a cord from which a metal weight is suspended pointing directly to the earth 's center of gravity ; used to determine the vertical from a given point
follow a procedure or take a course
make less lively , intense , or vigorous ; impair in vigor , force , activity , or sensation
the area in which something exists or lives
an overwhelming feeling of fear and anxiety
the lowest part of anything
spend lavishly or wastefully on
make a hole with a pointed power or hand tool
a medicine used to relieve pain
data processing in which the result is completely specified by a rule
walk
property that has economic utility : a monetary value or an exchange value
a flat floatthat can be used for transport or as a platform for swimmers
an object used as a container
happening again
a unit with administrative responsibilities
move along on or as if on wheels or a wheeled vehicle
a sequentially ordered set of things or events or ideas in which each successive member is related to the preceding
make final ; put the last touches on ; put into final form
a member of a police force
a collection of things wrapped or boxed together
move in a wavy pattern or with a rising and falling motion
the act of pursuing in an effort to overtake or capture
the act of nullifying ; making null and void ; counteracting or overriding the effect or force of something
the period spent sleeping
an elaborate or deceitful scheme contrived to deceive or evade
the organized action of making of goods and services for sale
a protest action by labor or minority groups to obtain their demands
edge tool used as a cutting instrument ; has a pointed blade with a sharp edge and a handle
a coming to or returning home
a local and well-defined elevation of the land
artifact consisting of soft or resilient material used to fill or give shape or protect or add comfort
the practice of owning slaves
a fine cord of twisted fibersused in sewing and weaving
installation from which a military force initiates operations
a cause of pain or injury or loss
put in order or neaten
a distinguishing difference
small and light boat ; pointed at both ends ; propelled with a paddle
sing with closed lips
the loose soft material that makes up a large part of the land surface
a newspaper as a physical object
the property possessed by an array of things that have space between them
the act of describing something
a low continuous indistinct sound ; often accompanied by movement of the lips without the production of articulate speech
the side that is seen or that goes first
a small quantity
come into possession of
a commercial or industrial enterprise and the people who constitute it
a means of persuading or arguing
a feeling of pleasure and enjoyment
a record or narrative description of past events
the state of not being
a supplier
any physical damage to the body caused by violence or accident or fracture etc .
the surface prepared to take the paint for a painting
several things grouped together or considered as a whole
a sudden unexpected event
a large flow
an implement with a shaft and barbed point used for catching fish
narrow padded board on collapsible supports ; used for ironing clothes
an account of the series of events making up a person 's life
a community of people smaller than a town
the idea that is intended
demand as being one 's due or property ; assert one 's right or title to
make uniform
recovery or preservation from loss or danger
happen or occur again
the period from the present until death
the part of the day between noon and evening
the region that is inside of something
use up
a form of energy that is transferred by a difference in temperature
look forward to the probable occurrence of
workplace consisting of farm buildings and cultivated land as a unit
structure consisting of a room or set of rooms comprising a single level of a multilevel building
a graphic or vivid verbal description
sound with resonance
of short duration or distance
any of various mostly cold-blooded aquatic vertebrates usually having scales and breathing through gills
a body of people or families living together and sharing everything
drive or propel with the foot
distance travelled per unit time
wealth in the form of money or property owned by a person or business and human resources of economic value
create by artistic means
a facility composed of one or more pieces of equipment connected to or part of a structure and designed to provide a service such as heat or electricity or water or sewage disposal
physical appearance
an obstruction that stands in the way
a stringed instrument that is played by depressing keys that cause hammers to strike tuned strings and produce sounds
the members of a social organization who are in power
someonewho learnsor takes up knowledge or beliefs
the act of caressing with the lips
state categorically
a special situation
something that remains on the surface of a liquid
be a distinctive feature , attribute , or trait ; sometimes in a very positive sense
a bad or difficult situation or state of affairs
implement consisting of a length of wood
an automotive vehicle suitable for hauling
a period of opportunity
fly a plane
a military training exercise
pronounce with a roll , of the phoneme /r/ ;  she rolls her r 's 
an event that recurs at intervals
the act of having and controlling property
make shorter than originally intended ; reduce or retrench in length or duration
support consisting of a place to rest the foot while ascending or descending a stairway
the body of members of an organization or group
behave in a certain manner ; show a certain behavior ; conduct or comport oneself
help to some food ; help with food or drink
the event that occurred at the beginning of something
praise somewhat dishonestly
a state of connectedness between people
an enclosure that is set back or indented
stimulate sexually
end a legal dispute by arriving at a settlement
a substance that is liquid at room temperature and pressure
be the cause or source of
the cultivation of plants
the process of giving birth
a framework of wood or metal that contains a glass windowpane and is built into a wall or roof to admit light or air
an original creation from which copies can be made
call a meeting ; invite or command to meet
the occurrence of two or more things coming together
the surface at either extremity of a three-dimensional object
adhering to moral principles
become part of ; become a member of a group or organization
an emotion of great sadness associated with loss or bereavement
give a shape or form to
make a victim of
a boxing match
a formal religious act conferring a specific grace on those who receive it ; the protestant sacraments are baptism and the lord 's supper ; in the roman catholic church and the eastern orthodox church there are seven traditional rites accepted as instituted by jesus : baptism and confirmation and holy eucharist and penance and holy orders and matrimony and extreme unction
become angry
an attempt to get something
an embarrassing mistake
draw into the mouth by creating a practical vacuum in the mouth
the way a person behaves toward other people
the state of a person 's cognitive processes
a district of a city or town marked out for administrative purposes
the motion characteristic of fluids
the particular auditory effect produced by a given cause
any device that bears the weight of another thing
play a role or part
combine so as to form a whole ; mix
a person of a specified kind
any warm-blooded vertebrate having the skin more or less covered with hair ; young are born alive except for the small subclass of monotremes and nourished with milk
state of well-being characterized by emotions ranging from contentment to intense joy
a form of entertainment that enacts a story by a sequence of images giving the illusion of continuous movement
exercise authoritative control or power over
become dry or drier
a way of acting or behaving
the act of creating something by thinking
make strong or stronger
any of diverse minute acellular or unicellular organisms usually nonphotosynthetic
complete confidence in a person or plan etc
send greetings to
cry weakly or softly
get sick
an artifact that has been created by someone or some process
the act of agitating something ; causing it to move around
make amends for ; pay compensation for
speak , pronounce , or utter in a certain way
something a little different from others of the same type
perceive by sight or have the power to perceive by sight
harmony of people 's opinions or actions or characters
let something be known
an indication that makes something evident
being distinct from that or those first considered
a branch of knowledge
the state of being connected
engage in the trade of
the words of something written
the area in any structure that provides space for storage
a domed or vaulted recess or projection on a building especially the east end of a church ; usually contains the altar
be without
the liquid parts of the body
a complete collection of similar things
evidence of identity ; something that identifies a person or thing
the act of making something clean
a time unit of ٣٠ days
a boat that is small
the place where some action occurs
turn from an upright or normal position
exchange or givein exchange for
the customers for a particular product or service
a married woman ; a man 's partner in marriage
the activity of writing by hand
knowledge acquired by learning and instruction
be false to ; be dishonest with
loss of money or decrease in financial value
a wheeled vehicle with large wheels ; used in farming and other applications
a group of animals
a self-contained part of a larger composition
strenuous effort
destroying the moral basis for a doctrine or policy
all non-artificial phenomena
a person who owns something
speak to someone
intend to refer to
a human offspringof any age
a central point or locus of an infection in an organism
carry on or manage
a physical phenomenon associated with stationary or moving electrons and protons
attempting to get personal recognition for yourself
the act of public worship following prescribed rules
allow or plan for a certain possibility ; concede the truth or validity of something
create by hammering
form the substance of
any object that can be used to hold things
talk over conjecturally , or review in an idle or casual way and with an element of doubt or without sufficient reason to reach a conclusion
the pathological state resulting from the invasion of the body by pathogenic microorganisms
corrupt morally or by intemperance or sensuality
a portable shelter
a unit of spoken language larger than a phoneme
any object of warm affection or devotion
take into custody
a favorite haunt where people gather
one of a series of ridges that moves across the surface of a liquid
the boundary of a surface
a tall piece of furniture that provides storage space for clothes ; has a door and rails or hooks for hanging clothes
a conspicuous success
a device designed to prevent injury
an effortful attempt to attain a goal
an adult female person
an anxious feeling
the process of becoming dilapidated
any cognitive content held as true
a composition written in metrical feet forming rhythmical lines
all the knowledge and values shared by a society
the act of forming something
a property used to characterize physical objects
insist on having one 's opinions and rights recognized
any spatial attributes
a feeling of excitement
a formation of aircraft in flight
cloth that covers the chest or breasts
be shown or be found to be
power to be effective ; the quality of being able to bring about an effect
the trait of being uncommunicative
a band of adjacent radio frequencies
the condition of being essential or indispensable
normal or sound powers of mind
the greatest possible degree of something
a record of scores
the leg of a pair of trousers
an edible emulsion of fat globules made by churning milk or cream ; for cooking and table use
an artifact that is heavy
a piece of furniture having a smooth flat top that is usually supported by one or more vertical legs
device that reflects radiation
an activity that stands as an equivalent of something or results in an equivalent
an extended outer surface of an object
a violent weather condition with winds ٦٤-٧٢ knotsand precipitation and thunder and lightening
gradually ceasing to be visible
perform as expected when applied
the act of punishing
provide entertainment for
a combination of points and lines and planes that form a visible palpable shape
a compact mass
a sequence of foot movements that make up a particular dance
a covering for a floor
the body of laws established by a state or nation for its own regulation
an event that repeats
a small or medium size bag-like container for holding or carrying things
expose to a chance of loss or damage
give verbal or other expression to one 's feelings
an implement for practical use
very unusual ; different in character or quality from the normal or expected
a human written or spoken language used by a community ; opposed to e.g . a computer language
cut a furrow into a columns
cause to do ; cause to act in a specified manner
surround so as to force to give up
gather , as of natural products
the act of opposing groups confronting each other
the act of constructing or building something
any of the terminal members of the hand
the floor of a building that is at or nearest to the level of the ground around the building
a game suitable for playing in a parlor
allow participation in or the right to be part of ; permit to exercise the rights , functions , and responsibilities of
becoming open or being made open
beliefs of a person or social group in which they have an emotional investment
kill by squeezing the throat of so as to cut off the air
any of a large group of nitrogenous organic compounds that are essential constituents of living cells ; consist of polymers of amino acids ; essential in the diet of animals for growth and for repair of tissues ; can be obtained from meat and eggs and milk and legumes
make something , usually for a specific function
experience while sleeping
personnel who assist their superior in carrying out an assigned task
a group of artists who agree on general principles
the property created by the space between two objects or points
a person 's breast or chest
separate or cause to separate abruptly
a desire for sexual intimacy
a motorbike that can be pedaled or driven by a low-powered gasoline engine
place troops or weapons in battle formation
placein or on the ground for future growth
care by procedures or applications that are intended to relieve illness or injury
shallow-water echinoderms having soft bodies enclosed in thin spiny globular shells
any part of a plant or fungus
terrestrial or aquatic flesh-eating mammal ; terrestrial carnivores have four or five clawed digits on each limb
make a record of ; set down in permanent form
an artifact that is instrumental in accomplishing some end
provide or furnish with
breed animals or plants using parents of different races and varieties
get rid of
a rateat which something happens
make short successive sounds
a person who invests capital in a business
destroy completely ; damage irreparably
an identifying appellation signifying status or function : e.g . mr. or general
abstaining from food
make fit for , or change to suit a new purpose
agree freely
shape , form , or improve a material
written programs or procedures or rules and associated documentation pertaining to the operation of a computer system and that are stored in read/write memory
an era of existence or influence
provide what is desired or needed , especially support , food or sustenance
be in an agitated emotional state
the extent of a ٢-dimensional surface enclosed within a boundary
a disease that affects plants
the time that has elapsed
assume a different shape or form
an ancestor in the direct line
feel remorse for ; feel sorry for ; be contrite about
cause to occur or exist
electronic equipment that converts sound into electrical signals that can be transmitted over distances and then converts received signals back into sounds
a beverage made by steeping tea leaves in water
make a whining , ringing , or whistling sound
an instrumentality invented for a particular purpose
the act of protesting ; a publicmanifestation of dissent
give a promotion to or assign to a higher position
somethingselected by an artist or photographer for graphic representation
a person who pleads for a cause or propounds an idea
extensive landed propertyretained by the owner for his own use
a person who contributes to the fulfillment of a need or furtherance of an effort or purpose
touch lightly and briefly
an enterprise connected with commerce
a tool used for cutting or slicing
property that your creditor can claim in case you default on your obligation
a district defined for administrative purposes
assets in the form of material possessions
property consisting of houses and land
become smaller or draw together
any organization that provides resources and facilities for a function or event
time for earth to make a complete rotation on its axis
opening for the neck ; the part of a garment near the neck opening
rub with a circular motion
lack of honesty ; acts of lying or cheating or stealing
remove or force out from a position
an architectural partition with a height and length greater than its thickness ; used to divide or enclose an area or to support another structure
any animal that lives by preying on other animals
serve as a means for expressing something
used as a term of address for those male persons engaged in the same movement
run or flow slowly , as in drops or in an unsteady stream
a close friend who accompanies his buddies in their activities
a sudden occurrence of an uncontrollable condition
solid-hoofed herbivorous quadruped domesticated since prehistoric times
make a mess of , destroy or ruin
move with a flapping motion
a person who uses the mind creatively
burn with heat , fire , or radiation
the process of taking food into the body through the mouth
something curved in shape
an institution created to conduct business
undergo a change ; become different in essence ; losing one 's or its original nature
articles of commerce
a condition that accompanies or influences some event or activity
move so that an opening or passage is obstructed ; make shut
any period of seven consecutive days
a car suitable for traveling over rough terrain
form metals with a swage
make a sound like a clock or a timer
the side that goes last or is not normally seen
professional treatment for illness or injury
a chemical substance that undergoes a rapid chemical changeon being heated or struck
the act of deciding to do something
the official currency issued by a government or national bank
social deportment
a person whose creative work shows sensitivity and imagination
fill or meet a want or need
a symbol used to represent a number
cover the front or surface of
fix , force , or implant
the practice or manner of preparing food or the food so prepared
a contestant that you are matched against
a hypothetical force to which the functions and qualities peculiar to living things are sometimes ascribed
a substance that can be consumed to produce energy
the distance or area or volume over which something extends
a device that requires skill for proper use
a protective cloth covering for an injured eye
the time of life when sex glands become functional
wealth as evidenced by sumptuous living
used for writing or printing
a small metal block bearing a raised character on one end ; produces a printed character when inked and pressed on paper
a heavy cloth in basket weave
a building where travelers can pay for lodging and meals and other services
the personswho make up a body for the purpose of administering something
an abstract mental location
an unpleasant or disappointing surprise
have the will and intention to carry out some action
a category falling within certain defined limits
a plane figure that deviates from a square or circle due to elongation
narrow-leaved green herbage : grown as lawns ; used as pasture for grazing animals ; cut and dried as hay
a thin layer covering something
an educator who works at a college or university
compete for something ; engage in a contest ; measure oneself against others
mark as different
behave in a certain manner
a movable piece of tissue partly connected to the body
an artifact that is one of the individual parts of which a composite entity is made up ; especially a part that can be separated from or attached to a system
any part of an organism such as an organ or extremity
prolonged unfulfilled desire or need
turn red , as if in embarrassment or shame
the state of matter distinguished from the solid and liquid states by : relatively low density and viscosity ; relatively great expansion and contraction with changes in pressure and temperature ; the ability to diffuse readily ; and the spontaneous tendency to become distributed uniformly throughout any container
covering for a person 's feet
a possible alternative
a leader engaged in civil administration
a victory won on points when no knockout has occurred
a sharp side formed by the intersection of two surfaces of an object
an incorporeal being believed to have powers to affect the course of human events
sing or play with trills , alternating with the half note above or below
any mainly aquatic arthropod usually having a segmented body and chitinous exoskeleton
be driven or carried along , as by the air
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any help to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and god sees all that you do .
and he dimmed its night , and brought out its daylight .
,  seize them and drag them into the middle of hell .
and , verily , our word has gone forth of old for our slaves , the messengers ,
thus do we relate to thee some stories of what happened before : for we have sent thee a message from our own presence .
he said : o my lord ! help me against their calling me a liar .
anddoors for their houses andcouches on which they recline ,
pharaoh said : if you have brought a sign , then bring it forth if you are truthful . '
o you who believe ! whoever from among you turns back from his religion , then allah will bring a people , he shall love them and they shall love him , lowly before the believers , mighty against the unbelievers , they shall strive hard in allah 's way and shall not fear the censure of any censurer ; this is allah 's face , he gives it to whom he pleases , and allah is ample-giving , knowing .
say : ' i take refuge with the lord of the daybreak
the example of eisa with allah is like that of adam ; he created himfrom clay and then said to him , “ be ” – and it thereupon happens !
and is followed by the successor ,
and between them is a veil , and on the ramparts are men knowing each by their mark , who shall call to the inhabitants of paradise : 'peace be upon you ! they have not entered it , for all their eagerness . '
exaltations to him to whom belong the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them ! with him is the knowledge of the hour and tohim you shall be returned .
o mankind ! there has come to you an admonition from your lord , a cure for what is in the hearts , and a guide and a blessing to true believers .
yet he attempteth not the steep ,
the people of the scripture ask you to bring down to them a book from the heaven . but they had asked of mosesgreater than that and said ,  show us allah outright ,  so the thunderbolt struck them for their wrongdoing . then they took the calfafter clear evidences had come to them , and we pardoned that . and we gave moses a clear authority .
remember the name of your lord , and devote yourself to him wholeheartedly .
that is the meed of the enemies of allah : the fire . therein is their home of abidence : a meed forasmuch as our revelations they were wont to gainsay .
by the sun and its brightness
say : become stones or iron ,
we had empowered them in the same way as we empowered you ; and we gave them the hearing , and the sight , and the minds . but neither their hearing , nor their sight , nor their minds availed them in any way . that is because they disregarded the revelations of god ; and so they became surrounded by what they used to ridicule .
verily this is an admonition : therefore , whoso will , let him take apath to his lord !
again , perish he , how he decided !
then as for him whose measure of good deeds is heavy ,
we shall surely aim , o both burdened .
surely to your lord is the return .
abiding eternally therein . good is the settlement and residence .
but those who believe and work righteous works , theirs shall be a hire unending .
pharaoh said :  what ! did you believe in him even before i permitted you to do so ? surely , he must be your chief who taught you magic . now i will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , and will crucify you on the trunks of palm-trees , and then you will come to know which of us can inflict sterner and more lasting torment . 
whosoever retaliates to the extent of injury suffered by him , and is wronged again , will certainly be helped by god . verily god is forgiving and kind .
and we made a covenant with those who proclaimed , “ we are christians ” – they then forgot a large portion of the advices given to them ; we have therefore instilled enmity and hatred between them till the day of resurrection ; and allah will soon inform them of what they were doing .
and if you do not -- and you will not -- then fear the fire , whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for unbelievers .
, if god afflicts you with hardship , no one besides him will be able to relieve you . if he bestows a favor on you , know that he has power over all things .
this is the absolute truth and certainty .
or , why has no treasure been thrown to him , or a garden for him to eat from ' and the harmdoers say : 'the man you follow is surely bewitched '
we made it a punishment for the former times and for the latter , an exhortation to the cautious .
that he may reward those who believe and work deeds of righteousness : for such is forgiveness and a sustenance most generous . 
whatever you have cut down ofpalm trees or left standing on their trunks - it was by permission of allah and so he would disgrace the defiantly disobedient .
therein will be maidens chaste and beautiful .
and covet not the thing in which allah hath made some of you excel others . unto men a fortune from that which they have earned , and unto women a fortune from that which they have earned.but ask allah of his bounty . lo ! allah is ever knower of all things .
ha , meem .
and many from the later generations .
by the sky that returns .
they will be given to drink a sealed wine .
allah hath set a seal upon their hearts and upon their hearing , and over their sights is a covering ; and unto them shall be a torment mighty .
and the likeness of those who spend their substance , seeking to please allah and to strengthen their souls , is as a garden , high and fertile : heavy rain falls on it but makes it yield a double increase of harvest , and if it receives not heavy rain , light moisture sufficeth it . allah seeth well whatever ye do .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the cry .
and when you recite the quran , we place between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter a hidden barrier ;
patiently , then , persevere : for the promise of allah is true : and ask forgiveness for thy fault , and celebrate the praises of thy lord in the evening and in the morning .
say : 'every man works according to his own manner ; but your lord knows very well what man is best guided as to the way . '
there has come to you a messenger of allah from among yourselves , who is distressed by the losses you sustain , who is ardently desirous of your welfare and is tender and merciful to those that believe .
the revelation of the book is from allah the exalted in power , full of wisdom .
say thou : if the mankind and the jinn leagued together that they might produce the like of this qur'an , they could nor produce the like thereof , though one to the other were a backer .
surely we purified them by a pure quality , the keeping in mind of theabode .
go thou with this epistle of mine , and cast it down unto them , and turn aside from them , and see how they return .
who has ordained and guided ,
he who turns his face to god in submission and does good , holds fast to a handle that is strong ; for the resultance of things rests with god .
and the day on which we will cause the mountains to pass away and you will see the earth a levelled plain and we will gather them and leave not any one of them behind .
we shall show you some of our greatest signs .
and had not a word from thy lord gone forth , and a term determined , it must necessarily have come .
the people of paradise will say to the dwellers of the fire ,  we have found whatever our lord promised has come true . have you found whatever the lord promised you to be true ?  they will reply ,  yes , we have also found it to be true .  thereupon , someone will cry out ,  god has condemned the unjust ,
and we have enjoined on man to be dutiful and kind to his parents . his mother bears him with hardship and she brings him forth with hardship , and the bearing of him , and the weaning of him is thirtymonths , till when he attains full strength and reaches forty years , he says :  my lord ! grant me the power and ability that i may be grateful for your favour which you have bestowed upon me and upon my parents , and that i may do righteous good deeds , such as please you , and make my off-spring good . truly , i have turned to you in repentance , and truly , i am one of the muslims . 
glory be to allahfrom what they describe ;
and is it not sufficient for them that we revealed to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in that is a mercy and reminder for a people who believe .
muhammad , the apostle of allah , and those who are with him are hard against the faithless and merciful amongst themselves . you see them bowing and prostrating , seeking allah ’ s grace , andpleasure . their mark ison their faces , from the effect of prostration . such is their description in the torah and their description in the evangel . like a tillage that sends out its shoots and builds them up , and they grow stout and settle on their stalks , impressing the sowers , so that he may enrage the faithless by them . allah has promised those of them who have faith and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
ye shall have therein abundance of fruit , from which ye shall have satisfaction .
god certainly knows those among you who create obstaclesand those who say to their brothers , 'come quickly to us ' and very rarely take part in the fighting .
is it you who produce its tree , or are we the producer ?
and he swore to them both : 'surely i am your sincere adviser . '
lo ! herein is indeed a portent ; yet most of them are not believers .
these are nothing but names which ye have devised , - ye and your fathers , - for which allah has sent down no authority . they follow nothing but conjecture and what their own souls desire ! - even though there has already come to them guidance from their lord !
andthe heaven raised high
if you disbelieve , god is independent of you , yet he does not approve ingratitude on the part of his servants . and if you are thankful , he will approve that in you . no bearer of burden can bear the burden of another . then to your lord is your return ; and he will inform you of what you used to do . he is aware of what the hearts contain .
again , what do you know what the day of recompense is ?
 he wishes to drive you away from the land . so what do you advise ? 
and give unto the womenfree gift of their marriage portions ; but if they of their own accord remit unto you a part thereof , then ye are welcome to absorb it .
i shall soon constrain him to a hard ascent .
thot they may bring to thee every magician knowing .
they said ,  you are not but human beings like us , and the most merciful has not revealed a thing . you are only telling lies . 
and we willed to favour those who were weak in the earth , and to make them leaders and to make them the inheritors .
moses said to them ,  throw whatever you will throw . 
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
o people who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided you , and be grateful to allah if it is only him you worship .
but none is granted itexcept those who are patient , and none is granted it except the owner of the great portion .
but i plot and scheme .
o ye who believe ! lift not up your voices above the voice of the prophet , nor shout when speaking to him as ye shout one to another , lest your works be rendered vain while ye perceive not .
and i do not believe that the hour will ever come . even if i am returned to my lord , i shall surely find a better place than this . 
then i seized the faithless . so how was my rebuttal !
go to pharaoh , and say , ‘ we are the messengers of the lord of the worlds .
when those who were followed will disclaim those who followed them , and see the torment all ties between them shall be severed ,
those who believe , those who follow the jewish , and the sabians and the christians , - any who believe in allah and the last day , and work righteousness , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
made we not the earth to be a housing
and in the morning it was if the garden had been reaped .
they are certainly disbelievers who say , “ allah is actually the messiah , the son of maryam ” ; whereas the messiah had said , “ o descendants of israel , worship allah who is my lord andyour lord ” ; undoubtedly whoever ascribes partners with allah , then allah has forbidden paradise for him ; his destination is hell ; and the unjust do not have any supporters .
so he cast down his rod , and lo ! it was an obvious serpent ,
and that he is the lord of the sirius ;
knowing that he has created you by various stages ?
they had rejected it in their worldly life and expressed disbelief at the unseen , considering it less than a remote possibility .
there is none who can take away the favours he bestows on man ; and there is none apart from him to restore what he has withheld . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
are they jealous of the favors that god has done to some people ? we have given to the family of abraham the book , wisdom , and a great kingdom .
have we not , made for him two eyes
then god sent a raven , which scratched the earth , so that he might show him how to hide the corpse of his brother .  alas !  he cried ,  am i not able even to be like this raven , so that i may hide the corpse of my brother ?  and he repented .
whose seal is musk—for such let the viers vie—
abraham replied ,  your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i bear witness to that .
do you not know that to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth andyou have not besides allah any protector or any helper ?
so , when she came , it was said : is thy throne like this ? she said : as though it were the very one . and : we were given the knowledge before her and we had surrendered .
then , verily , we know best those who are most worthy of being burnt therein .
those who lagged behind will presently , when ye march forth to take spoils , leave us , we shall follow say you . they intend to change the word of allah . say thou : ye shall by no means follow us ; thus hath allah said afore . then they will say : aye ! ye envy us . aye ! little it is they are wont to understand .
slip thy hand in thy bosom , it shall come forth white without hurt ; and draw back thy arm unto thee for fear . these shall be two proofs from thy lord unto fir'awn and his chiefs ; verily they have been a people given to transgression .
if you wish to take a wife in the place of another wife , and you have given to one a qintarso do not take from it anything . what , will you take it by way of calumny and a clear sin !
and when the prayer is finished , then may ye disperse through the land , and seek of the bounty of allah : and celebrate the praises of allah often : that ye may prosper .
we sent no prophet to a village but seized its inhabitants with misfortune and adversity in order that they might be humble in supplication .
when they are thrown into it , they hear from it ainhaling while it boils up .
their messengers said , 'is there any doubt regarding god , the originator of the heavens and the earth , who calls you so that he may forgive you your sins , and defer you to a term stated ? ' they said , 'you are nothing but mortals , like us ; you desire to bar us from that our fathers served ; then bring us a manifest authority . '
leave is given to those who fight because they were wronged -- surely god is able to help them --
so she carried him , and secluded herself with him in a remote place .
they profess obedience , but when they leave your presence , some of them conspire something contrary to what you said . but god writes down what they conspire . so avoid them , and put your trust in god . god is guardian enough .
i swear by the twilight ;
but most of them follow nothing but fancy : truly fancy can be of no avail against truth . verily allah is well aware of all that they do .
and had the people of those townships believed and feared , we would of a surety have opened up to them blessings from the heavens and the earth ; but they belied , wherefore we laid hold of them for that which they had been earning .
he said : truly you know that none but the lord of the heavens and the earth has sent down these as clear proof and most surely i believe you , o firon , to be given over to perdition .
he said ,  lut is in it ! ” ; they said , “ we know very well who all are there ; we shall rescue him and his family , except his wife ; she is of those who will stay behind . ”
surely man is created of a hasty temperament
he said , “ my lord is well aware of what you do . ”
speak to him with gentle words ; perhaps he will ponder or fear '
o ye who believe ! it is not lawful for you forcibly to inherit the women , norye should put constraint upon them that ye may take away a part of that which ye have given them , unless they be guilty of flagrant lewdness . but consort with them in kindness , for if ye hate them it may happen that ye hate a thing wherein allah hath placed much good .
so set thy face toward the right religion before the day cometh from which there is no averting , from allah , on that day they shall be sundered .
if it had been our wish to takea pastime , we should surely have taken it from the things nearest to us , if we would do !
and when you have divorced your wives and they are about to complete their prescribed term , then either retain them gracefully or release them generously . it is transgression to retain them merely for harassment ; and whoever ' does that indeed wrongs his own self . do not play with allah 's commandments , and remember that allah has blessed you with a great favour . he admonishes you to show due respect to the book and the wisdom he has sent to you . fear allah and know that he is fully aware of everything .
being driven off , and for them is a perpetual chastisement ,
is it not enough for them that we have revealed the book to you to be recited to them . it is a mercy and a reminder for the believers .
their physical appearance attracts you when you see them and when they speak , you carefully listen to them . in fact , they are like propped up hollow trunks of woodthey think that every cry which they hear is against them . they are the enemy , so beware of them . may god condemn them . where are they turning to , leaving behind the truth ?
verily that which ye are promised is true ;
peace be with the followers of elias .
saying , ‘ make easy coats of mail , and keep the measure in arranging , and act righteously . indeed i watch what you do . ’
o prophet ! verily we have allowed unto thee thy wives unto whom thou hast given their hires , and also those whomsoever thy right hand owneth of those whomsoever allah hath given thee as spoils of war , and the daughters of thy paternal uncle , and the daughters of thy paternal aunts , and the daughters of thy maternal uncle , and the daughters of thy maternal aunts , who migrated with thee , and any believing woman , when she offereth herself unto the prophet if the prophet desire to wed her -- purely for thee , above the rest of the believers . surely we know that which we have ordained unto them concerning their wives and those whom their right hands won : in order that there may be no blame upon thee : and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
verily , allah knows what things they invoke instead of him . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
indeed allah and his angels bless the prophet ; o you who have faith ! invoke blessings on him and invoke peace upon him in a worthy manner .
the day when the sky will be like molten silver .
‘ this is the day of judgement . we have brought you together with the former generations .
and do they serve , apart from god , that which has no power to provide them anything from the heavens and the earth and can do nothing ?
we therefore heard his prayer ; and bestowed him yahya , and cured his wife for him ; indeed they used to hasten to perform good deeds , and pray to us with hope and fear ; and used to weep before us .
“ and stop them – they are to be questioned . ”
he will ask his companion ,  did you not say that there would only be one death
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you . let her grazein allah ’ s land , and do not cause her any harm , for then you shall be seized by a prompt punishment . ’
i do not know—maybe it is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a while . ’
and we found no covenant in most of them ; and most of them we found ungodly .
make not the calling of the messenger among you as your calling one of another . allah knoweth those of you who steal away , hiding themselves . and let those who conspire to evade orders beware lest grief or painful punishment befall them .
never ! indeed , it is a blazing fire ,
and whoever submits his face to allah while he is a doer of good - then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold . and to allah will be the outcome ofmatters .
there is a party of my servants who said ,  our lord , we believe ; therefore forgive us , and have mercy on us , for thou art the best of the merciful . 
and they swear by god with their most solemn oaths , “ god will not resurrect anyone who dies. ” yes indeed , it is a promise binding on him , but most people do not know .
and if you see when the guilty will hang their heads before their lord ; “ our lord ! we have seen and heard , therefore send us back in order that we do good deeds – we are now convinced ! ”
and when a description of the son of marium is given , lo ! your people raise a clamor thereat .
those that were before them devised ; but god 's is the devising altogether . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers shall assuredly know whose will be the ultimate abode .
o believers , eat what is good of the food we have given you , and be grateful to god , if indeed you are obedient to him .
yet there are among those we have created people who leadto the truth , and act justly in its light
and it is he who hath appointed for you the stars that ye may be guided thereby in the darknesses of the land and the sea . surely we have expounded the signs unto a people who know .
said he , ‘ the truth is that—and i speak the truth—
verily , you are those who have disputed about that of which you have knowledge . why do you then dispute concerning that which you have no knowledge ? it is allah who knows , and you know not .
it is he who accepts the repentance of his servants , forgives their evil deeds and knows all about what you do .
let the man of plenty expend out of his plenty . as for him whose provision is stinted to him , let him expend of what god has given him . god charges no soul save with what he has given him . god will assuredly appoint , after difficulty , easiness .
and thereafter verily they shall have thereon a draught of balling water .
let them worship the lord of this house ,
the creator of the heavens and the earth : he has made for you pairs from among yourselves , and pairs among cattle : by this means does he multiply you : there is nothing whatever like unto him , and he is the one that hears and sees .
they take their rabbis and their monks for their lords apart from allah , and also the messiah , son of mary , whereas they were commanded to worship none but the one true god . there is no god but he . exalted be he above those whom they associate with him in his divinity .
yet no sooner does he relieve your distress than some among you set up other partners besides their lord ,
now such were their houses , - in utter ruin , - because they practised wrong-doing . verily in this is a sign for people of knowledge .
saying ,  we feed you for the sake of god alone , we seek neither recompense nor thanks from you .
we truly tell you that we have brought to you the truth .
the jews and the christians say :  we are sons of allah , and his beloved .  say :  why then doth he punish you for your sins ? nay , ye are but men , - of the men he hath created : he forgiveth whom he pleaseth , and he punisheth whom he pleaseth : and to allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between : and unto him is the final goal 
that i may act righteously in what i have left behind. ’ ‘ by no means ! these are mere words that he says. ’ and before them is a barrier until the day they will be resurrected .
he said : even though i bring unto thee something manifest ?
they said ,  your evil augury be with you ! is it because you are admonished about the truth ? surely , you are a people transgressing all bounds ! 
and seek help in patience and as-salatand truly it is extremely heavy and hard except for al-khashi'unand in his warnings ] .
and be not like unto those who say : we hear , whereas they hearken not .
he said :  i will address my sorrow and grief only to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know .
faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . whoever carries injustice will despair .
i found her and her people worshipping the sun , instead of god . satan has made their conduct appear good to them , and has thus diverted them from the right path , so that they might not be guided .
allah has cursed him ; and he said : most certainly i will take of thy servants an appointed portion :
this we recite to thee of signs and wise remembrance .
and luscious gardens .
and then follow them with the later folk ?
upon the day when a man shall flee from his brother ,
so the sorcerers were cast down , prostrating themselves ,
then , when our command came to pass , we saved salih and those who shared his faith through our special mercy , from the disgrace of that day . truly your lord is all-strong , all-mighty .
verily the god-fearing will be amid gardens and water- springs .
were you afraid that giving in charity before your consultation would make you poor ? since you did not offer such charity , god forgave you for this . at least be steadfast in prayer , pay the religious tax , and obey god and his messenger . god is well aware of what you do .
fighting is made mandatory for you , but you dislike it . you may not like something which , in fact , is for your good and something that you may love , in fact , may be evil . god knows , but you do not know .
so that allah may reward them by the best of what they have done , and enhance them out of his grace , and allah provides for whomever he wishes without any reckoning .
no prophet couldbe false to his trust . if any person is so false , he shall , on the day of judgment , restore what he misappropriated ; then shall every soul receive its due , - whatever it earned , - and none shall be dealt with unjustly .
only those who have understanding will accept your faith.are like the dead whom god will resurrect and to him will all return .
thereat zechariah supplicated his lord . he said , ‘ my lord ! grant me a good offspring from you ! indeed you hear all supplications . ’
if any of your women commit fornication , call in four male witnesses from among yourselves against them ; if they testify to their guilt , confine them to the house until death releases them or until god gives them another way out .
but as for him who is a miser , and self-sufficient ,
say ,  have you considered : if there came to you the punishment of allah or there came to you the hour - is it other than allah you would invoke , if you should be truthful ? 
there is no blame on the weak , nor on the sick , nor on those who do not find anything to spend , so long as they are sincere to allah and his apostle . there is noblaming the virtuous , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and in like manner we shall keep the wrongdoers close to others as a punishment for their misdeeds .
then , when they presented themselves before joseph , he drew his parents to him and said ,  welcome to egypt , in safety , if god wills ! 
and remember when your lord brought forth the generations from the backs of the descendants of adam , and made them their own witness ; “ am i not your lord ? ” ; they all said , “ yes surely you are , why not ? we testify ” ; for you may say on the day of resurrection that , “ we were unaware of this . ”
and say ,  hast thou the will to purify thyself ;
they take their priests and their anchorites to be their lords in derogation of allah , andchrist the son of mary ; yet they were commanded to worship but one allah : there is no god but he . praise and glory to him : from having the partners they associate .
how many a town has disobeyed its lord and his messenger ! for them our questioning was strict and our punishment severe .
when they embark on a vessel , they pray to god , devoting their faith to him ; but once he has delivered them safely to land , they attribute partners to him .
this is because they defied and disobeyed allah and his messenger . and whoever defies and disobeys allah and his messenger , then verily , allah is severe in punishment .
we say nothing except our gods have afflicted you with some kind of evil ' he said : ' i call allah to witness , and you to bear witness , that i reject what you associate ,
if you could see the angels when they carry off the souls of the unbelievers , beating their faces and their backs , saying : 'taste the punishment of burning !
and when the hills are moved ,
say , ,  if your fathers , your sons , your brothers , your wives , your relatives , wealth which you have obtained , commerce wherein you fear decline , and dwellings with which you are pleased are more beloved to you than allah and his messenger and jihad in his cause , then wait until allah executes his command . and allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people . 
and let there be of you a community calling others to good and commanding that which is reputable and prohibiting that which is disreputable . and these they are the blissful .
say , ‘ in allah ’ s grace and his mercy—let them rejoice in that ! it is better than what they amass . ’
when the souls are paired .
and naught preventeth their expendings being accepted except that they have disbelieved in allah and his apostle , and they perform not prayer except as sluggards and expend not except as those averse .
but when our clear signs came to them , they said :  this is plain magic . 
wherein art thou concerred with the declaration thereof !
o sons , go in search of joseph and his brother , and do not despair of the mercy of god . only they despair of god 's mercy who do not believe . 
we shall bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from the heaven because of their evildoing . ”
so let man consider from what he is created .
muhammad is not the father of any man among you , but he is the apostle of allah and the seal of the prophets , and allah has knowledge of all things .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things that we have provided you with , and give thanks to allah if him it is that you serve .
and those who believe and do good works : such are rightful owners of the garden . they will abide therein .
andthat the hour is coming - no doubt about it - and that allah will resurrect those in the graves .
except those who re-pent and mend their ways and hold fast to allah and make their faith exclusive to allah . those people shall be numbered with the believers and allah will certainly bestow on the believers a great reward .
have you seen the water you drink ?
allah said : o iblis ! what preventeth thee from prostrating thyself before that which have created with both my hands ? becomest thou stiff-necked , or art thou of the exalted ones ?
and whatever creature that is in the heavens and that is in the earth makes obeisance to allah , and the angelsand they do not show pride .
never does a new reminder come to them from ar-rahman but they turn away from it .
and it is all the same for them whether you warn them or do not warn them - they will not believe .
or lest ye should say :  if the book had only been sent down to us , we should have followed its guidance better than they .  now then hath come unto you a clearfrom your lord , - and a guide and a mercy : then who could do more wrong than one who rejecteth allah 's signs , and turneth away therefrom ? in good time shall we requite those who turn away from our signs , with a dreadful penalty , for their turning away .
 and it is he who feeds me and gives me to drink .
and what did they dislike from the muslims , except that the muslims accepted faith in allah the most honourable , the most praiseworthy ?
if allah were to hasten on for men the illas they would hasten on the good , their respite would already have expired . but we suffer those who look not for the meeting with us to wander blindly on in their contumacy .
indeed this qur ’ an narrates to the descendants of israel most of the matters in which they differ .
on the day of resurrection each one of these will come to him singly .
those who falsely fix lies upon allah despite this are the wrong-doers .
and we desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in the land , and to make them the imams , and to make them the heirs ,
have they not considered that we have taken over the land and reduced its borders ? it is god who issues the irreversible decree and his reckoning is swift .
how could it have harmed them if they had believed in god and the last day and spent their property for the cause of god ? god knows them very well
god and his messenger declare the abrogation of the peace treaty that existed between them and the pagans .
o believers , let not any people scoff at another people who may be better than they ; neither let women scoff at women who may be better than themselves . and find not fault with one another , neither revile one another by nicknames . an evil name is ungodliness after belief . and whoso repents not , those -- they are the evildoers .
we gave him the glad news of the birth of a forbearing son .
 as dispute about the signs of allah , without any authority that hath reached them , grievous and odiousin the sight of allah and of the believers . thus doth allah , seal up every heart - of arrogant and obstinate transgressors . 
we have already gripped them with suffering , but they did not surrender to their lord , nor did they humble themselves .
say : 'it is a mighty tiding
for the unbelievers not easy .
the people ask you about the hour . say , “ the knowledge thereof rests with god . but what do you know ? perhaps the hour is near . ”
and when the heaven has its covering removed ,
and we had certainly given moses the scripture and appointed with him his brother aaron as an assistant .
he said :  my lord is the best knower of what you do . 
his is whatever is at rest in the night and in the day . he is the hearing , the knowing .
have you not thought about the group of the children of israel aftermusa ? when they said to a prophet of theirs ,  appoint for us a king and we will fight in allah 's way .  he said ,  would you then refrain from fighting , if fighting was prescribed for you ?  they said ,  why should we not fight in allah 's way while we have been driven out of our homes and our children ?  but when fighting was ordered for them , they turned away , all except a few of them . and allah is all-aware of the zalimun .
remember when you set forth in the morning from your house assigning the faithful positions for the battle , god heard everything and knew all .
surely i have turned myself , being upright , wholly to him who originated the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the polytheists .
is the one who has created the heavens and the earth not able to create another creature like the human being ? he certainly has the power to do so . he is the supreme creator and is all-knowing .
the jews say :  the christians have naughtupon ; and the christians say :  the jews have naughtupon .  yet theystudy thebook . like unto their word is what those say who know not ; but allah will judge between them in their quarrel on the day of judgment .
we would surely have been allah 's chosen servants . ”
he has also subjected to you the sun and the moon , both steadfastly pursuing their courses . he has subjected to you the night as well as the day ;
on that day , we shall let them surge against each other like waves and then the trumpet will be blown and we shall gather them all together .
say , “ perhaps some of what you are impatient for has drawn near . ”
the revelation of this book free of doubt and involution is from the lord of all the worlds .
to a rich man ,
and that he creates the two mates - the male and female -
and he whom allah guideth , for him there can be no misleader . is not allah mighty , able to requite ?
believers , know that the polytheists are impure , so they should not approach the sacred mosque after this year onwards . if you should fear destitution , god will enrich you out of his bounty , if he so wishes . god is aware and wise .
and assigned it sexes , male and female .
and we bore noah on the vessel built of planks and nails ,
rather , allah raised him to himself . and ever is allah exalted in might and wise .
o mankind ! it is you who stand in need of allah , but allah is rich , worthy of all praise .
some of them made a covenant with allah :  if allah gives us out of his bounty , we will give alms and act righteously . 
and say :  i am indeed he that warneth openly and without ambiguity ,  -
those who have brought the truth and have acknowledged it are those who have fear of god .
and hold ye fast , all of you , to the cord of allah , so and separate not . and remember allah 's favour unto you in that ye were enemies and he joined your hearts together , so ye became by his favour brethren ; and ye were on the brink of an abyss of the fire and he rescued you therefrom . in this wise allah expoundeth unto you his revelations that haply ye may remain guided .
indeed those who accuse chaste and unwary faithful women shall be cursed in this world and the hereafter , and there shall be a great punishment for them
nay , but they say , 'we found our fathers upon a community , and we are guided upon their traces . '
and when we shook the mountain above them as if it were a canopy , and they supposed it was about to fall on them : 'take forcefully what we have given you , and remember what is in it ; haply you will be godfearing . '
those that were before them contrived ; then god came upon their building from the foundations , and the roof fell down on them from over them , and the chastisement came upon them from whence they were not aware .
do they not realise that god who created the heavens and the earth , and did not tire creating them , is able to bring the dead to life ? and why not ? he has the power over everything .
he was one of our believing servants .
but as for he who is given his record behind his back ,
and verily we have displayed for mankind in this qur'an all manner of similitudes , but man is more than anything contentious .
a number of people from those of old ,
certainly we sent to thamud salih , their brother , ‘ worship allah ! ’ but thereat they became two groups contending with each other .
and you devourinheritance greedily ,
but there are others who pray ,  our lord , grant us good in this world as well as good in the world to come , and protect us from the torment of the fire . 
and no blame is on you in that ye speak indirectly of your troth unto the said women or conceal it in , your souls ! allah knoweth that ye will anon make mention of these women : but make no promises unto them in secret , except ye speak a reputable saying . and even resolve not on wedding-knot until the prescribed term hath attained its end ; and know that allah knoweth that which is in your souls , wherefore beware of him , and know that allah is forgiving , forbearing
no one will seek guidance unless god wills it . he alone is worthy of being feared and he is the source of forgiveness .
and because of their saying : we slew the messiah , jesus son of mary , allah 's messenger - they slew him not nor crucified him , but it appeared so unto them ; and lo ! those who disagree concerning it are in doubt thereof ; they have no knowledge thereof save pursuit of a conjecture ; they slew him not for certain .
or they say , ‘ he has fabricated it. ’ say , ‘ should i have fabricated it , you would not avail me anything against allah . he best knows what you gossip concerning it . he suffices as a witness between me and you , and he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ’
in fact , it is a glorious quran .
 call on your lord ,  they said ,  to name its variety , as cows be all alike to us . if god wills we shall be guided aright . 
your lord is he who causes the ships to move onward for you across the sea , so that you may go in quest of his bounty : he is most merciful towards you .
they said : are you indeed yusuf ? he said : i am yusuf and this is my brother ; allah has indeed been gracious to us ; surely he who guardsand is patientfor surely allah does not waste the reward of those who do good .
never think that the unbelievers will be able to frustratein the earth . their refuge is the fire , an evil arrival .
and remember when they were commanded , “ reside in this township and eat whatever you wish in it , and say ‘ sins are forgiven ’ and enter the gate prostrating – we will forgive you your sins ; we shall soon bestow more upon the virtuous . ”
the fish then swallowed him and he blamed himself .
they said ,  if a wolf should eat him while we are aclan , indeed , we would then be losers . 
—crystal of silver—which they will dispense in a precise measure .
and if we had not made thee wholly firm thou mightest almost have inclined unto them a little .
'go down , all together , ' we said , 'so if a guidance shall come to you from me , whosoever follows my guidance no fear shall be on them , neither shall they be saddened .
nay , but they marvel that a warner has come to them from among them ; and the unbelievers say , 'this is a marvellous thing !
he will say : my lord ! wherefor hast thou gathered meblind , when i was wont to see ?
the great terror will bring them no grief : but the angels will meet them :  this is your day , -that ye were promised . 
believers , listen to god and the messengers when they call you to that which gives you life . know that god is between a man and his heart and that before him you will all be brought together .
he said , ' i make complaint of my anguish and my sorrow unto god ; i know from god that you know not .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great one .
and we inspired to moses ,  throw your staff ,  and at once it devoured what they were falsifying .
satan has mastered them and caused them to forget the remembrance of allah . those are satan 's party ; and satan 's party shall assuredly be the losers .
they will never fight against you as a body ; and if they fight against you they will fight only in fortified townships or from behind walls . intense is their hostility to one another . you reckon them united while their hearts are divided . that is because they are a people devoid of reason .
o messenger ! proclaim thewhich hath been sent to thee from thy lord . if thou didst not , thou wouldst not have fulfilled and proclaimed his mission . and allah will defend thee from men . for allah guideth not those who reject faith .
they said ,  call upon your lord to show us what is her color .  he said ,  he says , 'it is a yellow cow , bright in color - pleasing to the observers . ' 
a messenger from god , reciting to them pure scriptures ,
o you who believe ! when you go to war in allah 's way , make investigation , and do not say to any one who offers you peace : you are not a believer . do you seek goods of this world 's life ! but with allah there are abundant gains ; you too were such before , then allah conferred a benefit on you ; therefore make investigation ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
by the sky with its constellations ,
if we list , we can send down unto them a sign from the heaven so that their necks would became to it submissive .
some people say ,  we have faith in god .  but when they face some hardship for his cause , they begin to consider the persecution that they have experienced from people as a torment from god . when your lord grants you a victory , they say ,  we were with you .  does god not know best what is in the hearts of every creature ?
they shall bear their own burdens , and other burdens besides . on the day of resurrection they shall be questioned about their false assertions .
so who is a greater wrongdoer than him who attributes a falsehood to allah , and denies the truth when it reaches him ? is not theabode of the faithless in hell ?
never ; soon they will deny ever worshipping them , and will turn into their opponents .
and it is he who removes your souls at nightand knows whatever you commit by day ; then he raises you again during the day , to complete the term appointed ; then it is to him that you are to return – he will then inform you of what you used to do .
and they sold him for a low price , - for a few dirhams . and they were of those who regarded him insignificant .
so they made great mischief therein ?
how my lord has forgiven me , and made me one of the honored . ”
if they say ,  he has invented it himself ,  say to them ,  if i have indeed invented this myself , then may i be punished for my sin ; i am innocent of the crimes that you commit . 
even so , in the eyes of most of the pagans , their  partners  made alluring the slaughter of their children , in order to lead them to their own destruction , and cause confusion in their religion . if allah had willed , they would not have done so : but leave alone them and their inventions .
andsaid :  are we going to abandon our alihafor the sake of a mad poet ?
and the brooding night !
and the bondmen of the compassionate are those who walk upon the earth meekly and when the ignorant address them , they say peace
if they had intended to come out , they would certainly have made some preparation therefor ; but allah was averse to their being sent forth ; so he made them lag behind , and they were told ,  sit ye among those who sit . 
surely those who believed and fledand struggled hard in allah 's way with their property and their souls , and those who gave shelter and helped -- these are guardians of each other ; andthose who believed and did not fly , not yours is their guardianship until they fly ; and if they seek aid from you in the matter of religion , aid is incumbent on you except against a people between whom and you there is a treaty , and allah sees what you do .
are they waiting for allah to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels ! their matter will have been settled then . to allah shall all things return .
and ye shall know to whom a punishment that will confound him cometh , and upon whom a lasting doom will fall .
and when they went back to their families , they would go back exulting .
that hemay make what is thrown in by shaitana trial for those in whose hearts is a diseaseand whose hearts are hardened . and certainly , the zalimunare in an opposition far-off .
and whoso bringeth the truth and believeth therein - such are the dutiful .
, we granted knowledge to david and solomon and they said :  all praise be to allah who has exalted us above many of his believing servants ! 
they will swear to you by allah , when ye return to them , that ye may leave them alone . so leave them alone : for they are an abomination , and hell is their dwelling-place , -a fitting recompense for thethat they did .
it is a message for you , and for your people ; and you will be questioned .
those who have gone before them also plotted . then , allah came upon their building from the foundations , and the roof fell down on them from above them . and the punishment overtook them from where they did not know .
other than allah ? do they help you or even help themselves '
without adding to their swearing , .
lord of the east and the west . there is no god but he , so take him as a trustee .
who whispers in the breasts of men
thinking he would never revert .
so he cried out to his lord , saying ,  i am overcome , so help me ! 
if these had been gods they would not have come thither , but all will abide therein .
he set it before them , saying : 'will you not eat '
but verily , it will be but a singlecry ,
besides allah ? ’ they will say , ‘ they have forsaken us . no , we did not invoke anything before. ’ that is how allah leads the faithless astray .
think not that those who exult at what they have done , and who love to be praised for what they have not done , shall escape the punishment , for grievous indeed will be their doom .
in the life to come they will certainly lose a great deal .
and when thou bringest not a verse for them they say : why hast thou not chosen it ? say : i follow only that which is inspired in me from my lord . thisis insight from your lord , and a guidance and a mercy for a people that believe .
and that he might test the hypocrites , it was said to them :  come , fight in the way of allah ordefend yourselves .  they said :  had we known that fighting will take place , we would certainly have followed you .  they were that day , nearer to disbelief than to faith , saying with their mouths what was not in their hearts . and allah has full knowledge of what they conceal .
then shall each person know what he has brought along .
do not say that those who are killed in god 's cause are dead ; they are alive , but you are not aware of it .
the quran is the final word ,
and they say : 'why has no miraculous sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ' say : 'surely allah has the power to send down a sign , but most of them do not know .
, say ,  i do not know whether that with which you have been threatened is close by or whether my lord will prolong the time of its coming .
and had allah increased the sustenance for all his slaves , they would have surely caused turmoil in the land , but he sends it down by a proper assessment as he wills ; indeed he is well aware of , seeing his bondmen .
god bears witness that there is no deity save him , as do the angels and those who possess knowledge . he is the upholder of justice . there is no diety save him , the mighty , the wise one .
those who do not give poor-rate and they are unbelievers in the hereafter .
by your lord , we will bring them back to life with satan and gather them around hell in large groups .
and mention the brother of ad ; when he warned his people in the sandy plains , -- and indeed warners came before him and after him -- saying serve none but allah ; surely i fear for you the punishment of a grievous day .
and enclosed gardens luxuriant .
verily we ! we have believed in our lord , that he may forgive us our faults , and that to which thou hast constrained us in the way of magic ; and allah is best and most lasting .
and surely we have brought them a book which we have expounded with knowledge , a guide and a mercy for those who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our miracles and clear authority
“ do not plead for one death today , but plead for a great many deaths . ”
when the graves are overturned ,
satan is certainly your enemy , so hold him as a foe . he only calls his faction to be the residents of hell .
they said , ‘ we bring you good news in truth ; so do not be despondent . ’
o people who believe ! whoever among you reneges from his religion , so allah will soon bring a people who are his beloved ones and allah is their beloved , lenient with the muslims and stern towards disbelievers – they will strive in allah ’ s cause , and not fear the criticism of any accuser ; this is allah ’ s munificence , he may give to whomever he wills ; and allah is the most capable , the all knowing .
when man asks ,  what is happening to her ?  ;
from the evil of him who breathes temptations into the minds of men ,
one of soundness . and he rose totrue form
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
and fight them until there is no more fitnahand the religionwill all be for allah alone . but if they cease , then certainly , allah is all-seer of what they do .
then we made the wind subservient to him ; it made his command to run gently wherever he desired ,
he said :  you are people i do not know . 
o people who believe ! if you marry muslim women and divorce them without having touched them , so for you there is no waiting period for the women , which you may count ; therefore give them some benefit and release them with a proper release .
are they waitingbut the hourwhich would descend upon them suddenly , and catch them unawares ?
and they will not be absent from it .
indeed allah sustains the heavens and the earth lest they should fall apart , and if they were to fall apart , there is none who can sustain them except him . indeed he is all-forbearing , all-forgiving .
or are you asking them for some compensation so that they feel burdened with debt ?
and we have left there a signfor those who fear the painful torment .
believers ! remember allah 's favour upon you . when a certain people decided to stretch their hands against you , he restrained their hands from you . do fear allah . men of faith should put their trust in allah alone .
do those who perpetrate the evil deeds assume that we will regard them as equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , whether in their life or their death ? evil is their judgment !
for every one of them on that day shall be business enough to occupy
nor are they suffered to put forth excuses .
the seal thereof will be musk : and for this let those aspire , who have aspirations :
when their brother noah said to them ,  will you not fear allah ?
“ and soon the time will come when you will remember what i now say to you ; and i entrust my tasks to allah ; indeed allah sees the bondmen . ”
are you more difficult to create than the heaven which he has built ,
and we gave them clear proofs of the matter . and they did not differ except after knowledge had come to them - out of jealous animosity between themselves . indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that over which they used to differ .
when you do not bring them a sign , they say , ‘ why do you not improvise one ? ’ say , ‘ i only follow what is revealed to me from my lord ; these are insights from your lord , and a guidance and mercy for a people who have faith . ’
say : 'who provides for you from heaven and earth , or who owns the hearing and the sight ? who brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living ' who directs the affair ? surely , they will say : 'allah ' then say : 'then , will you not be fearful '
they can not listen to the exalted assembly , and they are darted at from every side .
wherein are two fountains flowing .
but god has granted us favors and saved us from the scorching heat of the torment .
he said : so . thy lord saith : it is easy for me , even as i created thee before , when thou wast naught .
and of those whom we have created there is a party who guide men through the truth and act justly according to it .
whywhen adisaster struck you , although you had struckwith one twice as great , you said ,  from where is this ?  say ,  it is from yourselves .  indeed , allah is over all things competent .
to allah you shall all return . he has power over all things .
we shall guide those who strive in our cause to the paths leading straight to us . surely god is with those who do good .
in order to reach the place of advantage for them , and to pronounce the name of god on appointed days over cattle he has given them for food ; then eat of the meat and feed the needy and the poor .
and naught preventeth mankind from believing when the guidance hath come unto them , and from asking foregiveness of their lord , but that there may come unto them the dispensation of the ancients , or that the torment may come unto them face to face .
which leapeth up over the hearts .
who created and proportioned ,
do they seek to outmaneuver ? but it is the faithless who are the outmaneuvered ones !
go back to them . we shall soon come with our armies which they will not be able to face . we shall drive them out ofwith ignominy , and they will be humbled . 
he calls on that which would sooner harm than help . such a patron is indeed evil and such a companion is indeed evil .
those who believe , and emigrate , and strive in god ’ s path with their possessions and their persons , are of a higher rank with god . these are the winners .
that is the knower of the unseen and the witnessed , the exalted in might , the merciful ,
satan wants to induce hostility and hatred among you through wine and gambling and to prevent you from remembering god and prayer . will you then avoid such things ?
or it should say when it sees the punishment : were there only a returning for me , i should be of the doers of good .
thus have we sent thee amongst a people before whomhavepeoplespassed away ; in order that thou mightest rehearse unto them what we send down unto thee by inspiration ; yet do they reject , the most gracious ! say :  he is my lord ! there is no god but he ! on him is my trust , and to him do i turn ! 
likewise , we revealed to you the scripture . those to whom we gave the scripture believe in it , and some of these believe in it . none renounce our communications except the disbelievers .
he would never order you to take the angels and the prophets as lords ; what , would he order you to disbelieve , after you have surrendered ?
commemorate moses in the book . he was a chosen one , both an apostle and a prophet .
he will say : 'you have tarried a little , did you know ?
here is a message for mankind : let them take warning therefrom , and let them know that he isone allah : let men of understanding take heed .
those who received knowledge know that what is revealed to you from your lord is the truth ; and it guides to the path of the majestic , the praiseworthy .
who created thee , then moulded thee , then proportioned thee ?
where they shall remain for ages ,
and for each we presented examples , and each we destroyed withdestruction .
to him who desires a harvest in the life to come , we shall grant an increase in his harvest ; whereas to him who desiresa harvest in this world , wegive something thereof -- but he will have no share inthe life to come .
or are you secure of those in the heaven that he should not send down upon you a punishment ? then shall you know how was my warning .
and let those who do not find the means to marry keep chaste until allah makes them free from want out of his grace . andthose who ask for a writing from among those whom your right hands possess , give them the writing if you know any good in them , and give them of the wealth of allah which he has given you ; and do not compel your slave girls to prostitution , when they desire to keep chaste , in order to seek the frail good of this world 's life ; and whoever compels them , then surely after their compulsion allah is forgiving , merciful .
then i will come at them from their front and from their rear , and from their right and their left , and you will not find most of them to be grateful . ’
, thus have we revealed this as an arabic qur'an and have expounded in it warning in diverse ways so that they may avoid evil or become heedful .
such as fear not the meeting with ussay :  why are not the angels sent down to us , ordo we not see our lord ?  indeed they have an arrogant conceit of themselves , and mighty is the insolence of their impiety !
thamudand ‘ ad denied the cataclysm .
we verily created man and we know what his soul whispereth to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to the praying ones ,
but they denied him and were seized by an earthquake , and lay overturned in their homes in the morning .
lo ! thy lord knoweth surely all that their bosoms hide , and all that they proclaim .
did they not see that it could not return them a word , and that it had no power either to harm them or to do them good ?
he is allah , the creator , the shaper out of naught , the fashioner . his are the most beautiful names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth him , and he is the mighty , the wise .
for this reason ; we decreed for the descendants of israel that whoever kills a human being except in lieu of killing or causing turmoil in the earth , so it shall be as if he had killed all mankind ; and whoever saves the life of one person , is as if he had saved the life of all mankind ; and undoubtedly our noble messengers came to them with clear proofs – then after this indeed many of them are oppressors in the earth .
he said :  i do detest your doings . 
you will surely find the most intense of the people in animosity toward the believersthe jews and those who associate others with allah ; and you will find the nearest of them in affection to the believers those who say ,  we are christians .  that is because among them are priests and monks and because they are not arrogant .
neither the faithless from among the people of the book nor the idolaters like that any good be showered on you from your lord ; but allah singles out for his mercy whomever he wishes , and allah is dispenser of a mighty grace .
the pharaoh and his forces turned away from him , saying ,  he is either a magician or an insane person  .
 and i seek refuge with you , my lord ! lest they may attendme . 
your wealth and your children are only a temptation , whereas allah ! with him is an immense reward .
or do they say , “ he forged a lie about god. ” if god so willed , he could have sealed your heart . but god obliterates the false , and confirm the true by his words . he knows what is in the hearts .
and to thamud we sent forth their brother . salih . he said to them : ' o my people ! serve allah , you have no other god than him . truly there has come to you a clear proof from your lord . this she-camel from allah is a divine portent for you . so leave her alone to pasture on allah 's earth , and touch her with no evil lest a painful chastisement should seize you .
or by the great father and his wonderful son
and indeed we have written in zabur , the injeel , the quran ] afteral-lauh al-mahfuz , that my righteous slaves shall inherit the land .
allah has sent down the best statement , a book , its parts resembling each other in goodness and truth , oft-repeated . the skins of those who fear their lord shiver from it . then their skin and their heart soften to the remembrance of allah . that is the guidance of allah . he guides therewith whom he pleases and whomever allah sends astray , for him there is no guide .
that is satan frightening those whom he sponsored . so do not fear them , and fear me , if you are believers .
apostles were certainly derided before you . but then i gave respite to those who were faithless , then i seized them ; so how was my retribution ?
do they help or harm you ? 
then we changed adversity into ease until they throve and said : 'our forefathers had also seen both adversity and prosperity . ' so we suddenly seized them without their even perceiving it .
those who barter the life of this world for the next should fight in the way of god . and we shall bestow on him who fights in the way of god , whether he is killed or is victorious , a glorious reward .
they have no knowledge of that . they only follow assumptions , and assumptions are no substitute for the truth .
those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , and establish regular prayers and regular charity , will have their reward with their lord : on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
verily thy lord will decide between them by his decree : and he is exalted in might , all-knowing .
he said : how was your affair when you sought yusuf to yield himself ? they said : remote is allah , we knew of no evil on his part . the chief 's wife said : now has the truth become established : i sought him to yield himself , and he is most surely of the truthful ones .
had the truth followed their desires , the heavens and the earth and all that is in them would have been destroyed . we sent them the quran but they ignored it .
and ye are at that moment looking
and ,  seek forgiveness of your lord and repent to him , he will let you enjoy a good provision for a specified term and give every doer of favor his favor . but if you turn away , then indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a great day .
anyone whose heart god has opened up to islam possesses a light from his lord . but woe betide those whose hearts have been hardened against the rememberance of god ! such people are in obvious error .
nor is it the word of a satan accursed .
and one of his signs is your sleeping and your seeking of his grace by night andday ; most surely there are signs in this for a people who would hear .
will you then dispute with him about what he saw ? !
and no sincere friend .
but whoever desires the hereafter , and pursues it as it should be pursued , while he is a believer ; these—their effort will be appreciated .
it will come upon them unawares , and they will not comprehend it .
be not grieved , o apostle , by those who hasten to outrace others in denial , and say with their tongues :  we believe ,  but do not believe in their hearts . and those of the jews who listen to tell lies , and spy on behalf of others who do not come to you , and who distort the wordsout of context , and say :  if you are givenaccept it ; but if you are not given it , beware .  you can not intercede with god for him whom god would not show the way . these are the people whose hearts god does not wish to purify . for them is ignominy in this world and punishment untold in the next --
when he said to his father , ‘ father ! why do you worship that which neither hears nor sees , and is of no avail to you in any way ?
rather , your possessions , and children are a test , and allah—with him is a great reward !
there they shall groan with anguish and the din and noise in hell will not let them hear anything .
besides god ? will the idols help you ? can they help themselves ? 
say , “ my lord has forbidden immoralities—both open and secret—and sin , and unjustified aggression , and that you associate with god anything for which he revealed no sanction , and that you say about god what you do not know . ”
of mankind are some who say : we believe in allah ; then if they are afflicted in the way of allah , they take the persecution of men even as the torment of allah ; and then , if succour cometh from thy lord they say : verily we have been with you . is not allah the best knower of that which is in the breasts of the creatures ?
he knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth and he knows all what you conceal and what you reveal . allah knows the innermost of the chests .
who hath created life and death that he may try you which of you is best in conduct ; and he is the mighty , the forgiving ,
had we so wiled , we could have shown them up to thee , and thou shouldst have known them by their marks : but surely thou wilt know them by the tone of their speech ! and allah knows all that ye do .
or that he might receive admonition , and that the admonition might profit him ?
thou shalt not find any people who believe in god and the last day who are loving to anyone who opposes . god and his messenger , not though they were their fathers , or their sons , or their brothers , or their clan . those -- he has written faith upon their hearts , and he has confirmed them with a spirit from himself ; and he shall admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein to dwell forever , god being well-pleased with them , and they well-pleased with him . those are god 's party ; why , surely god 's party -- they are the prosperers .
then they will have on top of it a mixture of boiling water .
it is he who has made you the successors of your predecessors in the earth ; so whoever disbelieves –his disbelief falls only on him ; and for the disbelievers , their disbelief increases nothing in their lord ’ s sight except disgust ; and for the disbelievers , their disbelief increases nothing for them except ruin .
when they will see it near at hand , the faces of all those who had denied it will be distraught , and then they will be told : “ this is the doom which you used to ask for . ”
by the night when it departs !
it is allah who made out of the things he created , some things to give you shade ; of the hills he made some for your shelter ; he made you garments to protect you from heat , and coats of mail to protect you from yourviolence . thus does he complete his favours on you , that ye may bow to his will .
a proclamation , from god and his messenger , unto mankind on the day of the greater pilgrimage : 'god is quit , and his messenger , of the idolaters . so if you repent , that will be better for you ; but if you turn your backs ; know that you can not frustrate the will of god . and give thou good tidings to the unbelievers of a painful chastisement ;
then we told moses by inspiration :  strike the sea with thy rod .  so it divided , and each separate part became like the huge , firm mass of a mountain .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , and difference arose concerning it ; and had not a word gone forth from thy lord , the affair would have been decreed between them . and verily they are in regard thereto in doubt and dubitating .
no good is there in much of their conspiring , except for him who bids to freewill offering , or honour , or setting things right between the people . whoso does that , seeking god 's good pleasure , we shall surely give him a mighty wage .
those who accept the faith , then disbelieve , then return to it , and deny once again and increase in disbelief , will not be forgiven by god or be guided by him .
we did deliver aforetime the children of israel from humiliating punishment ,
and we have not sent you but as a giver of good news and as a warner .
they said : we found our fathers worshippers of them .
and they returned with grace and bounty from allah : no harm ever touched them : for they followed the good pleasure of allah : and allah is the lord of bounties unbounded .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom : he has power over all things ;
or say , when it sees the penalty , “ if only i had another chance , i would be of the virtuous . ”
and upon that day faces shall be scowling ,
they said ,  there is no harm . to our lord we shall return .
lo ! i would rather thou shouldst bear the punishment of the sin against me and thine own sin and become one of the owners of the fire . that is the reward of evil-doers .
nor canst thou be a guide to the blind out of their error ; thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our signs , and who have surrendered themselves .
thinketh he that none hath power over him ?
whatever phrase he utters , an observer is present .
indeed , man shall be a witness against himself ,
so those on the right – howare those on the right !
indeed i am your lord ! so take off your sandals . you are indeed in the sacred valley of tuwa .
then moses threw down his staff and suddenly , unmistakably , it appeared as a serpent ,
lo ! allah pardoneth not that partners should be ascribed unto him . he pardoneth all save that to whom he will . whoso ascribeth partners unto allah hath wandered far astray .
when the sun is folded up ,
turn unto your lord repentant , and surrender unto him , before there come unto you the doom , when ye can not be helped .
we called out :  o abraham ,
as for ad , they waxed proud in the land without justification and said : “ who is greater than we in strength ? ” did they not see that allah , who created them , is greater in strength than they ? they continued to deny our signs ,
in that case , we would have made you taste a double portionin this life and a double portionafter death . and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are just a warner for whoever dreads it .
is he who created the heavens and the earth , and sent water from the sky for you and caused gardens to grow full of beauty of which its tree you could never grow , is there a god with allah ? no , but they are a nation who set up equals with him !
in an exposed parchment
lo ! abraham was mild , imploring , penitent .
and if allah toucheth thee with hurt there is no remover thereof but he , and if he intendeth any good there is no averter of his grace . he letteth it befall on whomsoever of his bondmen he will ; and he is the forgiving , the merciful .
again , woe to you ] ! and thenwoe to you !
thereafter we raised up many a generation and a long time passed . you were then not even present among the people of midian to rehearse our verses to them . but it is we who are sending news about that .
and those who recite the exhortation ;
or , 'had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better guided than they ' indeed a clear sign has now come to you from your lord ; a guidance and a mercy . and who is more harmful than he who belies the verses of allah and turns away from them ! we shall recompense those who turn away from our verses with an evil punishment for their turning away .
what is wrong with the disbelievers who roam around you ,
and if they turn their backs , truly allah knows those who cause mischief .
we shall surely ease for him the path of hardship .
for me , i have been commanded to serve the lord of this city , him who has sanctified it and to whomall things : and i am commanded to be of those who bow in islam to allah 's will , -
you attended to him ,
and they will admit their sin , soalienation for the companions of the blaze .
 that we may celebrate thy praise without stint ,
did you create it , or are we the creator ?
the day when the catastrophe occurs and they are summoned to prostrate themselves , they will not be able .
on the day when the punishment envelopes them , from above them and from under their feet , and he will say , ‘ taste what you used to do ! ’
do not treat being called by the messenger like being called by one another . god knows those of you who slip away on some pretext . let those who go against his order beware lest some affliction befall them or they receive a painful punishment .
is the human to have whatever he fancies ?
on the day when he shall muster them all together : 'company of jinn , you have made much of mankind . ' then their friends among mankind will say , 'our lord , we have profited each of the other , and we have reached the term determined by thee for us . he will say : 'the fire is your lodging , therein to dwell forever ' - except as god will ; surely thy lord is all-wise , all-knowing .
the day the horn will be blown . and we will gather the criminals , that day , blue-eyed .
they question thee of the hour : 'when will its arrival be ?
and food that chokes , and a painful punishment .
he said :  the knowledgeis only with allah : i proclaim to you the mission on which i have been sent : but i see that ye are a people in ignorance !  ..
his authority is only over those who follow him , and those who associate others with him .
he says , ‘ i have squandered immense wealth . ’
they are enemies to me except the lord of all the worlds
the fire abounding in fuel ,
those who dispute about the signs of allah without any authority bestowed on them , - there is nothing in their breasts butgreatness , which they shall never attain to : seek refuge , then , in allah : it is he who hears and sees .
if your wives go away from you to disbelievers who will not give you back the dowry which you spent on them , let the muslims pay back such dowry from the property of the disbelievers which may come into their hands . have fear of god in whom you believe .
surely , the punishment of your lord is about to come ,
they said :  o hud ! no clearthat hast thou brought us , and we are not the ones to desert our gods on thy word ! nor shall we believe in thee !
but as for the unbelievers , who cried lies to our signs ; for them awaits a humbling chastisement .
and the first to embrace islam of the muhajirunand the ansarand also those who followed them exactly . allah is well-pleased with them as they are well-pleased with him . he has prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow , to dwell therein forever . that is the supreme success .
but diminish when they measure or weigh for them .
he replied :  only god will bring it on you if he please , and you can not prevail against him .
and by oath of the night when it hides it
this is the truth from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
that is because they followed that which angered allah , and hated that which pleased him . so he made their deeds fruitless .
the people of the book ask thee to bring down a book to them from the heaven . but surely they asked musa a thing greater than that ; they said : shew us god manifestly ; whencefore the thunderbolt overtook them for their wrong-doing . then they took a calf after there had come unto them the evidences . even so we pardoned that , and we gave musa a manifest authority .
andwhen abraham said : 'show me , lord , how you raise the dead ' he replied : 'have you not believed ' 'rather ' said abraham , 'in order that my heart be satisfied ' 'take four birds ' said he , 'draw them to you , then set a part of them on every hill , then call them , they will come swiftly to you . know that allah is mighty and wise '
and appoint me a tongue of truthfulness among the latter .
erect palacesthat you will live for ever ,
and thou wilt see the guilty on that day bound together in fetters .
o my son , establish prayer , enjoin what is right , forbid what is wrong , and be patient over what befalls you . indeed , that is of the mattersdetermination .
indeed , there shall be neither fear nor sorrow upon the guided by allah .
and obeys its lord and it must .
but then their affirming served them nothing after they had seen our torment . this is the law of god that has prevailed among his creatures , then the unbelievers went to rack and ruin .
god made you inherit their land , houses , property , and a land on which you had never walked . god has power over all things .
, say ,  have you not considered that regardless whether god forgives me and my followers or grants us mercy , but who will protect the disbelievers from a painful torment ?
and we gave him isaac , and jacob as well for a grandson , and each of them we made righteous .
excepting such as are faithful and do righteous deeds : for them there will be an everlasting reward .
should they come upon you , they will be enemies unto you and will stretch out against you their hands and their tongues with evil ; and fain would they that ye should disbelieve .
is one who worships devoutly during the hour of the night prostrating himself or standing , who takes heed of the hereafter , and who places his hope in the mercy of his lord - ? say :  are those equal , those who know and those who do not know ? it is those who are endued with understanding that receive admonition .
whatever benefit comes to you , it is from allah , and whatever misfortune befalls you , it is from yourself , and we have sent you , to mankind as an apostle ; and allah is sufficient as a witness .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters are returned . so worship him and trust in him . your lord is not oblivious of what you do .
nay , we generously provided them and their fathers , and they enjoyed our provision for long . do they not see that we are now advancing into their territory , diminishing it from different sides ? is it they , then , who will triumph ? 
as for those who disbelieve , neither wealth nor children will avail them in the least against god . they are the residents of hell where they will live for ever .
we made the people who were abased the heirs to the east and west of the land which we had blessed , and your lord ’ s best wordwas fulfilled for the children of israel because of their patience , and we destroyed what pharaoh and his people had built and what they used to erect .
and withhold the necessaries of life .
but to serve me ; this is the straight path ?
we have sent forth other messengers before you and given them wives and descendants . yet none of them could bring a sign except by the permission of allah . every term has its book .
and he it is who hath created man from water , and hath appointed for him kindred by blood and kindred by marriage ; for thy lord is ever powerful .
for ye will behold hell-fire .
how many towns we have destroyed . our scourge fell upon them by night or at midday when they were resting :
we said , ‘ o fire ! be cool and safe for abraham ! ’
 then verily , i should be in plain error .
o children of adam , take your adornment at every masjid , and eat and drink , but be not excessive . indeed , he likes not those who commit excess .
andten nights
and believes in the best ,
when one god is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the day of judgment begin to shrink , but when the idols are mentioned , they rejoice .
andi will grant them respite . my design is incontrovertible .
surely it is on a way yet remaining ;
so that allah may pay them their wages in full and may add to them out of his bounty . he is most forgiving , most appreciative .
announce to the believers the good tidings that allah has kept bounteous blessings in store for them .
and when you see there , you shall see blessings and a great kingdom .
when the stars are obliterated .
have they feet wherewith they walk ? or have they hands wherewith they hold ? or have they eyes wherewith they see ? or have they ears wherewith they hear ? say :  call yourpartnersand then plot against me , and give me no respite !
eight mates - of the sheep , two and of the goats , two . say ,  is it the two males he has forbidden or the two females or that which the wombs of the two females contain ? inform me with knowledge , if you should be truthful . 
to him is referred the knowledge of the hour . no fruit sprouts forth from its sheath , no female conceives or is delivered , except with his knowledge . on the day he will call to them : 'where then are my associates ' they will reply : 'we proclaim to you that none of us can bear witness '
and certainly we have set forth to men in this quran similitudes of every sort that they may mind .
return to your lord , well-pleased and well-pleasing him .
nor walk on the earth with insolence : for thou canst not rend the earth asunder , nor reach the mountains in height .
say : praise be to allah and peace on his servants whom he has chosen : is allah better , or what they associate ?
o mankind ! lo ! the promise of allah is true . so let not the life of the world beguile you , and let not thebeguiler beguile you with regard to allah .
again , you shall surely see it with the eye of certainty
allah it is who hath appointed for you the earth for a resting-place and the heaven for a structure , and fashioned you and fashioned you well , and provided you with goodly things . such is allah , your lord . so blessed be allah , the lord of the worlds !
if you were to obey most of those on earth , they would divert you from god ’ s path . they follow nothing but assumptions , and they only conjecture .
god increases his guidance to those who follow guidance ; and lasting good works are better in the sight of your lord and are most rewarding .
do not makewith allah another deity andbecome censured and forsaken .
and olive and palm trees
say : 'he is the merciful . in him we believe and in him we put all our trust . indeed , you shall soon know who is in clear error '
surely allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; he brings to life and causes to die ; and there is not for you besides allah any guardian or helper .
that is a nation that has passed away ; there awaits them that they have earned , and there awaits you that you have earned ; you shall not be questioned concerning the things they did .
and are turned away from him who is turned .
has not there come to you the story of musa ?
and they have taken to them other gods apart from god , that they might be for them a might .
and when they saw them , they said : verily these are the strayed ones .
say : o my slaves who have been prodigal to their own hurt ! despair not of the mercy of allah , who forgiveth all sins . lo ! he is the forgiving , the merciful .
hast thou not regarded those who were given a share of the book purchasing error , and desiring that you should also err from the way ?
behold , moses said to his attendant ,  i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas ori spend years and years in travel . 
a bounty from thy lord . that ! that is the supreme achievement .
it is knowledge of the hour ; doubt not concerning it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
and said ,  i am sick ! 
be they men or women , the hypocrites are all alike . they order what is evil , forbid what is just , and tighten their purse strings . they forsook allah , so allah forsook them . surely , the hypocrites are evildoers .
whatever blessing you have is from allah , and when a distress befalls you , you make entreaties to him .
those desert arabs who remained behind will say to you ,  our belongings and our families kept us occupied , so ask forgiveness for us .  they will say with their tongues what is not in their hearts . say ,  who then has any power at allon your behalf with god , if his will is to do you harm , or if he intends to do you good ? indeed , god is well aware of all that you do . 
we told him ,  do not be afraid for you will be the winner .
what do they look for , but that god shall come to them in the cloud -- shadows , and the angels ? the matter is determined , and unto god all matters are returned .
then on the day of resurrection you will contend before your lord .
those who were before them impugned , whereat the punishment overtook them whence they were not aware .
the unbelievers say of those who believe :  ifwere a good thing , would not have gone to it first , before us !  and seeing that they guide not themselves thereby , they will say ,  this is anfalsehood ! 
“ when we considered you equal to the lord of the creation . ”
how many messengers did we send to the ancient people ?
so when the trumpet will be blown .
and before this , was the book of moses as a guide and a mercy : and this book confirmsin the arabic tongue ; to admonish the unjust , and as glad tidings to those who do right .
, some of them listen to you , but when they leave you they ask those who have received knowledge ,  what did he say a few moments ago ?  god has sealed the hearts of such people who have followed their worldly desires .
that had fled from a lion ?
thus does the word of your lord prove true against those who transgress that they do not believe .
“ and to perform the prayers , and to revere him ; it is to him that you will be gathered . ”
o people given the book ! indeed this noble messengerof ours has come to you , revealing to you a lot of the things which you had hidden in the book , and forgiving a lot of them ; indeed towards you has come a light * from allah , and a clear book . .
mankind was only one community , but then they differed , and had it not been for a prior word from your lord , their differences would have been settled for them .
thus do we deal with the culprits .
children of adam ! we have sent down to you clothing that covers your nakedness , and feathers . but the clothing of piety that is better . that is one of the signs of allah , in order that they remember .
your lord is rich and the owner of mercy . he can destroy you if he will and replace you with whom he pleases , just as he raised you from the offspringof other nations .
even so perverted are they who deny the signs of god .
ruin is for every great slanderer , excessive sinner .
the messiah , son of mary , is but an apostle . certainly , apostles have passed before him , and his mother was a truthful one . both of them would eat food . look how we clarify the signs for them , and yet , look , how they go astray !
that god may save you from earlier and subsequent blames , and complete his favours on you , and guide you on the straight path ,
“ you surely have to taste the painful punishment . ”
thou wilt know that some great disaster is about to fall on them .
on that day when the hour will come to pass , people will be split into groups .
certainly you were longing for death before you had encountered it . then certainly , you saw it , as you were looking on .
he ] said ,  he says , 'it is a cow neither trained to till the soil nor water the fields , sound , having no other colour except bright yellow . '  they said ,  now you have brought the truth .  so they slaughtered it though they were near to not doing it .
all that ; and whosoever venerates the sacred rites of allah it shall be better for him with his lord . the flocks are lawful to you , except that which is recited to you . therefore , avoid the filth of idols and avoid speaking falsely ,
he enjoined on his household worship and zakat , and he was obedient to his lord .
neither can the sun overtake the moon , nor the night outpace the day : each of them keeps coursing in its orbit .
and already were messengers ridiculed before you , but those who mocked them were enveloped by that which they used to ridicule .
then we draw it toward us with an easy drawing .
thereupon lot believed in him , and he said , ‘ indeed i am migrating toward my lord . indeed he is the all-mighty , the all-wise . ’
so he reduced them into pieces , except for their biggest , that they may return to it .
that it was he who destroyed the 'ad of old ,
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth ; god suffices for a guardian .
a warning to humans ,
say : 'we believe in allah and in what is sent down to us and in that which was sent down to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob and the tribes , and in that which was given tomoses and jesus , and the prophets from their lord . we do not differentiate between any of them . to him we are submitters '
and from the good land comes forth its vegetation by the command of allah ; and from the infertile land , nothing comes forth except a little with difficulty ; this is how we explain our signs in different ways , for people who are thankful .
and if we willed we could have taken away the revelations which we have sent to you – you would then not find anyone who could advocate for you before us for this .
and a barrier is set between them and what they desire , as was done aforetime with their likes , who had remained in grave doubt ?
the life of this world is but sport and amusement . if you believe and are god-fearing , he will grant you your reward , and will not ask you for your possessions .
we caused their story to become public so that people would know that god 's promise was true and that there is no doubt about the coming of the day of judgment . they started to argue with each other about the matterand some of them said ,  let us establish a building at the youths ' sleeping place . their lord knew best their intentions about them . the majority prevailed in their suggestion of the establishment of a mosque in that place .
and strain not thine eyes toward that which we cause some wedded pairs among them to enjoy , the flower of the life of the world , that we may try them thereby . the provision of thy lord is better and more lasting .
allah grants the provision to whomsoever he wills abundantly and grants others in strict measure . they exult in the life of the world , although compared with the hereafter , the life of the world is no more than temporary enjoyment .
is not allah sufficient for his slave ? yet they try to frighten you with thosebesides him ! and whom allah sends astray , for him there will be no guide .
take , , from their wealth a charity by which you purify them and cause them increase , and invokeupon them . indeed , your invocations are reassurance for them . and allah is hearing and knowing .
so we seized him and his hosts and hurled them into the sea and he was blamable .
it is prescribed that when death approaches any of you and he is leaving behind wealth , he shall make a will in favour of his parents and relatives equitably . this is a duty for all who fear god .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah – allah does not guide them , and for them is a punishment , most painful .
and remember the favor of allah on you and his covenant with which he bound you firmly , when you said : we have heard and we obey , and be careful ofallah , surely allah knows what is in the breasts .
what ! is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves , saying : warn the people and give good news to those who believe that theirs is a footing of firmness with their lord . the unbelievers say : this is most surely a manifest enchanter .
he who brings the truth , and he who testifies to it as such -- those are surely the people who are god-fearing :
he said , ‘ o adam , inform them of their names , ’ and when he had informed them of their names , he said , ‘ did i not tell you that i know the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and that i know whatever you disclose and whatever you conceal ? ’
and how should i fear those whom you associate in worship with allah , while you fear not that you have joined in worship with allah things for which he has not sent down to you any authority.which of the two parties has more right to be in security ? if you but know . 
so persevere in patience ; for the promise of allah is true : and whether we show theesome part of what we promise them , - or we take thy soul , - it is to us that they shallreturn .
but those who repented and believed and acted righteously , they will perhaps be among those who will prosper there .
now taste my punishment after my warnings !
so he came out before his people in his adornment . those who desired the worldly life said ,  oh , would that we had like what was given to qarun . indeed , he is one of great fortune . 
no soul will deny its coming .
and he made them like eaten straw .
on the day when he will call you , you will answer him with praise and think that you have tarried for only a little while . 
the day when wealth and sons will be of no avail ,
“ the lord of moosa and haroon . ”
our lord , bring us forth out of it ! then , if we revert , we shall be evildoers indeed . '
i will punish him most severely , or slay him , unless he gives me a valid excuse . ”
he is created of water pouring forth ,
that ye should not trespass in respect of the balance .
the day when the sky is cleft with clouds , and the angels are sent down in streams .
and from the evil of the dark night when it falls ,
and indeed for these unjust is also a turn of punishment , like that of their companions – so they must not ask me to hasten .
when the two forces drew within seeing distance of each other , the people of moses said :  we shall certainly be overtaken . 
in a lofty garden ,
and the unbelievers would almost trip thee up with their eyes when they hear the message ; and they say :  surely he is possessed ! 
 verily ! i am your lord ! so take off your shoes , you are in the sacred valley , tuwa .
and if we had made him an angel , we would have made hima man , and we would have covered them with that in which they cover themselves .
surely we will suffice you against the scoffers
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who were told to hold back their handsbut establish regular prayers and spend in regular charity ? whenthe order for fighting was issued to them , behold ! a section of them feared men as - or even more than - they should have feared allah : they said :  our lord ! why hast thou ordered us to fight ? wouldst thou not grant us respite to ourterm , near ?  say :  short is the enjoyment of this world : the hereafter is the best for those who do right : never will ye be dealt with unjustly in the very least !
i follow the creed of my fathers , abraham , isaac , and jacob . it is not for us to associate anything with allah . such is the favor of allah to us , and to mankind . yet most people do not give thanks .
he said : aye , and ye will then surely be of those brought near .
and surely , we gave you authority on the earth and appointed for you therein provisions . little thanks do you give .
do not be a wasteful spender . squanderers are the brothers of satan . satan was faithless to his lord .
thenthose who believe and do good , they shall have forgiveness and an honorable sustenance .
to him thou payest no heed .
among them are those who listen to you , but then , when they leave your presence , say to those who have been given knowledge ,  what was that he just said ?  such are those whose hearts god has sealed , and who follow their own base desires .
then , in a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits , bind him .
“ criminals , separate yourselves from others today !
nor is that for allah any great matter .
) frowned and turned away ,
then that he become of those who believe and counsel each other to be steadfast , and counsel each other to be merciful .
this is nothing but morals of the ancients .
they are certainly doubtful about their meeting with their lord . god indeed encompasses all things .
his is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth , and unto allahthings are brought back .
so strike not any similitudes for god ; surely god knows , and you know not .
thereforeproclaim the purity of the name of your lord , the greatest .
those who have taken others than him as their protectors beside him , it is allah who oversees them ; you are no guardian over them .
muhammad is the messenger of allah . and those with him are hard against the disbelievers and merciful among themselves . thouseest them bowing and falling prostrate , seeking bounty from allah andacceptance . the mark of them is on their foreheads from the traces of prostration . such is their likeness in the torah and their likeness in the gospel - like as sown corn that sendeth forth its shoot and strengtheneth it and riseth firm upon its stalk , delighting the sowers - that he may enrage the disbelievers withthem . allah hath promised , unto such of them as believe and do good works , forgiveness and immense reward .
this is the hell with which you were threatened .
and how many a sign in the heavens and the earth they pass by , while they are averters therefrom .
so that thou didst not follow after me ? didst thou then disobey my commandment ? '
whom the angels take while they are goodly , saying , 'peace be on you ! enter paradise for that you were doing . '
and for their taking of usury , that they were prohibited , and consuming the wealth of people in falsehood , for the unbelievers among them we have prepared a painful punishment .
he said ,  my love of horses for the cause of god has made me continue watching them until sunset , thus making me miss my prayer  .
crystal-white , of a taste delicious to those who drink ,
a limited number of days . so whoever among you is ill or on a journey- then an equal number of days . and upon those who are able- a ransomof feeding a poor person . and whoever volunteers excess - it is better for him . but to fast is best for you , if you only knew .
and i chose you for myself . ’
the command was given : “ cast into hell every hardened , stubborn unbeliever ,
then is one who walks fallen on his face better guided or one who walks erect on a straight path ?
it is he who gives life and causes death , and he holds mastery over the alternation of night and day . do you not understand this ?
indeed , the men who practice charity and the women who practice charity andhave loaned allah a goodly loan - it will be multiplied for them , and they will have a noble reward .
he said ,  my lord , indeed my bones have weakened , and my head has filled with white , and never have i been in my supplication to you , my lord , unhappy .
you are surely seeing us '
god himself testifies that he is the only lord . the angels and the men of knowledge and justice testify that god is the only lord , the majestic , and all-wise .
except those who are patient and do good deeds—these will have forgiveness and a great reward .
lo ! we warn you of a chastisement near at hand ; the day when a man will look on what his own hands have sent forth , and the unbelievers shall say : “ oh would that i were utter dust . ”
and we rescued him in exchange of a great sacrifice . .
except the one who may have repentedand have believed and done righteous works , for then allah will change his evil deeds into good deeds , and he is very forgiving and merciful .
among his signs is this , that he sends the winds , as heralds of glad tidings , giving you a taste of hismercy , - that the ships may sailby his command and that ye may seek of his bounty : in order that ye may be grateful .
the unjust will suffer other torments besides this but most of them do not know .
andthe companions of the left hand ; how wretched are the companions of the left hand !
those whospend of their goods by night and by day , in secret and in public , have their reward with their lord : on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
nor can you lead the blind when they have gone astray . you can make none hear except those who believe in our signs and have come to peace and submission .
we have told you about some messengers sent previously , while we have not yet told you about others . god spoke to moses directly .
for that is allah , your lord , the truth . and what can be beyond truth except error ? so how are you averted ?
 there is no blame on you today ,  he said ,  may god forgive you . he is the most merciful of all .
on the day whenfaces will be whitened andfaces will be blackened ; and as for those whose faces have been blackened , it will be said unto them : disbelieved ye after yourbelief ? then taste the punishment for that ye disbelieved .
where to are you then heading ?
you asked them for payment ? the reward that you will receive from your lord is the best . he is the best provider .
both jinn and people . '
, tell them : “ i do not ask you for any recompense for the performance of this task ; nor am i given to affectation .
they will enter a scorching fire
and they have taken gods , other than allah , that they might be a power from them .
he it is who created you from a single soul , and he created therefrom his spouse that he might find repose in her . then when he covereth her she beareth a light burthen and fareth about there with ; then when she groweth heavy the twain call upon allah their lord : if thou vouchsafest us a goodly child , we shall surely be of the thankful .
their reckoning is only with my lord , should you be aware .
they will all be marshalled before allah together : then will the weak say to those who were arrogant ,  for us , we but followed you ; can ye then avail us to all against the wrath of allah ?  they will reply ,  if we had received the guidance of allah , we should have given it to you : to us it makes no differencewhether we rage , or bearwith patience : for ourselves there is no way of escape . 
and gave them a clear exposition of our laws . and they did not differ until after knowledge came to them , through mutual jealousies . verily your lord will judge between them on the day of judgement in what they differed about .
each group will receive its share of your lord 's generosity . your lord 's generosity is not limited .
so exalt the name of your lord , the most great .
and inspired it withits virtues and vices :
other than god ,  ,  then show them the way to hell ,
to each these as well as those we bestow from the bounties of your lord . and the bounties of your lord can never be forbidden .
when we grant the human being a favor , he ignores it and turns away but when he is afflicted by hardship , he starts lengthy prayers .
and fear allah and do not disgrace me . 
they said ,  by god , youknow we have not come here to cause any trouble in the land . we are not thieves ! 
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
simply because he has wealth and sons ,
we destroyed the rest .
and for every nation have we appointed a ritual , that they may mention the name of allah over the beast of cattle that he hath given them for food ; and your god is one god , therefor surrender unto him . and give good tidingsto the humble ,
and you used to wish for death before you met it ; so now you see it before your eyes .
and they swore by allah most vehemently in their oaths that , “ allah will not raise up the dead ” ; yes he will , why not ? a true promise obligatory upon him , but most men do not know .
say : ' i am not an innovation among the messengers , and i know not what shall be done with me or with you . i only follow what is revealed to me ; i am only a clear warner . '
he said : this is a mercy from my lord , but when the promise of my lord comes to pass he will make it level with the ground , and the promise of my lord is ever true .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the awful cry !
again lo ! presently ye shall know .
from every nation we will bring a witness , and we shall say to them : 'produce your proof ' then they shall know the truth is with allah , and their own fabrications will forsake them .
they did not expect such a judgment
a beseecher besought the visitation of chastisement ,
and who is there that has a fairer religion than he who submits his will to god being a good-doer , and who follows the creed of abraham , a man of pure faith ? and god took abraham for a friend .
for the living and the dead ?
and so that those endowed with knowledge may know that it is the truth from your lord , and so believe in it , and their hearts soften to it . god guides those who believe to a straight path .
and forego sleep * in some part of the night – an increase for you * * ; it is likely your lord will set you on a place where everyone will praise you * * * .
say :  in the bounty of allah . and in his mercy , - in that let them rejoice  : that is better than thethey hoard .
intercession is of no avail with him , except for those whom he permits . when fear is lifted from their hearts , they say , ‘ what did your lord say ? ’ they say , ‘ the truth , and he is the all-exalted , the all-great . ’
his power is only over those who take him as their patron , and those who ascribe equals .
' o zachariah , we give you good tidings of a son , and he shall be called john ; a name we have never given before '
to those who have attained to faith we shall unite their offspring who have also followed them in faith , and we shall not let any of their good deeds go unrewarded ; every human being is a pledge for whatever he has earned .
when the faithful come to you , say to them ,  peace be upon you . your lord has decreed for himself to be all-merciful . anyone of you who commits a sin out of ignorance , then repents , and reforms himself will find that god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . 
that which ye have wasteth away , and that which allah hath remaineth . and verily we shall pay those who are steadfast a recompense in proportion to the best of what they used to do .
they contrived a plot of great magnitude .
it is allah who made cattle for you , that ye may use some for riding and some for food ;
which will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger .
and in the night also hallow him , and at the setting of the stars .
in this there is , certainly , evidence . but most of them have no faith .
verily he was among his people joyous .
to be sure , qarunwas one of moses ' people ; then he transgressed against them . we had bestowed on him such treasure that their very keys would have been raised with difficulty by a whole group of strong people . once when his people said to him :  do not exult , for allah does not love those who exult .
hast thou not seen that allah knoweth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ? there is no secret conference of three but he is their fourth , nor of five but he is their sixth , nor of less than that or more but he is with them wheresoever they may be ; and afterward , on the day of resurrection , he will inform them of what they did . lo ! allah is knower of all things .
have they not travelled through the land so that they may observe how was the fate of those who were before them ? allah destroyed them , and a similarawaits these faithless .
when they hear what has been revealed to the apostle , you see their eyes fill with tears because of the truth that they recognize . they say , ‘ our lord , we believe ; so write us down among the witnesses .
the polytheists do not worship allah , except some females ; and they do not worship anyone except the rebellious satan .
and who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against allah ? these shall be brought before their lord , and the witnesses shall say : these are they who lied against their lord . now surely the curse of allah is on the unjust .
and maryam , the daughter of 'imran who guarded her chastity ; and we breathed intothrough our ruh ] , and she testified to the truth of the words of her lord- son of maryam ; as a messenger of allah ] , andhis scriptures , and she was of the qanitin .
the revelation of the scripture is from allah , the mighty , the knower ,
but the hoopoe stayed not long , hesaid :  i have graspedwhich you have not grasped and i have come to you from saba'with true news .
he said , 'the lord of the east and west , and what between them is , if you have understanding , '
i swear by the receding stars .
and the cattle hath he created , whence ye have warm clothing and uses , and whereof ye eat ;
except an old womanwho was among those who remained behind .
and it will be said to them : 'this is that which you belied '
o believers , fear god , and speak words hitting the mark ,
his is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all things will go back to him .
 and verily , the curse shall be upon you till the day of recompense . 
those of you , who shall die and leave wives behind them , should make a will to the effect that they should be provided with a year 's maintenance and should not be turned out of their homes . but if they leave their homes of their own accord , you shall not be answerable for whatever they choose for themselves in a fair way ; allah is all-powerful , all-wise .
no disaster strikes upon the earth or among yourselves except that it is in a register before we bring it into being - indeed that , for allah , is easy -
nay , but the houris their appointed tryst , and the hour will be more wretched and more bitter .
and those who are upright in their testimonies ,
praise be allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made the darkness and the light . yet those who reject faith holdas equal , with their guardian-lord .
and of the wandering arabs there is he who believeth in allah and the last day , and taketh that which he expendeth and also the prayers of the messenger as acceptable offerings in the sight of allah . lo ! verily it is an acceptable offering for them . allah will bring them into his mercy . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and by this secure town :
so they set out again ; until when they met a boy , the chosen bondman slew him – moosa said , “ did you slay an innocent soul not in retribution for another ? you have indeed done an extremely evil thing . ”
what is the indubitable ?
when you call them to prayer , they treat it as a jest and a diversion . this is because they are devoid of understanding .
do you feel secure that the one in heaven will not send against you a whirlwind to pelt you with stones , so that you will know howmy warning was ?
your lord has commanded that you should worship none but him , and show kindness to your parents . if either or both of them attain old age with you , say no word of contempt to them and do not rebuke them , but always speak gently to them
 and if there is a party among you who believes in the message with which i have been sent , and a party which does not believe , hold yourselves in patience until allah doth decide between us : for he is the best to decide .
and we have broken themup into various separate groups on the earth , some of them are righteous and some are away from that . and we tried them with goodand evilin order that they might turn .
 this is the hell of which ye werewarned !
as for those who disbelieve and die unbelievers , there shall be not accepted from anyone of them , the whole earth full of gold , if he would ransom himself thereby . those , for them there is a painful punishment , and none shall help them .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and other similar torments .
and saying , “ and do not rebel against allah ; i have brought a clear proof to you . ”
but those who fear their lord in the unseen , for them there is forgiveness and a great wage .
do they not considerits fulfillment ? the day when its fulfillment comes , those who had forgotten it before will say , ‘ our lord ’ s apostles had certainly brought the truth . if only we had some intercessors to intercede for us , or we would be returned , so that we may do differently from what we did ! ’ they have certainly ruined their souls , and what they used to fabricate has forsaken them .
condemned are the hands of abee lahab , and he is condemned .
no , do not obey him ; but kneel down , and come near .
zachariah when he called to his lord :  do not leave me alone , for you are the best of givers . 
hesaid to ,  i want to give one of my daughters to you in marriage on the condition that you will work for me for eight years , but you may continue for two more years only out of your own accord . i do not want it to become a burden for you . god willing , you will find me a righteous person  .
and if a false imputation from the shaitan afflict you , seek refuge in allah ; surely he is hearing , knowing .
by allah , we indeed sent noble messengers to several nations before you , but satan made their misdeeds appear good to them – so he only is their companion this day , and for them is a punishment , most painful .
yet no faith will the greater part of mankind have , however ardently thou dost desire it .
or say they :  hehas fabricated it .  say :  if i have fabricated it , still you have no power to support me against allah . he knows best of what you say among yourselves concerning it ! sufficient is he for a witness between me and you ! and he is the oft-forgiving , the most merciful . 
and never think that those who rejoice in what they have perpetrated and like to be praised for what they did not do - never think themin safety from the punishment , and for them is a painful punishment .
and give orphans their properties , and do not substitute the bad for the good . and do not consume their properties by combining them with yours , for that would be a serious sin .
they said ,  you are only of those affected by magic .
it leaves and spares no one and nothing .
you should most certainly have seen the hell ;
i will constrain him to a hard ascent .
human beings , we created you all from a male and a female , and made you into nations and tribes so that you may know one another . verily the noblest of you in the sight of allah is the most god-fearing of you . surely allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
but when we had relieved them of their punishment they broke their promise .
excepting someone who is compelledwhile his heart is at rest in it , those who disbelieve in allah aftertheir faith and open up their breasts to unfaith , allah ’ s wrath shall be upon them and there is a great punishment for them .
those who give partnerswill say :  if allah had wished , we should not have given partners to him nor would our fathers ; nor should we have had any taboos .  so did their ancestors argue falsely , until they tasted of our wrath . say :  have ye anyknowledge ? if so , produce it before us . ye follow nothing but conjecture : ye do nothing but lie . 
in his absence , the people of moses made a calf from their ornaments , an image which made a lowing sound . could they not see that it did not speak to them or guide them in any way ? yet they took to worshipping it : they were evil-doers .
we helped him against the people who said our revelations were mere lies . they were a bad people and we drowned them all .
nay , verily . lo ! we created them from what they know .
those are the disbelievers , the wicked .
and become like scattered dust particles ,
those who make a display .
as provision for you and your grazing livestock .
yet they are not all alike ; some of the people of the book are a nation upstanding , that recite god 's signs in the watches of the night , bowing themselves ,
they say ,  what is in the wombs of such and such cattle is exclusively for our males and is forbidden to our females . but if it is stillborn , they may have a share of it .  god will soon punish them for theirattribution . he is wise , and all-knowing .
how many generations have we destroyed before them who criedwhen it was too late for escape .
have they not seen that we have created the night for them to rest and the day for them to see . in this there is evidence for the believing people .
and had we destroyed them with some punishment before the advent of a noble messenger , they would have certainly said , “ our lord , why did you not send a noble messenger to us , so we would have followed your signs , before being humiliated and disgraced ? ”
the day when their excuses will be of no profit to zalimun . theirs will be the curse , and theirs will be the evil abode .
fulfill the covenant of god when you have made one ; and do not break your pledges after their confirmation . indeed you have made god your surety ; for god knows all that you do .
and when we took compact from the prophets , and from thee , and from noah , and abraham , moses , and jesus , mary 's son ; we took from them a solemn compact ,
allah will say , “ remain rebuked in it , and do not speak to me . ”
then will they say :  can we be given respite ? 
and the fire will be uncovered for those who strayed ,
the disbelievers say :  shall we tell you of a man who prophesies that when you are reduced to particles and vanished in the dust , you will become a new creation
and he found you poor , and made you rich ?
say , the holy spirit has brought it down duly from your lord to fortify those who have faith and as guidance and good news for the muslims .
 and gardens and springs .
repel evil with what is best , we are well aware of the things they say ,
so all the angels prostrated , every one , without exception .
and i give them rein : verily my contrivance is firm .
allah , la ilaha illa huwa , the lord of the supreme throne !
he said :  i shall pray to my lord for your forgiveness , for he , and indeed he alone , is ever forgiving , most merciful . 
he saith : my lord ! judge thou with truth . and our lord is the compassionate whose help is to be sought against that which ye utter .
woe to al-mutaffifin ] ,
when a single blow is blown on the horn ,
they can never frustrate god on earth , nor have they any protectors besides god . they will be subjected to double punishment , for they could neither hear nor see .
how can the idolaters have any treaty with allah and his messenger , except those with whom you have made treaties by the sacred mosque ? so long as they are straight with you , so be straight with them . allah loves the righteous .
surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is a greater act than the creation of human beings . but most people do not know .
the pagans will say ,  had god wanted , we would not have worshipped idols , nor would our fathers , nor would we have made anything unlawful .  others before them had also spoken such lies until they experienced the severity of our wrath . , ask them ,  do you possess any knowledge ? if so , tell us about it . you follow only conjectures and preach falsehood . 
have you seen him who denies the day of judgement ?
when you divorce women , and they have reached their term , do not restrain them from marrying theirhusbands , when they have agreed together with kindness . that is an exhortation for whosoever of you believes in allah and the last day . that is cleaner and purer for you . allah knows , and you do not know .
that which you have is transitory , but that which is with allah endures . we shall reward the patient according to the best of their deeds ,
and they sold him for a low price , a number of silver coins ; and they attached no value to him .
do not prostrate before anyone other than him . when the servant of godpreachedthe jinn would all crowd around him .
say : o followers of the book ! why do you hinder him who believes from the way of allah ? you seekit crooked , while you are witness , and allah is not heedless of what you do .
they ask thy instruction concerning the women say : allah doth instruct you about them : andwhat hath been rehearsed unto you in the book , concerning the orphans of women to whom ye give not the portions prescribed , and yet whom ye desire to marry , as also concerning the children who are weak and oppressed : that ye stand firm for justice to orphans . there is not a good deed which ye do , but allah is well-acquainted therewith .
glorify him during the night and also glorify him after prostration .
this . and lo ! for the transgressors there with be an evil journey 's end ,
they ask you about menstruation . say : 'it is an injury . stay away from women during their menstrual periods and do not approach them until they are cleansed . when they have cleansed themselves , then come to them from where allah has commanded you . allah loves those who turn to him in repentance and he loves those who cleanse themselves '
the unbelievers will suffer a severe torment , but the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and a great reward .
praise belongs to allah who has sent down the book to his worshiperand has not made any crookedness in it ,
and had we revealed it unto any of the ncn-arabs ,
god warns you never to repeat the like of it again , if you are true believers .
and they say : when will this promise be fulfilled if ye say sooth ?
do you create it , or we are its creator ?
they prayed for victory and the haughty transgressors were defeated .
and they have set up a kinship between him and the jinn , while the jinn certainly know that they will be presented .
they are unable to frustrate him on the earth ; there is none to protect them , except allah . those , their punishment shall be doubled ; they could neither hear nor see .
the wretched ones will be in the fire sighing and groaning ,
that my lord hath forgiven me , and hath made me of the honoured ones .
how should the idolaters have a covenant with god and his messenger ? -- excepting those with whom you made covenant at the holy mosque ; so long as they go straight with you , do you go straight with them ; surely god loves the godfearing .
and we made the son of marium and his mother a sign , and we gave them a shelter on a lofty ground having meadows and springs .
'no indeed ; but he brought the truth , and confirmed the envoys .
then , the one whose good deeds weigh heavy on the scales ,
o ye who believe ! spend of the good things which ye have earned , and of that which we bring forth from the earth for you , and seek not the badto spend thereofwhen ye would not take it for yourselves save with disdain ; and know that allah is absolute , owner of praise .
your people have rejected the message we have sent through you , though it is the truth . say  i am not your keeper .
and the mountains will be like wool , fluffed up .
he said :  allah forbid , that we should take anyone but him with whom we found our property . indeed , we should be zalimun . 
, recall our servant job . when he prayed to his lord saying ,  satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment , 
that you have surely therein what you choose ?
no sin is on those who believe and work righteous works for that which they have eaten when they have abstained , and believed and work righteous works , and shall again abstain and believe , and shall again abstain and do well ; and allah loveth the well-doers .
then we withdraw it unto us , a gradual withdrawal ?
and they were hewing out houses from mountains feeling secure .
then we subjected the wind to his power , so that it blew gently , at his behest , wherever he willed ,
look then at the effects of allah 's mercy : what wise he quickeneth the earth after the death thereof . verily . he is the quickener of the dead , and he is over every-thing potent .
and the only answer of his people was that they said , 'expel them from your city ; surely they are folk that keep themselves clean ! '
all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah . verily he is all-sufficient , immensely praiseworthy .
and grow in it grains .
they solemnly swear by allah that allah will never raise the dead to life . no , surely the promise of allah is binding upon him , though most people do not know .
so do they not see that it does not answer to any of their speech ? and has no power to cause them any harm or benefit ?
there are those who follow the messengers , the illiterate prophet , whose description they find written in the torah and the gospel.enjoins them to do good and forbids them to do all that is unlawful , makes lawful for them all that is pure and unlawful all that is filthy , removes their burdens and the entanglements in which they are involved ] . those who believe in him , honor and help him , and follow the light which is sent down to him , will have everlasting happiness .
when it descends on their courtyards , how terrible that morning will be for those who were warned !
no . in fact you are not generous to the orphans ,
certainly we had granted them power in respects that we have not granted you , and we had vested them with hearing and sight and hearts . but neither their hearing availed them in any way nor did their sight , nor their hearts when they used to impugn the signs of allah . so they were besieged by what they used to deride .
indeed , it isfor you not to be hungry therein or be unclothed .
but allah did punish him , example of him , - in the hereafter , as in this life .
those who obey god and his messenger , who are humble before him , and who have fear of him will , certainly , be successful .
, the people of the book ask you to make a book descend to them from the heavens . however , they had asked moses for things much harder to do than this , by saying ,  show us god in person .  thunder and lightning struck them because of their unjust demands . despite all the evidence that had come to them , they started to worship the calf , but we forgave them for their sins and gave moses clear authority .
o people who believe ! remember allah ’ s favour upon you , when a people wished to extend their hands against you , so he restrained their hands from you ; and keep fearing allah ; and muslims must rely only upon allah .
and we know not whether evil is boded for those who are on the earth , or whether their lord intendeth for them a right direction .
those who disregard their covenant with god after he has taken such a pledge from them , who sever the proper relations that god has commanded them to establish , and those who spread evil in the land will have god 's condemnation instead of reward and will face the most terrible end .
if you are true indeed to this covenant , why do you not believe in god , when his messenger invites you to believe in your lord with whom you have made a solemn covenant ?
but as for those who disbelieved , and rejected our signs and the encounter of the hereafter—those will be hauled into the torment .
in the victory of allah . he gives victory to whom he wills , and he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
he plunged the villages
and , when mankind are gathered , those will become their enemies and disown their worship .
and recall what time thou settedst forth from thy household early to settle believers in positions for the fight . and allah is hearing , knowing .
have you considered him who turned away ?
and do not sit on every path , threatening and averting from the way of allah those who believe in him , seeking to make itdeviant . and remember when you were few and he increased you . and see how was the end of the corrupters .
yes , if you remain patient and conscious of allah and the enemy come upon youin rage , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels having marks
then would those who are followed clear themselves of those who follow : they would see the penalty , and all relations between them would be cut off .
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the benevolent , the compassionate .
and made of him the two sexes , the male and the female ?
 and to our lord , surely , must we turn back ! 
, say to them ,  should god afflict you with torment , or should the day of judgment arrive , if what you claim is true , could you then seek help from any one other than god ?
remember when he made you successors after ‘ ad , and settled you in the land : you build palaces in its plains , and hew houses out of the mountains . so remember allah ’ s bounties , and do not act wickedly on the earth , causing corruption . ’
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness and a bearer of happy tidings and an admonisher ,
whoever rallies to a good cause shall have a share in its blessing ; and whoever rallies to an evil cause shall be answerable for his part in it : for , indeed , god watches over everything .
and other faces , that day , will be dust-stained ;
do they not consider that god , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the likes of them ? he has assigned for them a term , in which there is no doubt . but the wrongdoers persist in denying the truth .
so leave alone those who turn away from the remembrance of us and who seek nothing but the life of the world –
and watch and they shall see !
who shall enter the great fire ;
instead , the unbelievers reject it , calling it a lie .
to him belong all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth . all are in obedience to him .
o people ! he can remove you and bring others , if he wills ; and allah is able to do that .
hesaid , “ so it is ; your lord says , ‘ this is easy for me – in fact i created you before this , at a time when you did not exist . ’ ”
then her lord accepted her with goodly acceptance and made her grow up with a goodly growth , and he made zakariyya take care of her . so oft as zakariyya entered the apartment to see her , he found provision by her . he said : o maryam ! whence hast thou this ! she said this is from before allah . verily allah provideth for whomsoever he will without reckoning .
go to pharaoh . indeed , he has transgressed . 
if you do good openly or in secret or pardon an evil , surely god is all-pardoning , all-powerful .
we recount unto thee their tidings with truth . verily they were certain youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits , and pastures ,
man is destroyed : how ungrateful !
and will reward them for their steadfastness with paradise and robes of silk .
when distress befalls people , they supplicate their lord , turning to him in penitence . then , when he lets them taste his mercy , behold , a part of them ascribe partners to their lord ,
unto allah belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth . he createth what he will . he bestoweth femaleupon whom he will , and bestoweth maleupon whom he will ;
the promise of allah ! allah does not fail his promise , yet most people do not know .
he was told to enter paradise
and we send down from the clouds water pouring forth abundantly ,
you will surely be tested in your possessions and in yourselves . and you will surely hear from those who were given the scripture before you and from those who associate others with allah much abuse . but if you are patient and fear allah - indeed , that is of the mattersof determination .
it is he who has sent down the bookto youwith truth , confirming what came before it . and he sent down the tauratand the injeel .
who gathers wealth and counts it over .
say : do you apprise allah of your religion , and allah knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
men shall have a share in what parents and relatives leave behind , and women shall have a share in what parents and relatives leave behind , whether it be little or much . this is ordained .
we did not create the sky and the earth and whatever is between them in vain . that is a conjecture of the faithless . so woe to the faithless for the fire !
surely warners came to the people of pharaoh .
have we not made for him two eyes ,
most certainly we revealed to moses :  proceed with my servants in the night and strike for them a dry path in the sea . have no fear of being overtaken , nor be afraid of treading through the sea . 
the path of god , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and on the earth . indeed all matters return eventually to god .
“ so why was he not bestowed with armlets of gold ? or angels should have come with him staying at his side ! ”
in order that he may reward them with goodness in full , and further increase it with his munificence ; indeed he is oft forgiving , most appreciative .
allah shall surely ascertain those who have faith , and he shall surely ascertain the hypocrites .
let the man of means spend according to his means : and the man whose resources are restricted , let him spend according to what allah has given him . allah puts no burden on any person beyond what he has given him . after a difficulty , allah will soon grant relief .
so you did not slay them , but it was allah who slew them , and you did not smite when you smote , but it was allah who smote , and that he might confer upon the believers a good gift from himself ; surely allah is hearing , knowing .
then we drowned the rest .
so exalt the name of your lord , the great .
and keep yourselfpatiently with those who call on their lordmorning and afternoon , seeking his face , and let not your eyes overlook them , desiring the pomp and glitter of the life of the world ; and obey not him whose heart we have made heedless of our remembrance , one who follows his own lusts and whose affairhas been lost .
the messenger believes in what was sent down to him from his lord , and the believers ; each one believes in god and his angels , and in his books and his messengers ; we make no division between any one of his messengers . they say , 'we hear , and obey . our lord , grant us thy forgiveness ; unto thee is the homecoming . '
whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with an endeavour worthy of it , should he be faithful , —the endeavour of such will be well-appreciated .
allah brings usury to naught , but he makes charities flourish . allah does not like any sinful ingrate .
and during a part of the night , pray tahajjud beyond what is incumbent on you ; maybe your lord will raise you to a position of great glory .
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving shall be recompensed .
then when our enlightening signs came to them , they said , “ this is clear magic . ”
and we let itremain upon him in the latter ,
and do not makewith allah another deity . indeed , i am to you from him a clear warner .
then it occurred to them , after they had seen the signs , to imprison him for a while .
then woe , that day , to the deniers ,
“ my lord , give me one of the righteous . ”
for those who forswear their wives shall be a waiting of four months . and if they recant , allah is indeed all-forgiving , all-merciful .
near them shall be its shades , and its clusters hung meekly down ,
and he will leave the earth a level plain ;
 wherein they shall dwell . no desire will they have to be removed therefrom . 
so be not in doubtas to what thesemen worship . they worship nothing but what their fathers worshipped before . and verily , we shall repay them in full their portion without diminution .
they made for him whatever he wished , synagogues and statues , dishes large as water-troughs , and cauldrons firmly fixed :  o house of david , act , and give thanks .  but few among my creatures are thankful .
you are asking me to disbelieve in god , and to associate with him that of which i have no knowledge , yet i invite you to the all-mighty , all-forgiving .
now i will go apart from you and that you call upon , apart from god ; i will call upon my lord , and haply i shall not be , in calling upon my lord , unprosperous .
he is the knower of the unseen and does not disclose his unseen to anyone ,
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in six stages , then assumed the throne . he knows whatsoever enters the earth , and whatsoever comes out of it , and what comes down from the sky and what goes up to it ; and he is with you wheresoever you may be , and he perceives whatsoever you do .
and perform the prayer at the two ends of the day and nigh of the night ; surely the good deeds will drive away the evil deeds . that is a remembrance unto the mindful .
and as for thamud , we showed and made clear to them the path of truththrough our messenger , , but they preferred blindness to guidance , so the sa'iqahof disgracing torment seized them , because of what they used to earn .
surely he was of our believing servants .
:  surely they are a small band .
had we intended we could have given every soul its guidance ; but inevitable is my word that i will fill up hell with men and jinns together .
 o our lord ! truly thou dost know what we conceal and what we reveal : for nothing whatever is hidden from allah , whether on earth or in heaven .
lo ! you are they who will love them while they do not love you , and you believe in the bookthe whole of it ; and when they meet you they say : we believe , and when they are alone , they bite the ends of their fingers in rage against you . say : die in your rage ; surely allah knows what is in the breasts .
and in it he placed mountains as anchors from above it , and blessings in it , and appointed the sustenance for those who dwell in it – all this in four days ; a proper answer to those who question .
but if hebe of the denying , the erring ,
reclining on couches arranged in rows . and we shall wed them to fair maidens with large beautiful eyes .
and that they say that which they do not ?
unquestionably , they are in doubt about the meeting with their lord . unquestionably he is , of all things , encompassing .
and does not expect any reward from anyone ,
pleasing seem their persons when you look at them ; and when they talk , you listen to their speech . yet they are like the wooden panelling of a wall . they imagine every rebuke to be directed against them . they are the enemies , beware of them . may god damn them , how pervert are they !
he will forgive you your sins , and will defer you to an appointed term . verily the term of allah when it cometh shall not be deferred , if ye but knew .
who used to say , ‘ ‘ are you really among those who affirm
elias too was one of the envoys ;
ah woe , that day , to the rejecters of truth !
vile is that for which they have bartered their souls , that they should disbelieve that which allah hath sent down , out of envy that allah should reveal , out of his grace , unto whosoever of his bond men he listeth . wherefore they have drawn upon themselves wrath upon wrath , and unto the infidel shall be a torment ignominious .
he is the first and the last , and the manifest and the hidden , and he has knowledge of everything .
they rejected all our communications , so we overtook them after the manner of a mighty , powerful one .
 make long coats of mail ,  ,  and fix their links , and do the right . i surely see whatsoever you do . 
and sun and moon are united ,
the likeness of this present life is as water that we send down out of heaven , and the plants of the earth mingle with it whereof men and cattle eat , till , when the earth has taken on its glitter and has decked itself fair , and its inhabitants think they have power over it , our command comes upon it by night or day , and we make it stubble , as though yesterday it flourished not . even so we distinguish the signs for a people who reflect .
and if theydisobey thee , say : lo ! i am innocent of what they do .
and ease my task for me ,
:  indeed you were heedless of this , now we have removed your covering , and sharp is your sight this day ! 
lo ! allah hath cursed the disbelievers , and hath prepared for them a flaming fire ,
they say ,  when we return to medina , the honorable ones will certainly drive out the mean ones .  honor belongs to god , his messenger and the believers , but the hypocrites do not know .
be steadfast , then , , allah 's promise is true . seek forgiveness for your shortcomings , and celebrate the praise of your lord , evening and morning .
theirs whose effort is misspent in pursuit of the pleasures of the world , even though they think they are doing good things . 
they said :  shall we believe in you , when the meanestfollow you ? 
every small or great deed is written down .
or , are with them the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the bestower ?
and allah knows whatever you hide and whatever you disclose .
when the most wretched of them uprose ,
we ransomed him with a great sacrifice ,
thus we disclosed things to them so that they might know that god 's promise was true and there was no doubt about the hour . the people argued about them among themselves . they said ,  build a monument over them . their lord knows best concerning them .  those who prevailed in their affair said ,  let us surely build a place of worship over them . 
let man consider what he was created from .
to the madyan peopleshu'aib , one of their own brethren : he said :  o my people ! worship allah : ye have no other god but him . and give not short measure or weight : i see you in prosperity , but i fear for you the penalty of a day that will compassall round .
 for that my lord has granted me forgiveness and has enrolled me among those held in honour ! 
yet there you are , slaying your ownselves , and turning a number of them out of their dwellings , and helping each other against them with sin and aggression . although , should they come to you as captives , you would ransom them . surely , their expulsion was unlawful . do you then believe in a part of the book and disbelieve another ! what shall be the recompense of those of you who do that , but degradation in the worldly life , and on the day of resurrection to be returned to the most terrible punishment . allah is not inattentive of what you do .
and certainly we lodged the children of israel in a goodly abode and we provided them with good things ; but they did not disagree until the knowledge had come to them ; surely your lord will judge between them on the resurrection day concerning that in which they disagreed .
“ so you took them for a mockery until your mocking at them made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them ! ”
similar to yourself is he who conceals his saying , and he who proclaims it , he who hides himself in the night , and he who goes forth by day ,
those who repent , those who worship , those who praise , those who journey , those who kneel , those who bow down , those who advocate righteousness and forbid evil , and those who keep god ’ s limits—give good news to the believers .
faces , that day , will be bright -
 who gives me food and drink ,
as recompense for all they had done .
but they rebelled against their lord 's decree , and so the thunderbolt overtook them even while they gazed ;
so allah gave them a taste of humiliation in the present life , but greater is the punishment of the hereafter , if they only knew !
those who said about their brothers while sitting ,  if they had obeyed us , they would not have been killed .  say ,  then prevent death from yourselves , if you should be truthful . 
 and you take vengeance on us only because we believed in the ayatof our lord when they reached us ! our lord ! pour out on us patience , and cause us to die as muslims . 
their prophet said to them :  allah hath appointed talut as king over you .  they said :  how can he exercise authority over us when we are better fitted than he to exercise authority , and he is not even gifted , with wealth in abundance ?  he said :  allah hath chosen him above you , and hath gifted him abundantly with knowledge and bodily prowess : allah granteth his authority to whom he pleaseth . allah careth for all , and he knoweth all things . 
and we shaded you with clouds and sent down to you manna and quails , ,  eat from the good things with which we have provided you .  and they wronged us not - but they werewronging themselves .
we would have seized him by the right hand ;
but if they turn back , allah hath full knowledge of those who do mischief .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . 
and we raised him to an exalted station .
and there could be no party suceouring him as against allah , nor could he himself be an avenger .
say ,  whoever is an enemy to gabriel - it ishe who has brought the qur'an down upon your heart , , by permission of allah , confirming that which was before it and as guidance and good tidings for the believers . 
and the king said : bring him unto me . and when the messenger came unto him , hesaid : return unto thy lord and ask him what was the case of the women who cut their hands . lo ! my lord knoweth their guile .
but if you desire god , his messenger , and the home of the hereafter , then god has prepared for the righteous among you a magnificent compensation . ”
and in the end he will be repaid for it in full ;
joseph said ,  you shall sow for seven consecutive years as usual , but leave in the ear the harvest that you reap , except for a little which you may eat .
endowed with power and held in honour by the lord of the throne --
and whoever invokes , besides allah , any other ilah , of whom he has no proof , then his reckoning is only with his lord . surely ! al-kafirunwill not be successful .
he said ,  if only i had the strength to stop you or could take refuge in some powerful support ! 
if we will , we shall send down on them out of heaven a sign , so their necks will stay humbled to it .
those who believed in our communications and were submissive :
indeed we have made it a punishment for the wrongdoers .
and when my bondsmen ask thee regarding me , then verily i am nigh ; i answer the call of the caller when he calleth unto me , ; so let them answer me and believe in me , haply they may be rightly directed .
how the earth was outstretched ?
how terrible then was my punishment and my warning .
observed they not that it returned not unto them a word , and owned not for them hurt or profit ?
so i have warned you of a fire which is blazing .
human beings certainly do not want to pay much attention to the quran . in fact , they love the worldly life
man is created of haste ; now will i show to you my signs , therefore do not ask me to hastenon .
through which god will lead those who follow his pleasure to the path of peace , and guide them out of darkness into light by his will , and to the path that is straight .
he said , 'what , and do you serve , apart from god , that which profits you nothing ; neither hurts you ?
they will abide in it for ever , never wanting to shift from it .
but the various factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who disbelieve from the scene of a tremendous day .
but he denied and turned away .
and on that day we shall release them in groups surging like waves one after another , and the trumpet will be blown – so we shall gather them all together.and cause great destruction in the land . )
let there be a group among you who call others to good , and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong : those who do this shall be successful .
say : ' i am only a warner . there is no god except allah , the one , the conqueror ,
how could you turn back to disbelief when the words of god are recited to you and you have in your midst his messenger ? those who seek the protection of god will certainly be guided to the right path .
then went he forth before his people in his pomp . those who were desirous of the life of the world said : ah , would that we had the like of what hath been given unto korah ! lo ! he is lord of rare good fortune .
they said : we have met with ill luck on account of you and on account of those with you . he said : the cause of your evil fortune is with allah ; nay , you are a people who are tried .
could they not see that it could not return them a word , and that it had no power either to harm them or to do them good ?
you shall see the angels circling about the throne , glorifying their lord with praise . and judgement will have been passed in justice on all and it will be said ,  praise be to god , lord of the universe ! 
so that they adore not allah who bringeth forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knoweth that which conceal and that which ye make known .
whosoever has done even an atom 's weight of good will behold it ;
who keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , and of the hereafter , they are sure .
as if they were startled donkeys –
o apostles ! eat of the good things and act righteously . indeed i know best what you do .
then if they respond you not , know that it hath been sent down only with the knowledge of allah , and that there is no god but he ; are ye muslims then ?
this is an admonition for the people that they will be warned and know that he is the only god , and so that the people of understanding may take heed .
and those who associate others with allah say ,  if allah had willed , we would not have worshipped anything other than him , neither we nor our fathers , nor would we have forbidden anything through other than him .  thus did those do before them . so is there upon the messengers exceptclear notification ?
have we not spread the earth like a bed ,
in both of them live springs gush forth .
andwhen shaitanmade theirdeeds seem fair to them and said ,  no one of mankind can overcome you this dayand verily , i am your neighbour .  but when the two forces came in sight of each other , he ran away and said  verily , i have nothing to do with you . verily ! i see what you see not . verily ! i fear allah for allah is severe in punishment . 
so bear thou patiently with that which they say , and hallow the praise of thine lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting .
forgive my father . he has gone astray .
 and remember you much ,
for lo ! he did consider ; then he planned -
their cry in it will be : 'glory be to you , our lord ! ' , and their greeting : 'peace ! ' ; and their cry will always end with : 'all praise be to allah , the lord of the universe .
on that day all faces shall be humbled before the living , self-subsisting one . those burdened with evil deeds will come to grief ,
if you could only see when they are made to stand before their lord ! he will ask them ,  is thisnot the truth ?  they will say ,  yes , by our lord !  he will say ,  then , taste the punishment that comes from your having refused to acknowledge the truth ! 
but if good fortune comes to you from allah , they would be sure to say - as if there had never been ties of affection between you and them -  oh ! i wish i had been with them ; a fine thing should i then have made of it ! 
and for their saying : verily we have slain the messiah 'isa son of maryam , an apostle of allah , whereas they slew him not , nor they crucified him but it was made dubious unto them . and verily those who differ therein are in doubt thereof , they have no knowledge thereof ; they but follow an opinion ; and surely they slew him not .
surely we have given you kausar ,
or you said that he is possessed by satan ? in fact , he has brought you the truth , but most of you dislike it .
marked from before thy lord . nor are they from the wrong- doers far away .
said he , 'now , by thy glory , i shall pervert them all together ,
so they cast their ropes and staffs , saying : 'by pharaoh 's might , we shall be the victors '
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between them in vain ; that is the opinion of those who disbelieve then woe to those who disbelieve on account of the fire .
they observe toward a believer neither kinship nor covenant , and it is they who are the transgressors .
prosperous is he who purifies it ,
“ this is our bestowal – you may therefore bestow favours or withhold them – you will not be questioned . ”
for those that ask and those that are dispossessed ,
that we might try them there by . and whosoever turneth aside from the remembrance of his lord , him he shall thrust into a torment vehement .
this surely is a reminder : therefore whosoever desires may take the way to his lord .
o ye who believe ! be ye staunch in justice , witnesses for allah , even though it be against yourselves orparents orkindred , whethera rich man or a poor man , for allah is nearer unto both . so follow not passion lest ye lapseand if ye lapse or fall away , then lo ! allah is ever informed of what ye do .
for thy lord ison a watch-tower .
these shall be vouchsafed their hire twice over , because they have persevered , and they repel evil with good , and expend of that wherewith we have provided them .
if you help himnot , for allah did indeed help him when the disbelievers drove him out , the second of two , when theywere in the cave , and hesaid to his companion :  be not sad , surely allah is with us .  then allah sent down his sakinahupon him , and strengthened him with forceswhich you saw not , and made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost , while it was the word of allah that became the uppermost , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
there will then beno fitnahfor them but to say :  by allah , our lord , we were not those who joined others in worship with allah . 
so , verily youand those whom you worship .
we answered his prayers with the glad news of the birth of a son by the name of john and told him ,  we have never given such a name to anyone else . 
then surge on from where the people surge and ask allah for forgiveness . he is forgiving and the most merciful .
those who oppose allah and his messenger shall be among the humiliated .
when we let people tastemercy after they had been afflicted by hardship , they devise against our verses . say : 'allah is more swift in devising ' indeed , our messengersare writing down whatever you devise .
god pardon thee ! why gavest thou them leave , till it was clear to thee which of them spoke the truth , and thou knewest the liars ?
they said , 'so says thy lord ; he is the all-wise , the all-knowing . '
say : in whose hand is the dominion over all things and he protecteth , while against him there is no protection , if ye have knowledge ?
said : be not wroth with me that i forgot , and be not hard upon me for my fault .
therein every wise bidding
why bringest thou not angels unto us , if thou art of the truthful ?
the only answer given by his people was ,  turn them out of your town . they are people who regard themselves to be pure . 
he said : this shall be separation between me and you ; now i will inform you of the significance of that with which you could not have patience .
as mercy from your lord . he is the hearer , the knower .
thus , and we will wed them with houris pure , beautiful ones .
no believing men and women have any choice in a matter after god and his apostle have decided it . whoever disobeys god and his apostle has clearly lost the way and gone astray .
and he who saith unto his parents : fie upon you both ! threaten me ye that i shall be taken forth , whereas generations have passed away before me ? and the twain implore allah 's assistance woe unto thee ! come to believe ! verily the promise of allah is true ; yet he saith : naught is this but fables of the ancients . 
with fruits of their own choice
and we sent not unto any township a warner , but its pampered ones declared : lo ! we are disbelievers in that wherewith ye have been sent .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with aad ?
he harnessed the day and night for you , as also the sun , the moon and the stars , by his command . in this are signs for men who understand .
or ,  if only god had guided me , i would surely have joined the god-fearing . 
to allah belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth . he forgiveth whom he pleaseth and punisheth whom he pleaseth ; but allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
say : 'shall i seek after a lord other than god , who is the lord of all things ? ' every soul earns only to its own account , no soul laden bears the load of another . then to your lord shall you return , and he will tell you of that whereon you were at variance .
but those whose desires exceed those limits are transgressors ; -
among the people of the book there are some , who , if you trust him with a qintar , will return it to you , and there are others , who , if you trust him with a dinar will not hand it back unless you stand over him , for they say : 'as for the common people , they have no recourse to us ' they say lies against allah while they know .
god blots out , and he establishes whatsoever he will ; and with him is the essence of the book .
and as a caller towards allah , by his command , and as a sun that enlightens .
then god sent down a sense of tranquility on his apostle and the faithful ; and sent down troops invisible to punish the infidels . this is the recompense of those who do not believe .
whoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and messengers , to gabriel and michael , - lo ! allah is an enemy to those who reject faith .
he is god . there is no god but he , the knower of secrets and declarations . he is the compassionate , the merciful .
and we decreed unto him this commandment because the last of those was to be cut off in the early morning .
if thou fearest god ... he said , ' i am but a messenger come from thy lord , to give thee a boy most pure .
that they may enjoy the fruits of this : it was not their hands that made this : will they not then give thanks ?
thus we admitted him to our grace . he is surely one of the righteous .
but we have indeed made the qur'an easy to understand and remember : then is there any that will receive admonition ?
surely a chastisement awaits the wrong-doers even before the coming of that day ; but most of them do not know .
that he may forgive some of your sins and prolong your term till an appointed time . surely when god 's appointed time is come it will not be put off , if only you knew !
andfaces on that day , on them shall be dust ,
and said , “ o adam ! you and your wife dwell in paradise – therefore eat from it from wherever you wish , and do not approach this tree for you will become of those who transgress . ”
except the chosen servants of allah .
the day when no profit will it be to wrong-doers to present their excuses , but they willhave the curse and the home of misery .
“ he being my successor and the heir of the descendants of yaqub ; and my lord , make him a cherished * one . ”
what are they questioning each other about ?
and certainly yusuf came to you before with clear arguments , but you ever remained in doubt as to what he brought ; until when he died , you said : allah will never raise an apostle after him . thus does allah cause him to err who is extravagant , a doubter
so turn thou from them for a while ,
by the sky and the night-visitant ; -
say : 'indeed i fear , if i should rebel against thy lord , the chastisement of a dreadful day . '
“ and what is the matter with us that we should not rely on allah ? he has in fact shown us our ways ; and we will surely be patient upon the troubles you cause us ; and those who trust must rely only upon allah . ”
 woe betide us !  they will say ,  who has roused us from our sleep ?  this is what the lord of mercy promised : the messengers spoke the truth !
allah it is who revealed the book with truth , and the balance , and what shall make you know that haply the hour be nigh ?
truly , the likeness of jesus , in god 's sight , is as adam 's likeness ; he created him of dust , then said he unto him , 'be , ' and he was .
surely your god is one ,
joseph 's brothers came and presented themselves before him . he recognized them , but they did not know him .
in the heavens there is your sustenance and that which you were promised .
but those whose faces will bewhite , - they will be inallah 's mercy : therein to dwell .
say : ' i am only a mortal the like of you ; it is revealed to me that your god is one god . so let him , who hopes for the encounter with his lord , work righteousness , and not associate with his lord 's service anyone .
by your lord , we will surely muster them and the devils together . then we will surely bring them all , on their knees , around hell ,
and know that anything you obtain of war booty - then indeed , for allah is one fifth of it and for the messenger and fornear relatives and the orphans , the needy , and thetraveler , if you have believed in allah and in that which we sent down to our servant on the day of criterion - the day when the two armies met . and allah , over all things , is competent .
i am to you a faithful messenger .
and we are the arrangers .
blessed is he who , if that were his will , could give thee betterthan those , - gardens beneath which rivers flow ; and he could give thee palaces .
but if they press you to associate others with me in my divinity , those regarding whom you have no knowledge , do not obey them . and yet treat them well in this world , and follow the way of him who turns to me in devotion . eventually it is to me that all of you shall return , and i shall then tell you all that you did . ”
why will they not understand that their companionis not possessed by jinn.is only aauthorized preacher .
their prophet said to them : 'allah has raised saul to be your king ' but they replied : 'should he be given the kingship over us , when we are more deserving of it than he and he has not been given abundant wealth ' he said : 'allah has chosen him over you and increased him with amplitude in knowledge and body . allah gives his kingship to whom he will . allah is the embracer , the knower '
your wealth and your children are only a trial , whereas allah ! with him is a great reward .
you did not use to conceal yourselveslest your hearing , your eyes , or your skins should bear witness against you , but you thought that allah did not know most of what you did .
we shallshow them our evidence in the world and within their souls until it becomes clear that the quran is the truth . is it not sufficient for you that your lord witness all things ?
who , then , can be more unjust than he who lied against allah and denied the truth when it came to him , calling it a lie ? is there no room for such unbelievers in hell ?
assuredly we sent our apostles with evidences , and we sent down with them the book and the balance , that people might observe equity . and we sent down iron wherein is great violence and also advantages unto mankind , and that allah may know him who succoureth him , unseen , and his apostles . verily allah is strong , mighty .
o you who believe ! do not enter houses other than your own houses until you have asked permission and saluted their inmates ; this is better for you , that you may be mindful .
whether ye disclose a good or conceal it , or pardon an evil , then verily allah is ever pardoning potent .
and of the shayatin were some who dived for him , and did other work besides that ; and it was we who guarded them .
and , my nation , i fear for you the day of calling ,
god is not afraid of the result of what he had decreed .
,  my lord , grant me authority and join me with the righteous .
and created jinns from the white-hot flame of fire .
no ! they are going to know .
whosoever god allows to go astray has none to show him the way , for he leaves them to wander perplexed in their wickedness .
, if god afflicts you with hardship , no one besides him can save you . if god grants you a favor , no one can prevent you from receiving his favors . god bestows his favors upon whichever of his servants he wants . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
fear allah and do not disgrace me '
we then made our chosen bondmen the inheritors of the book ; so among them is one who wrongs himself ; and among them is one who stays on the middle course ; and among them is one who , by the command of allah , surpassed others in good deeds ; this is the great favour !
and chose the life of the world ,
it is he who produced you from one living soul , and then a lodging-place , and then a repository . we have distinguished the signs for a people who understand .
and we did not feed the poor ,
this is only revelation communicated ,
and shake the trunk of the palm-tree toward thee , thou wilt cause ripe dates to fall upon thee .
and he it is who makes the night as a robe for you , and sleep as repose , and makes the daya resurrection .
neither heaven nor earth wept for them , nor were they respited ;
and madea burning lamp
the drive will be , on that day , to your lord !
then as to those who have believed and worked righteous works , he shall give unto them their hire in full and shall give unto them an increase out of his grace . and as to those who disdained and were stiff-necked , he shall torment them with a torment afflictive . and they shall not find for themselves , against allah , a protecting friend or a helper .
do youcovet that they will believe in your religion inspite of the fact that a party of themused to hear the word of allah ] , then they used to change it knowingly after they understood it ?
no ! i swear by the reproachful soul .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? aye , that he is ! for he is the all-wise creator ,
being ungrateful toward what we have given them . so let them enjoy . soon they will know !
such is allah , your lord . there is no god but he - the creator of all things . serve him alone - for it is he who is the guardian of everything .
were it not for an ordinance from allah that had already gone forth , surely there would have befallen you a great chastisement for what you had taken to .
say :  see ye if theisfrom allah , and yet do ye reject it ? who is more astray than one who is in a schism far ? 
indeed those who have brought this great accusation are a group from among you ; do not consider it bad for you ; on the contrary , it is good for you ; for each man among them is the sin that he has earned ; and for the one among them who played the greatest part in it – for him is a terrible punishment .
prepare against them whatever you can ofpower and war-horses , awing thereby the enemy of allah , and your enemy , and others besides them , whom you do not know , but allah knows them . and whatever you spend in the way of allah will be repaid to you in full , and you will not be wronged .
the earth will glow with the light of her lord , and the book will be set up , and the prophets and the martyrs will be brought , and judgment will be made between them with justice , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites , those whose hearts are sick and those who encourage the spread of evil in the city , will not desist , we shall arouse you against them and they will only be allowed to be your neighbors for a short while .
and that they say that which they do not do ,
and we did certainly create the heavens and earth and what is between them in six days , and there touched us no weariness .
prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of glad news , a warner ,
i am not trying to absolve myself : for man 's very soul incites him to evil unless my lord bestows his mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful . 
and we have set therein lamps glowing .
when they reached david , he took fright , but they said ,  do not be afraid . we are two disputants , one of whom has wronged the other : judge between us fairly , do not be unjust , and guide us to the right path .
hearken ye to your lord , before there come a day which there will be no putting back , because ofallah ! that day there will be for you no place of refuge nor will there be for you any room for denial !
surely to us is their turning back ,
and allah doth know what ye conceal , and what ye reveal .
o you who believe ! when you marry the believing women , then divorce them before you touch them , you have in their case no term which you should reckon ; so make some provision for them and send them forth a goodly sending forth .
he whom allah guides is one that is guided , but he whom allah leaves in error shall surely be the lost .
though every sign come to them , till they see the painful chastisement .
yet they are in doubt , playing .
you will be three groups :
do they want to hasten our torment ?
those who blame the voluntary donors from among the faithful concerning the charities—and as for those who do not findexcepttheir means , they ridicule them—allah shall put them to ridicule , and there is a painful punishment for them .
until which day is it deferred ?
say : i do not know whether that with which you are threatened be nigh or whether my lord will appoint for it a term :
when they have reached their appointed time , then either keep them lawfully or let them go honourably ; but have two witnesses from among you , and give truthful evidence forgod . this is to warn him who believes in god and the last day . god will furnish a way out for him who fears him ,
remember when yusufsaid to his father , “ o my father ! i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon – i saw them prostrating to me . ”
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then ascended the throne , in a manner befitting his majesty ; he knows all what goes into the earth and all what comes out of it , and all what descends from the sky and all that rises in it ; and he is with you , wherever you may be ; and allah is seeing your deeds .
yet they worship in place of god that for which no authority has been sent to them , and of which they have no knowledge . the wicked will have none to help them .
those who believed , and those who migrated and fought for the sake of god—those look forward to god ’ s mercy . god is forgiving and merciful .
as for those who disbelieve after having believed , then plunge deeper into disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted ; these are the lost .
their way of request therein will be subhanaka allahummaand salamwill be their greetings therein ! and the close of their request will be : al-hamdu lillahi rabbil-'alamin ] .
from cattle they get milk and other benefits . will they not then give thanks ?
when hell is set ablaze ,
why , were you witnesses , when death came to jacob ? when he said to his sons , 'what will you serve after me ? ' they said , 'we will serve thy god and the god of thy fathers abraham , ishmael and isaac , one god ; to him we surrender . '
the messengers will receive their appointments .
and allah 's is the unseen in the heavens and the earth , and to him is returned the whole of the affair ; therefore serve him and rely on him , and your lord is not heedless of what you do .
in response they called their companion – he therefore caught and hamstrung the she-camel .
those who have accepted faith and practice piety .
then , when they have reached their term , take them back in kindness or part from them in kindness , and call to witness two just men among you , and keep your testimony upright for allah . whoso believeth in allah and the last day is exhorted to act thus . and whosoever keepeth his duty to allah , allah will appoint a way out for him ,
however , it will only take a single blast
and when they went forth togoliath and his soldiers , they said ,  our lord , pour upon us patience and plant firmly our feet and give us victory over the disbelieving people . 
o ye who believe ! when ye stand up for the prayer wash your faces and your hands unto the elbows , and wipe your heads , and wash your feet unto the ankles . and if ye be polluted , then purify yourselves and if ye be ailing or on a journey or one of you cometh from the privy or ye have touched women , and ye find not water , then betake yourselves to clean earth and wipe your faces and hands therewith . allah intendeth not to lay upon you a hardship , but intendeth to purify you and to complete his favour upon you , that haply ye may return thanks .
 and withhold not things justly due to men , nor do evil in the land , working mischief .
and those who ascribe not partners unto their lord ,
from allah , the lord of the ways of ascent .
is it you that produce the trees for it , or are we the producers ?
allah it is who created the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is betwixt the twain in six days , and then he established himself on the throne . no patron have ye nor an intercessor , besides him . will ye not then be admonished ?
and when they saw it as a sudden cloud heading for their valley they said : 'this is a cloud that will bring us rain ' 'rather ' : 'it is that which you have sought to hasten , a wind in which there is a painful punishment .
they said : call on your lord for our sake to make it plain to us what she is . musa said : he says , surely she is a cow neither advanced in age nor too young , of middle age between that ; do therefore what you are commanded .
said :  o my people ! there is no foolishness in me , buta messenger from the lord of the 'alamin !
there are some of them who prick up their ears at you . but can you make the deaf hear even if they do not exercise their reason ?
as a bounty from thy lord ! that will be the supreme achievement !
we destroyed them and their people altogether .
and wellnigh bursts asunder with rage . as often as a troop is cast into it , its keepers ask them , 'came there no warner to you ? ' ;
it is an arabic qur'an free of all crookedness that they may guard against their evil end .
but when he gave them from his bounty , they were stingy with it and turned away while they refused .
trust in god and be sure that he is a sufficient guardian .
foul mouthed , and in addition to all this , of improper lineage .
god has indeed heard the words of the woman who pleads with you about her husband and lays her complaint before god : god hears what the two of you have to say . god is all hearing , all seeing .
fight against those whobelieve not in allah , nor in the last day , nor forbid that which has been forbidden by allah and his messengerand those who acknowledge not the religion of truthamong the people of the scripture , until they pay the jizyah with willing submission , and feel themselves subdued .
these examples—we put them forward to the people ; but none grasps them except the learned .
and otherof the same kind -- of various sorts .
and they brought his shirt with false blood upon it . he said : nay , your souls have made the matter light for you , but patience is good and allah is he whose help is sought for against what you describe .
none besides allah can avert it , .
‘ o soul at peace !
precisely running their courses .
so they were rightly seized by a mighty blast ; and we turned them into mouldy rubbish : a good riddance of the wicked people !
it is that of which allah gives good tidings to his servants who believe and do righteous deeds . say , ,  i do not ask you for this message any paymentonly good will through kinship .  and whoever commits a good deed - we will increase for him good therein . indeed , allah is forgiving and appreciative .
allah has prepared a severe punishment for them . so those possessing understanding fear allah . believers , allah has sent this down for you as a reminder ,
and when he had furnished them with their furnishing ; he placed the drinking-cup in his brother 's pack . - thereafter a crier cried : o caravan ! verily ye are thieves .
and assuredly we established you in the earth and appointed for you livelihoods therein ; yet little thanks ye return .
and whether you are killed or you die , towards allah you will be gathered .
god will pay them on that day their just due in full , and they will come to know that god is the tangible reality .
those who prefer the life of the world to the hereafter , and hinder people from the way of allah , and seek crookedness therein ; these are in error far-off .
in them there are also other benefits for you , and through them you fulfil your heartfelt need , and you are borne along upon them as upon the ships .
among those we have created are a nation who guide by the truth and do justice thereby .
he has counted them and exactly numbered all ;
not so are the prayerful .
and the devils have not brought the revelation down .
whosoever desiresthe reward of the hereafter , we give him increase in his reward , and whosoever desires the reward of this world , we give him thereof , and he has no portion in the hereafter .
and you are carried on them and on ships .
and warn your close relatives .
the officials said :  we have lost the king 's cup .  :  he who brings it shall have a camel-load of provisions , i guarantee that . 
then will no intercession ofintercessors profit them .
as for the thief , whether male or female , cut their hands as a penalty for what they have reaped—a deterrent from god . god is mighty and wise .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion to his servant , that it may be an admonition to all creatures ; -
for sufficient are we unto thee against those who scoff , -
so ignore them . on the day when the crier will call out about a horrible event ,
do you not know that god 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and that there is none to save and protect you apart from god ?
say ,  i do not ask of you for it any payment - only that whoever wills might take to his lord a way . 
those only are believers whose hearts become full of fear when allah is mentioned , and when his communications are recited to them they increase them in faith , and in their lord do they trust .
give them power in the land and make the pharaoh , haman , and their armies to experience from their victims what they feared most .
a blast struck the unjust and they were found lying motionless on their faces
indeed , it will overtake them suddenly , dumbfounding them . so they will neither be able to avert it , nor will they be granted any respite .
have you not seen those who were told ,  restrain your handsand establish prayer and give zakah  ? but then when fighting was ordained for them , at once a party of them feared men as they fear allah or withgreater fear . they said ,  our lord , why have you decreed upon us fighting ? if only you had postponedus for a short time .  say , the enjoyment of this world is little , and the hereafter is better for he who fears allah . and injustice will not be done to you , as much as a thread . 
in it you will never go hungry , nor be naked .
he said :  shall i seek for you an ilahanother than allah , while he has given you superiority over the 'alamin . 
but those who repent and amend , and hold firmly to god , and are sincere and wholly obedient to god , are surely with the faithful ; and god will bestow on the faithful a great reward .
on that day , you shall see the sinners coupled together in fetters ;
and other torments , like thereof , conjoined .
so you leave him , and are engrossed elsewhere !
and the eminent among the people of pharaoh said ,  will you leave moses and his people to cause corruption in the land and abandon you and your gods ?  said ,  we will kill their sons and keep their women alive ; and indeed , we are subjugators over them . 
these are clear evidences to men and a guidance and mercy to those of assured faith .
set not up with god another god , or thou wilt sit condemned and forsaken .
no indeed ; but you cry lies to the doom ;
and we made your sleep to be rest ,
they said , 'we augur ill of thee and of those that are with thee . ' he said , 'your augury is with god ; nay , but you are a people being proved . '
,  we feed you for the sake of allah alone : no reward do we desire from you , nor thanks .
say to the ignorant who stayed behind , “ you will soon be called against a nation of great military strength – to fight against them or that they become muslims ; so if you obey , allah will give you an excellent reward ; and if you turn away , the way you had turned away before , he will mete out a painful punishment to you . ”
no indeed ; but they do not fear the hereafter .
establish your prayers , pay the obligatory charity , and bow with those who bow .
and it will revert the chastisement from her if she testifieth by allah four times that verily he is of the liars .
allah confirmeth those who believe by a firm saying in the life of the world and in the hereafter , and allah sendeth wrong-doers astray . and allah doeth what he will .
so , when you have gone apart from them and that they serve , excepting god , take refuge in the cave , and your lord will unfold to you of his mercy , and will furnish -- you with a gentle issue of your affair . '
surely those who disbelieve and turn away from allah 's way and oppose the apostle after that guidance has become clear to them can not harm allah in any way , and he will make null their deeds .
are we to make those who believe and do good works the same as those who corrupt the earth ? are we to make the righteous as the wicked ?
give thou good tidings to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness , that for them await gardens underneath which rivers flow ; whensoever they are provided with fruits therefrom they shall say , 'this is that wherewithal we were provided before ' ; that they shall be given in perfect semblance ; and there for them shall be spouses purified ; therein they shall dwell forever .
say :  who can keep you safe by night and by day from most gracious ?  yet they turn away from the mention of their lord .
truly god was gracious to the believers when he raised up among them a messenger from themselves , to recite to them his signs and to purify them , and to teach them the book and the wisdom , though before they were in manifest error .
how is it with you , that you do not eat of that over which god 's name has been mentioned , seeing that he has distinguished for you that he has forbidden you , unless you are constrained to it ? but surely , many lead astray by their caprices , without any knowledge ; thy lord knows very well the transgressors .
he knows all that goes into the earth and all that comes out of it , and all that descends from the skies and all that ascends into it ; and only he is the most merciful , the oft forgiving .
 o our lord ! certainly , you know what we conceal and what we reveal . nothing on the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
he said : as for him who doeth wrong , presently we shall torment him , and thereafter he shall be brought back to his lord , and he shall torment him with a torment formidable .
here you are , being called to spend in the cause of god . among you are those who withhold ; but whoever withholds is withholding against his own soul . god is the rich , while you are the needy . and if you turn away , he will replace you with another people , and they will not be like you .
andwhen the angels said ,  o mary , indeed allah has chosen you and purified you and chosen you above the women of the worlds .
their eyes will be cast down and they will be covered in shame ; they were bidden to prostrate themselves , when they were safe and sound .
 and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a symbol to you : leave her to feed on allah'searth , and inflict no harm on her , or a swift penalty will seize you ! 
also , remember our worshipers ishmael , elisha , and thulkifl , they are among the good .
and we left it as a sign . is there anyone who would take heed ?
“ and be separatedthis day , o you criminals ! ”
it is made lawful for you , during the nights of fasting , to have carnal relations with your wives . they are your garments and you are their garments . god knew that you were deceiving yourselves . he relented towards you and forgave you . now it is lawful for you to have carnal relations with your wives and follow what god has commanded . eat and drink until the white streak of dawn becomes distinguishable from darkness . complete your fast , starting from dawn to dusk . it is not lawful to have carnal relations with your wives during i'tikaf in the mosque . such are the limits of the laws of god . do not come close to transgressing them . thus has god explained his evidence to men so that perhaps they will have fear of god .
all the productive palm-treeswhich you cut down or left untouched were the will of god to bring disgrace upon the evil-doers .
when you were going up , not twisting about for anyone , and the messenger was calling you in your rear ; so he rewarded you with grief on grief that you might not sorrow for what escaped you neither for what smote you ; and god is aware of the things you do .
and if you do not find anyone therein , do not enter them until permission has been given you . and if it is said to you ,  go back ,  then go back ; it is purer for you . and allah is knowing of what you do .
as for those who are bent on denying the truth , it makes no difference to them whether you warn them or not , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world , and the excellent reward of the hereafter . and allah loves al-muhsinun .
for every prophecy is a term , and you will come to know .
he is the absolute master over his servants . he sends forth guardianswho watch over you until , when death approaches one of you , our angels take his soul , and they never fail in their duty .
say , ‘ what thing is greatest as witness ? ’ say , ‘ allah ! witness between me and you , and this quran has been revealed to me that i may warn thereby you and whomever it may reach. ’ ‘ do you indeed bear witness that there are other gods besides allah ? ’ say , ‘ i do not bear witness . ’ say , ‘ indeed he is the one god , and i indeed disown what you associate . ’
when we made you equal with the lord of all being .
no ; but you prefer the present life ,
god showedto be few in your dream , for if he had shown them to be many you would surely have lost courage and disagreed about theof the battle . but god spared you this , for he surely knows what is in the hearts of men .
but they rejected him , so we delivered him and those with him in the ark , and we made them rulers and drowned those who rejected our communications ; see then what was the end of thewarned .
we sent noah to his people to give them the clear warning
 and why should i not worship himwho has created me and to whom you shall be returned .
and we have certainly created you , , and given youform . then we said to the angels ,  prostrate to adam  ; so they prostrated , except for iblees . he was not of those who prostrated .
they say ,  our hearts are covered against and our ears are deaf to whatever youinvite us to . there is a barrier between us and you . so act as you please and we shall act as we please  .
their composing for the winter and summer caravan !
and whosoever obeyeth allah and the apostle , then those shall be with them whom allah hath blessed -- from among the prophets , the saints , the martyrs , and the righteous . excellent are these as a company !
even if you extend your hand toward me to kill me , i will not extend my hand toward you to kill you . indeed , i fear allah , the lord of all the worlds .
in the midst of a fierce blast of fire and in boiling water ,
say thou : allah keepeth you alive , then he shall cause you to die , then he shall assemble you on the day of resurrection whereof there is no doubt ; but most of mankind know not .
so eat of thaton which allah 's name has been pronounced , if you are believers in his ayat .
he surely will invoke destruction
and verily we are able to show thee that which we have promised them .
the righteously striving believers will receive the reward for their deeds and extra favors from god . but those who disdain the worship of god out of pride will suffer the most painful torment . they will find no guardian or helper besides god .
indeed the guilty used to laugh at the faithful ,
and enter thou my garden .
except by a mercy from us , and enjoyment for a while .
a book whose signs have been distinguished as an arabic koran for a people having knowledge ,
say : surely i have manifest proof from my lord and you call it a lie ; i have not with me that which you would hasten ; the judgment is only allah 's ; he relates the truth and he is the best of deciders .
but no ; ? his lord was ever watching him .
if it had been our will , we could have used these signs to exalt him , but instead he clung to the earth and followed his own desires , he was like a dog that pants whether you chase it away or leave it alone . such are those who reject our signs . tell them this story so that they may reflect .
with looks downcast they will come forth , from the tombs , as though they were locusts scattered abroad .
andthe night when it covers with darkness ,
: 'stamp your foot on the ground , here is cool water with which to wash and a drink '
in the houses which god has allowed to be raised for the remembrance of his name , morning and evening ,
they descend upon every calumniator , sinner .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah with disbelief and landed their nation in a house of ruin ?
children of israel , recall my favors which you enjoyed . fulfill your covenant with me and i shall fulfill mine . revere only me .
surely god is with those who are godfearing , and those who are good-doers .
said :  i am only a messenger from your lord , to you the gift of a righteous son . 
the fire , they are exposed to it morning and evening . and the day the hour appears ,  make the people of pharaoh enter the severest punishment . 
but the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and observed piety .
observe , then , what was the end of those that had been warned ,
so no ransom will be accepted of you on this day , or of those who refused to believe . hell will be your refuge and the only friend -- and how evil a destination ! 
he will say , “ similarly did our signs come to you but you forgot them ; and in the same way , nobody will heed you today . ”
we sent a sandstorm against them which destroyed them all , except the family of lot , whom we saved at the break of dawn ,
 so we led you astray because we were ourselves astray . 
those whom we have vouchsafed the book recognise him even as they recognise their own children . yet those who have lost themselves will not believe .
wherein they will not hear any vain talk .
 no reward do i ask of you for it , my reward is only from the lord of the 'alamin .
they said ,  we have , indeed , given you glad tidings in truth ; do not therefore despair . 
and he whom allah guides to the right way , none can lead him astray . is not allah the most mighty , the lord of retribution ?
he would make satan 's temptations a trial for those whose hearts are hard and sick . the wrong-doers are far away from the lord ,
and when the shaitan made their works fair seeming to them , and said : no one can overcome you this day , and surely i am your protector : but when the two parties came in sight of each other he turned upon his heels , and said : surely i am clear of you , surely i see what you do not see , surely i fear allah ; and allah is severe in requiting .
moses replied :  you shall find me , if allah wills , patient ; and i shall not disobey you in anything . 
seek they then other than the religion of allah whereas unto him hath submitted whosoever is in the heavens and the earth willingly or unwillingly , and unto him shall they all be returned .
or that the unseen is in their hands , so that they can write it down ?
those who reject faith and die in the state of rejection will not be saved , even if they offer as ransom enough gold to fill the entire earth . painful punishment is in store for them and they will have no supporters .
 go thou to pharaoh , for he has indeed transgressed all bounds . 
so believe in allah and his messenger and the qur'an which we have sent down . and allah is acquainted with what you do .
the god of men ,
for them shall be the abode of peace near their lord and he will be their guardian because of what they used to do .
and those who spend the night before their lord , prostrate and standing .
and you shall surely know its tiding after a while . '
were it not that favor from his lord had overtaken him , he would certainly have been cast down upon the naked found while he was blamed .
saying ,  peace be with you for all that you have patiently endured . blessed is the reward of paradise . 
then those who wrangle about our signs will come to know that there is no escape for them .
andwhen the disbelievers plotted against youto imprison you , or to kill you , or to get you out ; they were plotting and allah too was planning , and allah is the best of the planners .
indeed , for you by day is prolonged occupation .
they forbid from itand keep away from it . they destroy none except themselves , though they do not sense it .
the messenger believeth in that which hath been revealed unto him from his lord andbelievers . each one believeth in allah and his angels and his scriptures and his messengers - we make no distinction between any of his messengers - and they say : we hear , and we obey.thy forgiveness , our lord . unto thee is the journeying .
those who are faithfully true to their amanatand to their covenants ;
so the angels prostrated themselves , all together .
he cast a glance at the stars
but what will convey to you what the night of decree is ?
and when moosa asked for water for his people , we said , “ strike this rock with your staff ” ; thereupon twelve springs gushed forth from it ; each group recognised its drinking-place ; “ eat and drink from what allah has provided , and do not roam about the earth making turmoil in it . ”
therein are fruits and palm trees with sheaths ,
verily we take upon ourselves to guide ,
had we wanted , we could have drowned them and nothing would have been able to help or rescue them
it is he who made the earth tame for you - so walk among its slopes and eat of his provision - and to him is the resurrection .
the parable of those who disbelieve in their lord : their actions are like ashes on which the wind blows hard on a stormy day ; they shall not have power over any thing out of what they have earned ; this is the great error .
and before solomon were marshalled his hosts , - of jinns and men and birds , and they were all kept in order and ranks .
it invites he who turned his backand went away
do not think about those who have disbelieved that they will be able to frustrate allah in the land ; their abode is hell and it is a very evil abode .
preserved in a hidden book which
but they denied the truth when it has come to them , so they are in a confused state .
he will be welcomed by the words : “ peace to you ” from the people on the right .
they said :  are you speaking in earnest , or only jesting ? 
have they not seen that god has created the heavens and the earth and that he experienced no fatigue in doing this . he has the power to bring the dead back to life . certainly he has power over all things .
maintain the prayerfrom the sun ’ s decline till the darkness of the night , andthe dawn recital . indeed the dawn recital is attended .
as for him who thinks himself self-sufficient ,
look how they strike for you comparisons ; but they have strayed , so they cannota way .
so the magicians were assembled at a stated time and place on an appointed day .
 but if it be that his shirt is torn from the back , then is she the liar , and he is telling the truth ! 
a revelation from , most gracious , most merciful ; -
and remember god during the designated days . but whoever hurries on in two days commits no wrong , and whoever stays on commits no wrong—provided he maintains righteousness . and obey god , and know that to him you will be gathered .
and we delivered those who believed and were wont to fear .
those are the ones who have taken error in exchange for guidance and punishment for forgiveness . how little do they seem to fear the fire !
and there will be fair ones large eyed .
and when it is said to them ,  come to what allah has revealed and to the messenger ,  they say ,  sufficient for us is that upon which we found our fathers .  even though their fathers knew nothing , nor were they guided ?
have they not considered how many generations we destroyed before them ; and that unto them they will not return ?
made lawful to you is the fished of the sea and its food , an enjoyment for you and for travelers . but you are forbidden the hunted of the land whilst you are on pilgrimage . have fear of allah , before whom you shall all be assembled .
witnessed by those who are honoured .
and mention in the book , moses . indeed , he was chosen , and he was a messenger and a prophet .
no laden soul shall bear another 's load . if one is heavyburdened and calls for his load to be carried , nothing of it will be carried , not even if he is a close relative . you warn only those who fear their lord in the unseen , and establish the prayer . he who purifies himself , purifies himself for the good of his own soul . to allah is the arrival .
when moses came to them with our miracles , they said ,  these are only invented magic . we have never heard of such things from our fathers  .
woe to every slanderer and backbiter
proclaim thy lord 's praise , and be of those that bow ,
and when the magicians came , they said to firon : shall we get a reward if we are the vanquishers ?
they shall not taste therein cool nor drink
not so do those who show patience and constancy , and work righteousness ; for them is forgivenessand a great reward .
and guardagainst a day when no soul will in aught avail another , nor will compensation be accepted from it , nor will intercession be of use to it ; nor will they be helped .
and a sign for them is that we carried their seed in the laden ship ,
and will admit them into paradise , which he has identified for them .
indeed , those who came with falsehood are a group among you . do not think it bad for you ; rather it is good for you . for every person among them is whathe has earned from the sin , and he who took upon himself the greater portion thereof - for him is a great punishment .
people , remember the bounty of god that he has granted to you . is their any creator besides god who could provide you with sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? he is the only god . where then can you turn away ?
how many a generation have we destroyed afore them , and they cried when there was not time of fleeing .
and that allah may bestow upon you a mighty help .
and they will not be able to keep away therefrom .
have you not considered how god sends down water from the sky , then he makes it flow into underground wells , then he produces with it plants of various colors , then they wither and you see them yellowing , then he turns them into debris ? surely in this is a reminder for those with understanding .
they will have gardens and vineyards ,
and then we shall know well all those most worthy to be cast in hell .
and those who believe in the day of recompense ,
those who believe say , “ if only a chapter is sent down. ” yet when a decisive chapter is sent down , and fighting is mentioned in it , you see those in whose hearts is sickness looking at you with the look of someone fainting at death . so woe to them !
that is because when god alone was called upon , you disbelieved ; but when others were associated with him , you believed . judgment rests with god the sublime , the majestic .
in the victory of allah . allah gives victory to whosoever he will , and he is the mighty , the merciful .
others whose cases are deferred until it is god 's will to judge them . he will either punish them , or turn in mercy to them ; god is all knowing and wise .
profound in wisdom , but all warnings have been of no avail :
and they swear by allah with their solemn oaths that , if thou commandest them they will surely go forth . say thou : swear not , obedience is recognize ! verily allah is aware of that which ye work .
and of them are some who hearken unto thee and we have set over their hearts veils lest they understand it , and in their ears heaviness , and though they see any sign they will not believe therein : in as much as when they come to thee , they dispute with thee . then who disbelieve say : this is naught but the fables of the ancients .
o prophet , say to them ,  do you argue with us concerning aiiah , whereas he is our lord and also your lord ? we shall be accountable to him for our deeds and you for yours ; so we have dedicated our worship to him alone .
then the twain journeyed until when they embarked in a boat , he scuttled it . musa said : hast thou scuttled it that thou mayest drown the people thereof ? assuredly thou hast committed a thing grievous .
the roads of the heavens , and may look upon the god of moses , though verily i think him a liar . thus was the evil that he did made fairseeming unto pharaoh , and he was debarred from theway . the plot of pharaoh ended but in ruin .
we have appointed only angels to be masters of the fire , and their number we have appointed only as a trial for the unbelievers , that those who were given the book may have certainty , and that those who believe may increase in belief , and that those who were given the book and those who believe may not be in-doubt , and that those in whose hearts there is sickness , and the unbelievers , may say , 'what did god intend by this as a similitude ? ' so god leads astray whomsoever he will , and he guides whomsoever he will ; and none knows the hosts of thy lord but he . and it is naught but a reminder to mortals .
where they will be honourably seated in the presence of a king , mighty in power .
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say , ‘ certainly you remained in allah ’ s book until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ’
and do not argue on behalf of those who deceive themselves . god does not love the deceitful sinner .
and when they wrangle in the fire , the weak say unto those who were proud : lo ! we were a following unto you ; will ye therefor rid us of a portion of the fire ?
do they then wait for anything other than that allah should come to them in the shadows of the clouds and the angels ? the case would be already judged . and to allah return all matters .
he said , ‘ my lord ! i fear they will impugn me ,
and it is he who spread the earth , and placed in it mountains and rivers . and he placed in it two kinds of every fruit . he causes the night to overlap the day . in that are signs for people who reflect .
or thou cause the heaven to fall upon us piecemeal , as thou hast pretended , or bring allah and the angels as a warrant ;
believers , do not retreat when facing the marching army of the unbelievers , for no believer will turn back at that time except for strategic reasons or to join another band .
those who spread corruption in the land instead of putting things right . 
 now do thou throw thy rod !  but when he saw it movingas if it had been a snake , he turned back in retreat , and retraced not his steps : o moses !  ,  draw near , and fear not : for thou art of those who are secure .
indeed , we sent upon them a storm of stones , except the family of lot - we saved them before dawn
but they denounced him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we made them successors , and we drowned those who rejected our signs . so consider the fate of those who were warned .
those who deny the book and that with which we sent our messengers - they are going to know ,
pharaoh and his men were defeated and utterly humiliated .
determined as a bidding from us ,
then they were utterly put to confusion saying , 'very well indeed thou knowest these do not speak . '
when we inspired unto thy mother that which we inspired ,
who could do greater wrong than someone who invents a lie against god or who says ,  it has been revealed to me ,  while nothing has been revealed to him , or someone who says ,  i will send down the like of what god has sent down  ? if you could only see the wrongdoers in the throes of death when the angels are stretching out their hands , saying ,  give up your souls . today you will be repaid with a humiliating punishment for saying false things about god and being arrogant about his signs . 
o you wrapped in garments !
verily those who wrangle concerning the revelations of allah without an authority having come unto them there is aught in their breasts save greatness which they shall not reach . seek refuge thou then in allah verily he ! he is the hearer , the beholder .
and they say , “ if we follow the guidance with you , we will be snatched from our land. ” did we not establish for them a safe sanctuary , to which are brought all kinds of fruits , as provision from ourselves ? but most of them do not know .
thus , the words of our lord about us have come true and now we are suffering the torment .
as a provision for the worshipers ; thereby we revived a land that was dead . such shall be the emerging .
no nation can bring its time forward , nor can they delay it .
believers , fear allah and stand with the truthful .
'by allah ' he will say , 'you almost destroyed me !
hell is lying in ambush .
if you see those who had imputed lies to god on the day of resurrection , black would be their faces . is there not a place in hell for the arrogant ?
no calamity occurs on earth , or in your souls , but it is in a book , even before we make it happen . that is easy for god .
as for the tribe of 'ad , they behaved arrogantly in the land without any justification and said ,  who is mightier than we in power ?  did they not see that god , who created them , was mightier than they in power ? still they continued to deny our signs ,
and do they laugh instead of weeping ,
you have confirmed your vision ' as such we recompense the gooddoers .
and when our command came about , we turned it upside down , and we rained down on it stones of baked clay .
they say , 'if we return to the city , the mightier ones of it will expel the more abased ' ; yet glory belongs unto god , and unto his messenger and the believers , but the hypocrites do not know it .
we led you astray as we were ourselves astray . 
said : o haroun ! what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
the like of which was not built in the cities ,
round shall be passed a cup unto them filled with limpid drink :
there is only the life of this world : we die and we live : there is no rising from the dead for us .
and will not hear its hissing , and will live for ever in the midst of what their hearts desire .
or are with them the treasures of your lord ? or are they the tyrants with the authority to do as they like ?
say to them ,  if the abode of the hereafter with allah is exclusively reserved for you and not for the rest of mankind , then you should long for death , if you arc sincere in your claim . 
lost are those who kill their children foolishly , with no basis in knowledge , and forbid what god has provided for them—innovations about god . they have gone astray . they are not guided .
soon i will cast him into saqar .
wethe wind to solomon . its morning 's journey took one month , and the evening 's one month . we made a spring of molten brass to flow for him ; and many jinns laboured for him by the will of his lord . anyone of them who turned from our command was made to taste the torment of blazing fire .
by our own command -- we have been sending messages ,
do theyawait but that the angels should come to them ] , or there should come the commandof your lord ? thus did those before them . and allah wronged them not , but they used to wrong themselves .
and brought round amongst them will be vessels of silver and also goblets of glass .
tell my believing servants to be steadfast in prayer and to spend for the cause of their lord , both in private and in public , out of what we have given them . let them do this before the coming of the day when there will be no merchandising or friendship .
to such will be said , “ o my bondmen ! this day there shall be no fear upon you , nor any grief . ”
o you who believe ! be not unfaithful to allah and the apostle , nor be unfaithful to your trusts while you know .
indeed it is on a standing road ,
if the enemy were to enter the town from various directions , and they were summoned to act treacherously , they would have succumbed to it and would have shown little reluctance in doing so .
with the fire closed above them .
then he followed another way ,
we alsolut : he said to his people :  do ye commit lewdness such as no people in creationcommitted before you ?
and the most part of them believe not in god , but they associate other gods with him .
say :  do you wait for usexcept one of the two best things ; while we await for you either that allah will afflict you with a punishment from himself or at our hands . so wait , we too are waiting with you . 
when death comes to one of them , he says , ‘ my lord ! take me back ,
and hell will be made visible to all those who can see .
and jonah was one of the messengers .
the day the spirit takes its stand , with the angels ranged in rows . none will speak except who is permitted by ar-rahman and says what is right .
but those who struggle in our cause , surely we shall guide them in our ways ; and god is with the good-doers .
do men think that we shall never be able to assemble their bones ?
 i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust :
then he drew out his hand , and it appeared luminous to all beholders .
he said : allah protect us that we should seize other than him with whom we found our property , for then most surely we would be unjust .
they hatched up the plot ; we also planned without their knowledge .
you are surely calling them to the right path .
then he said ,  o adam , tell them their names .  when adam had told them the names , god said to the angels ,  did i not say to you : i know the secrets of the heavens and of the earth , and i know what you reveal and what you conceal ? 
said :  o lot , we have verily been sent by your lord . they will never be able to harm you . so , leave late at night with your family , and none of you should turn back to look ; but your wife will sufferthey are going to suffer . their hour of doom is in the morning : is not the morning nigh ? 
will all be gathered for the tryst of a known day .
it was not the satans who brought it down :
and what aileth you that ye fight not in the way of allah and for the oppressed among men and women and children who say : our lord ! take us forth from this town whereof the people are wrong-doing , and appoint us from before thee a patron , and appoint us from before thee a helper !
and those who believed and did good deeds , we shall soon admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow – abiding in it forever ; in it for them are pure wives – and we shall admit them into places of plentiful shade .
and stay quietly in your houses , and make not a dazzling display , like that of the former times of ignorance ; and establish regular prayer , and give regular charity ; and obey allah and his messenger . and allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you , ye members of the family , and to make you pure and spotless .
those of you who die and leave wives behind—a will shall provide their wives with support for a year , provided they do not leave . if they leave , you are not to blame for what they do with themselves , provided it is reasonable . god is mighty and wise .
follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord before the chastisement suddenly comes upon you without you even being aware of it . ”
and there is none equal to him '
in order that you may not be sad over matters that you fail to get , nor rejoice because of that which has been given to you . and allah likes not prideful boasters .
say : ' i have been commanded to serve god making my religion his sincerely ;
the clatterer !
say : 'who has forbidden the ornament of god which he brought forth for his servants , and the good things of his providing ? ' say : 'these , on the day of resurrection , shall be exclusively for those who believed in this present life . so we distinguish the signs for a people who know . '
andthe night when it departs
the day the horn is blown and you will come forth in multitudes
the people of paradise and hell are not alike ; the people of paradise are the successful ones . had we sent down this quran on a mountain , you would have seen it humbled and rent asunder for fear of god . these are parables which we tell to people so that perhaps they will think .
nun . by the pen , and what they inscribe ,
the thamud tribe rejected the truth because of their arrogance ,
if they reject you , other messengers have been rejected before you . to god all affairs will be returned .
you will indeed taste a painful punishment ,
indeed , the hour is their tryst ; and the hour will be most calamitous and bitter .
indeed , what they used to hide before has now become evident to them . but were they to be sent back they would revert to what they were forbidden , and they are indeed liars .
thus did we turn it upside down , and rained down upon them stones of what had been decreed .
and they swore by allah with the strongest of their oaths that if there came to them a warner they would be better guided than any of the nations ; but when there came to them a warner it increased them in naught but aversion .
they fear their lord above them , and they do what they are commanded .
is it ye who grow the tree which feeds the fire , or do we grow it ?
what are they waiting for except to witness the repetition of the days of calamity that their predecessors witnessed ? tell them : 'wait ; i too am waiting with you .
by thosewho pull outwith great violence ;
so prostrate yourselves before allah and worship .
should i tell you to whom the satans come ?
soon shall this legion be routed and shall turn their backs and flee .
and that “ among us some are muslims , and some of us are deviant . so those who became muslims found the right course ;
and should the truth follow their low desires , surely the heavens and the earth and all those who are therein would have perished . nay ! we have brought to them their reminder , but from their reminder they turn aside .
it is he who utterly destroyed the ancient tribes of ad ,
so that we might make it a reminder for you and so that attentive ears might retain it .
today no ransom shall be accepted from you or from the unbelievers . your shelter is the fire , that is your sponsor , the worst arrival '
had thesebeengods , they would not have come to it , but all are eternal therein .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel will be humans and stones , prepared for the faithless .
“ in gardens and water springs ? ”
they went betimes , strong inpurpose .
as for thamood , they were annihilated by the overwhelming .
on the day when there shall be a severe affliction , and they shall be called upon to make obeisance , but they shall not be able ,
yet the unbelievers still belie ,
saying : we feed you only for the sake of allah ; we desire not from you any recompense or thanks .
in it descend the angels and jibreel , by the command of their lord – for all works .
when their brother hud said to them :  will you not fear allah and obey him ?
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , who sent down water from the heaven and thereby brought forth a variety of fruits as your sustenance , who subjected for you the ships that they may sail in the sea by his command , who subjected for you the rivers ,
the day a master shall avail nothing a client , and they shall not be helped ,
joseph said to them ,  i shall inform you of the interpretation of your dreams before your meal is brought to you . this is a part of the knowledge that my lord has taught me . i have renounced the religion of the people who do not believe in god and who deny the hereafter .
thus has the decree of your lord become due against the unbelievers . they are destined for the fire .
nay , youwonderedwhile they mock .
whoso doeth right , it is for his soul , and whoso doeth wrong , it is against it . and afterward unto your lord ye will be brought back .
what will they think—those who fabricate lies and attribute them to god—on the day of resurrection ? god is bountiful towards the people , but most of them do not give thanks .
roast in it . bear it with patience or impatience , it will be the same for you . you will be requited for what you had done . 
and that man shall have nothing but what he has striven for ,
assuredly in the hereafter they are the losers .
and we gave understanding of the case to solomon , and to eachwe gave judgement and knowledge . and we subjected the mountains to exalt , along with david andthe birds . and we were doing .
who pray ,  lord , protect us from the torment of hell ; it is a great loss .
do not revile those whom they invoke other than allah , because they will revile allah in ignorance out of spite . for we have indeed made the deeds of every people seem fair to them . tlen , their return is to their lord and he will inform them of what they have done .
he is allah , than whom there is no other allah , the knower of the invisible and the visible . he is the beneficent , merciful .
so go to him , and say : verily we are two apostles of thy lord , so let go with us the children of isra'il , and torment them not ; surely we have come unto thee with a sign from thy lord : and peace be upon him who followeth the guidance .
there will be the best of rewards for those who respond to their lord : while those who do not respond to him -- if they possessed all that is on earth and twice as much , they would surely offer it as ransom ; -- will have the worst reckoning and their goal is hell : and how evil a resting-place !
and those who give what they give and their hearts fear for they have to return to their lord .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the wise .
and what will make you comprehend what the grand night
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward . he has knowledge of all things .
and remind them of the day whereon the trumpet shall be blown , and affrighted will be those who are in the heavens and the earth , save him whom allah willeth . and all shall come unto him , lowly .
and none belieth it save each trespasser , sinner .
when thou saidst to him whom god had blessed and thou hadst favoured , 'keep thy wife to thyself , and fear god , ' and thou wast concealing within thyself what god should reveal , fearing other men ; and god has better right for thee to fear him . so when zaid had accomplished what he would of her , then we gave her in marriage to thee , so that there should not be any fault in the believers , touching the wives of their adopted sons , when they have accomplished what they would of them ; and god 's commandment must be performed .
and command the muslim women to keep their gaze low and to protect their chastity , and not to reveal their adornment except what is apparent , and to keep the cover wrapped over their bosoms ; and not to reveal their adornment except to their own husbands or fathers or husbands ’ fathers , or their sons or their husbands ’ sons , or their brothers or their brothers ’ sons or sisters ’ sons , or women of their religion , or the bondwomen they possess , or male servants provided they do not have manliness , or such children who do not know of women ’ s nakedness , and not to stamp their feet on the ground in order that their hidden adornment be known ; and o muslims , all of you turn in repentance together towards allah , in the hope of attaining success .
and whoso disputes with thee concerning him , after the knowledge that has come to thee , say : 'come now , let us call our sons and your sons , our wives and your wives , our selves and your selves , then let us humbly pray and so lay god 's curse upon the ones who lie . '
as for the boat , it belonged to some poor people who work on the sea . i wanted to make it defective , for behind them was a king seizing every ship usurpingly .
they will say , ‘ all praise belongs to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inheritors of the earth , that we may settle in paradise wherever we may wish ! ’ how excellent is the reward of the workers !
and he produces arguments against us , and he forgets his own creation . he says , “ who will revive the bones when they have decayed ? ”
andsay , ‘ shall we abandon our gods for a crazy poet ? ’
even if we showed them mercy and relieved them of their afflictions , they would still persist in their transgression , wandering blindly .
they came on you from above and from below , and when your eyes swerved and your hearts leapt to your throats , and you thought thoughts about allah ;
say thou : in that better or garden of abidence that hath been promised to the god-fearing ! it shall be theirs as a recompense and a retreat .
so we established joseph in the land , to make his dwelling there wherever he would . we visit with our mercy whomsoever we will , and we leave not to waste the wage of the good-doers .
so withdraw from them , and await . lo ! theyare awaiting .
nay.- those that keep their plighted faith and act aright , -verily allah loves those who act aright .
the fire of allah , set ablaze ,
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between the two , in six days , and then he established himself on the throne . you have no guardian or intercessor other than he . will you , then , not take heed ?
‘ i will punish him with a severe punishment , or i will behead him , unless he brings me a credible excuse . ’
and his spouse , and his brother .
they ask youwhat is lawful for them . say :  lawful unto you are at-tayyibatfoods which allah has made lawful ] . and those beasts and birds of prey which you have trained as hounds , training and teaching themin the manner as directed to you by allah ; so eat of what they catch for you , but pronounce the name of allah over it , and fear allah . verily , allah is swift in reckoning . 
surely there hath been an excellent pattern for you in ibrahim and those with him , when they said unto their people ; verily we are quit of you and of that which ye worship beside allah ; we renounce you ; and surely there hath appeared between us and you hostility and hatred for evermore until ye believe in allah alone , - except the saying of ibrahim unto his father : surely i shall beg forgiveness for thee , and i have no power with allah for thee at all . our lord ! in thee we put our trust , and unto thee we turn , and unto thee is the journeying .
so whencame to solomon he said ,  what ! are you offering me wealth ? but that which god has given me is better than that which he has given you . yet you rejoice in your gift .
knower of the unseen and the visible ; he is exalted above all that which they associate with him .
if the wrong-doers possessed the treasures of the earth in their entirety and as much besides , they would gladly offer it on the day of resurrection to redeem themselves from the harrowing chastisement . this because there will appear to them from allah somethingthey had never even imagined .
their messengers said :  is there a doubt about allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth ? it is he who invites you , in order that he may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a term appointed !  they said :  ah ! ye are no more than human , like ourselves ! ye wish to turn us away from theour fathers used to worship : then bring us some clear authority . 
the hypocrites , and those who had doubts in their hearts , said :  their faith has misled them .  but whoever places his trust in god will find god mighty and wise .
nothing has kept these people from believing when guidance came to them , but their saying , ‘ has allah sent a human as an apostle ? ! ’
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they sold him as worthless for a few paltry dirham .
thereafter allah sent down his calm upon his apostle and upon the believers , and he sent down hosts ye saw not and tormented those who would disbelieve : such is the meed of the infidels .
except him who originated me , for he will guide me '
but whosoever gets his ledger in his left hand , will say :  would that i were never given my ledger ,
and the trumpet will be blown : ‘ this is the promised day . ’
nor to seek help from anyone other than god , lest i become of the unjust .
ah , if thou couldst see when they are terrified , and there is no escape , and they are seized from a place near at hand ,
he has forbidden you carrion , and blood , and the flesh of swine , and what was dedicated to other than god . but if anyone is compelled , without desiring or exceeding , he commits no sin . god is forgiving and merciful .
pharaoh said , ‘ o haman ! build me a tower so that i may reach the routes
they said : 'what , do you marvel at the command of allah ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house . indeed , he ispraised , exalted '
not lawful to you , , arewomen after , norfor you to exchange them forwives , even if their beauty were to please you , except what your right hand possesses . and ever is allah , over all things , an observer .
say ,  i will never disobey my lord , for i fear the punishment of a dreadful day . 
kaafhaya'aeensaad .
and if they turn their backs , assuredly god knows the workers of corruption .
god vindicates the truth by his commands , however the sinners may dislike it . 
yet man behaves arrogantly ,
assuredly they have disbelieved who say . verily god ! he is the masih , son of maryam . say thou ; who can avail in aught against allah , if he intended to destroy masih , son of maryam , and his mother and thou on the earth altogether ? and allah 's is the dominion of the heavens and the earth and that which is in between the twain . he createth whatsoever he will , and allah is over everything potent .
 i founda woman ruling over them and provided with every requisite ; and she has a magnificent throne .
we make their deeds attractive to those who do not believe in the hereafter , so that they may wander in perplexity .
the likeness of that which they spend in this life of the world is as the likeness of a biting , icy wind which smiteth the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and devastateth it . allah wronged them not , but they do wrong themselves .
and who submit , “ our lord – avert the punishment of hell from us ; indeed its punishment is a permanent neck-shackle . ”
had god wanted , they would not consider anything equal to him . god has not appointed you to watch over them nor are you their guardian .
those who believed in our revelations and surrendered themselves to us .
those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a lie that he hath invented , and other folk have helped him with it , so that they have produced a slander and a lie .
one day we shall remove the mountains , and thou wilt see the earth as a level stretch , and we shall gather them , all together , nor shall we leave out any one of them .
but he denied , and disobeyed .
and death 's agony comes in truth ; that is what thou wast shunning !
and those who disbelieve and belie our signs , they shall be the fellows of the flaming fire .
the next morning , when he was walking in the city , apprehensive , and watchful , and the man who had sought his help the day before cried out to him again for help . moses said to him ,  you are clearly a misguided man . 
to him is your return all together.the promise of allahtruth . indeed , he begins thecreation and then repeats it that he may reward those who have believed and done righteous deeds , in justice . but those who disbelieved will have a drink of scalding water and a painful punishment for what they used to deny .
is god not enough for his servant ? yet they try to frighten you with otherbesides him ! for such as god lets go astray , there will be no guide ;
and so we made themstumble upon them , so that they might know that the promise of allah is true and that there is no doubt about thehour . they argued among themselves over their affair , thensaid : 'build a building over them . their lord knows best who they were . 'but those who prevailed over the matter said ; 'we will build around them a mosque '
and they say : our hearts are hardened . nay , but allah hath cursed them for their unbelief . little is that which they believe .
so will he , who knows that what is sent down upon you from your lord is the truth , ever be equal to him who is blind ? only the men of understanding heed advice .
indeed , we have sent you , , with the truth as a bringer of good tidings and a warner , and you will not be asked about the companions of hellfire .
said ,  my lord , forgive me and my brother and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . 
in the midst of gardens and fountains ,
he said , ‘ did i not say that you can not have patience with me ? ’
these are nothing but names , which you have devised , you and your ancestors , for which god sent down no authority . they follow nothing but assumptions , and what the ego desires , even though guidance has come to them from their lord .
then , when the messengerscame unto the family of lout .
say :  verily my lord enlarges and restricts the sustenance to such of his servants as he pleases : and nothing do ye spend in the leastbut he replaces it : for he is the best of those who grant sustenance .
when musa said to his family : surely i see fire ; i will bring to you from it some news , or i will bring to you therefrom a burning firebrand so that you may warm yourselves .
then when cometh the deafening cry-
verily we established his power on earth , and we gave him the ways and the means to all ends .
they have not paid due respect to god . the whole earth will be gripped in his hands on the day of judgment and the heavens will be just like a scroll in his right hand . god is too glorious and high to be considered equal to their idols .
seest thou not that it is allah whose praises all beings in the heavens and on earth do celebrate , and the birdswith wings outspread ? each one knows its ownprayer and praise . and allah knows well all that they do .
he said : what is your business then , o apostles ?
allah chooses messengers from angels and from men for allah is he who hears and sees .
but she was prevented by what she worshiped besides god ; she belonged to a disbelieving people .
do not set up another god , along with god . i come from him to warn you plainly .
for allah only is the kingship on that day ; he will judge between them ; so those who believed and did good deeds are in gardens of content .
those who reject faith and do wrong , - allah will not forgive them nor guide them to any way-
do not let the coming and going in the land of those who disbelieve delude you ;
we know indeed that it grieves thee the things they say ; yet it is not thee they cry lies to , but the evildoers - it is the signs of god that they deny .
allah hath prescribed : surely shall overcome , and my apostles . verily allah is strong , mighty .
we brought the children of israel across the sea and they came upon a people who were devoted to their idols . they said ,  moses , give us a god just like the gods these people have .  he said ,  you are indeed an ignorant people :
they do blaspheme who say :  allah is christ the son of mary .  but said christ :  o children of israel ! worship allah , my lord and your lord .  whoever joins other gods with allah , - allah will forbid him the garden , and the fire will be his abode . there will for the wrong-doers be no one to help .
some faces will be bright on that day ,
“ this is the fire which you used to deny .
and he created jinns from fire free of smoke :
woe to every fault-finding backbiter ;
again , we gave the book to musa to completeon him who would do good , and making plain all things and a guidance and a mercy , so that they should believe in the meeting of their lord .
he created the skies without a support , as you can see , and placed stabilisers in the earth that you may dwell at ease as it revolves ; and dispersed on it all varieties of creatures , and he sent down water from the skies and grew all kinds of splendid things upon it .
why do their rabbis and scholars not forbid them to utter sinful words or to consume what is unlawful ? their actions are indeed vile .
then pharaoh sent gatherers to the cities .
are with them the treasures of thy lord ! or are they the dispensers ?
do not be like those who forgot god , so that he caused them to forget their own souls . it is they who are the rebellious ones .
and indeed it is , in the mother of the book with us , exalted and full of wisdom .
we sent our messengers with the clear proofs , and we sent down with them the book and the balance , that humanity may uphold justice . and we sent down iron , in which is violent force , and benefits for humanity . that god may know who supports him and his messengers invisibly . god is strong and powerful .
and if allah should hasten the evil to men as they desire the hastening on of good , their doom should certainly have been decreed for them ; but we leave those alone who hope not for our meeting in their inordinacy , blindly wandering on .
it will be the day when they shall be scourged by the fire
but lot believed him ; and he said , ' i will flee to my lord ; he is the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
 from which you turn away !
when a messenger was sent to them by god affirming the books they had already received , some of them putbehind their backs as if they had no knowledge of it .
turning away in pride to beguilefrom the way of allah . for him in this world is ignominy , and on the day of resurrection we make him taste the doom of burning .
but those who disbelieve and deny our signs - those are the companions of hellfire .
but as for those who disbelieve and reject our signs—these are the inmates of the fire—wherein they will remain forever . ”
by no means ! for they know very well out of what we have created them .
“ as rivals to allah ? ” ; they will say , “ we have lost them – in fact we never used to worship anything before ! ” ; this is how allah sends the disbelievers astray .
you alone we worship , and to you alone turn for help .
the wayis only against those who seek exemption from you although they are rich ; they preferred to be with the women who stay behind – and allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not know anything .
those who do not believe in the life to come are evil examples . to god belongs all the exalted attributes ; he is the majestic and the all-wise .
the faithless indeed dwell in conceit and defiance .
he said ,  bring them back to me .  then he started to rub their legs and necks .
pharaoh and his people pursued them at sunrise ,
by god 's favour and blessing ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
and recall what time we took a bond with the children of israel saying : worship not any god save allah , and unto parents show kindness , and also unto the kindred and the orphans and the poor , and speak kindly unto mankind , and establish prayer and give the poor rate . then ye turned away , save a few of you , and ye are backsliders .
yet we bestowed the good thingsupon their fathers for a great length of time . but do they not see how we are shrinking their borders ? is it they who will prevail ?
it is ; but if you persevere and remain cautious , and they attack you suddenly , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels , well trained .
o believers , whensoever you encounter a host , then stand firm , and remember god frequently ; haply so you will prosper .
the woman and the man guilty of fornication , flog each one of them with a hundred stripes - and let not any pity for them restrain you in regard to a matter prescribed by allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let , some of the believers witness the punishment inflicted on them .
we have revealed the quran in the arabic language containing various warnings so that it may cause them to have fearor take heed .
this is the guidance of god : he gives that guidance to whichever of his servants he pleases . if they had associated other deities with him , surely all they did would have been of no avail .
their account rests only with my lord , if you have sense .
indeed , over myservants there is for you no authority . and sufficient is your lord as disposer of affairs .
we gave the book to moses and made the messengers follow in his path . to jesus , the son of mary , we gave the miracles and supported him by the holy spirit . why do you arrogantly belie some messengers and murder others whenever they have brought you messages that you dislike ?
they will cry unto them : were we not with you ? they will say : yea , verily ; but ye tempted one another , and hesitated , and doubted , and vain desires beguiled you till the ordinance of allah came to pass ; and the deceiver deceived you concerning allah ;
they say his purity night and day , and do not slacken .
and when those who disbelieved devised plans against you that they might confine you or slay you or drive you away ; and they devised plans and allah too had arranged a plan ; and allah is the best of planners .
when their brother hud said to them , “ do you not fear ?
not dissolved with those pagans with whom ye have entered into alliance and who have not subsequently failed you in aught , nor aided any one against you . so fulfil your engagements with them to the end of their term : for allah loveth the righteous .
accept the offerings they make from their wealth in order to cleanse and purify them for progress , and invoke blessings upon them . your blessings will surely bring them peace , for god hears all and knows everything .
the inevitable reality -
with which will melt what is in their bellies , and their skins .
surely we shall help our messengers and those who have believed , in the present life , and upon the day when the witnesses arise ,
then he frowned , and scowled ,
and there is not an animal moving in the earth nor a bird flying on its wings , but they are a nation like you ; we have left out nothing in this book – then towards their lord they will be raised .
but as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we will admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , where they will abide forever . the promise of god is true—and who is more truthful in speech than god ?
this is your reward . your endeavour is fully acknowledged .
but we delivered those who believed and practised righteousness .
respond to your lord before a day arrives that will not be averted . you will not find any refuge from god on that day , nor will you haveto deny your sins .
nay , but ourselves gave these and their fathers enjoyment of days , until their life had lasted long while upon them . what , do they not see how we come to the land , diminishing it in its extremities ? or are they the victors ?
there has already been a sign for youin the two armies that met : one was fighting in the cause of allah , and as for the otherwere disbelievers . theysaw themwith their own eyes twice their number . and allah supports with his victory whom he pleases . verily , in this is a lesson for those who understand . .
say  be you stones or iron , 
“ and walk moderately and soften your voice ; indeed the worst voice is the voice of the donkey . ”
say : allah suffices as a witness between me and you ; surely he is aware of his servants , seeing .
they will reply ,  lord , you alone deserve all glory ! we were not supposed to choose any guardian other than you . since you have been benevolent to these people and their fathers , they forgot your guidance and , thus , became subject to perdition . 
we tried solomon by placing upon his throne abody ; and thereupon he turned towards us ] .
and of ibrahim , who was most obedient ?
and clustered plantains ,
allah is most gentle to his servants and grants sustenance to whomsoever he pleases . he is all-strong , most mighty .
do you not see that the ships run on in the sea by allah 's favor that he may show you of his signs ? most surely there are signs in this for every patient endurer , grateful one .
and when he said to his father and to his nation : 'what do you worship ?
say ,  o people of the scripture , why do you avert from the way of allah those who believe , seeking to make itdeviant , while you are witnesses ? and allah is not unaware of what you do . 
and their wealth will be of no benefit to them when they face destruction .
and the devils -- the builders and divers of all kinds ,
his is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; he gives life and causes death ; and he has power over all things .
and lo ! thy lord ! he is indeed the mighty , the merciful .
aif , lam , ra . these are the signs of the manifest book .
, we have sent revelations to you just as were sent to noah and the prophets who lived after him and to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob , his descendants , jesus , job , jonah , aaron , and solomon . we gave the psalms to david .
o people of the book ! now hath come unto you , makingclear unto you , our messenger , after the break inour messengers , lest ye should say :  there came unto us no bringer of glad tidings and no warner  : but now hath come unto you a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and allah hath power over all things .
and we did not send a warner to a township , but those who were given the worldly wealth and luxuries among them said :  we believe not in thewith which you have been sent . 
indeed , there came upon the human a period of time when he was an unremembered thing .
say ,  my lord has only forbidden immoralities - what is apparent of them and what is concealed - and sin , and oppression without right , and that you associate with allah that for which he has not sent down authority , and that you say about allah that which you do not know . 
they say :  most gracious has begotten a son ! 
hell , in which they will burn . how vile a resting place !
the unbelievers say : 'why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ' you are only a warner , and there is a guide for every nation .
who pray ,  our lord , bless us with wives and children , who may be the comfort of our eyes , and make us leaders of the righteous.  -
for every event god has ordained his decree . god establishes or effaces whatever he wants and with him is the original of the book .
of them werewho believed in him , and of them werewho averted their faces from him ; and enough is hell for burning .
on that day , no soul will be wronged in the least , and you will be recompensed only for what you used to do .
and he is allah : there is no god but he . to him be praise , at the first and at the last : for him is the command , and to him shall yebe brought back .
say , “ have you considered ? if your water drains away , who will bring you pure running water ? ”
in the morning they called out to one another , saying :
and how should i fear that which ye have associated , while ye fear not to have associated with allah that for which he hath sent down unto you no warranty ? which , then , of the two parties , is more worthy of security , if ye but knew ?
their brother noah said to them , “ do you not fear ?
so when they had despaired of him , they secluded themselves in private consultation . the eldest of them said ,  do you not know that your father has taken upon you an oath by allah andbefore you failed injoseph ? so i will never leaveland until my father permits me or allah decides for me , and he is the best of judges .
olives and dates ,
when you see them argue about our messages , withdraw from their company until they begin to talk of other things . in case the devil makes you forget , leave the company of these unjust people the moment you remember this .
and say : the truth has come and the falsehood has vanished ; surely falsehood is a vanishing .
 throw that which is in thy right hand : quickly will it swallow up that which they have faked what they have faked is but a magician 's trick : and the magician thrives not , where he goes . 
give not unto the foolishyourwealth , which allah hath given you to maintain ; but feed and clothe them from it , and speak kindly unto them .
when god said ,  jesus , son of mary , recall my favors to you and your mother.how i supported you by the holy spirit , made you speak to people from your cradle and when you grew up , taught you the book , gave you wisdom , the torah , and the gospel.when , by my will , you made a sculpture of a bird out of clay , blew into it , and it turned into a real bird by my will.how , by my will , you healed the deaf , the lepers , and raised the dead.when you came to the israelites in the house with clear miracles and i saved you from their mischief , even though the disbelievers among them said ,  this is obviously magic  .
till gog and magog are let loose and slide down out of every slope ;
and pharaoh said , 'council , i know not that you have any god but me . kindle me , haman , a fire upon the clay , and make me a tower , that i may mount up to moses ' god ; for i think that he is one of the liars . '
to him do you address yourself .
they said , “ your evil omens are with you ! what ! you get annoyed for being advised ? in fact you are a people who transgress the limits ! ”
he is the knower of the unseen , and he discloseth not his unseen unto anyone .
it is the speech of a noble messenger .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . we have told you and the people of the book to have fear of god . if you all refuse to believe in him , know that to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and thouart not occupied with any business and thou recitest not a lecture from this , and yeperform no act , but we are witness of you when ye are engaged therein . and not an atom 's weight in the earth or in the sky escapeth your lord , nor what is less than that or greater than that , but it isin a clear book .
the angels will stand on all its sides . and on that day , eightwill carry the throne of your lord above them .
the mosques of allah shall be maintained only by those who believe in allah and the last day ; perform as-salat , and give zakat and fear none but allah . it is they who are expected to be on true guidance .
say :  verily , i am commanded to worship allahby obeying him and doing religious deeds sincerely for allah 's sake only and not to show off , and not to set up rivals with him in worship ;
who will be my heir and an heir to the house of jacob , and make him , my lord , satisfied '
he is only a man in whom is madness wherefore await for him for a season .
and we left it as a sign , so is there any who will remember ?
and ordain for us good in this world , and in the hereafter . certainly we have turned unto you .  he said : my punishment i afflict therewith whom i will and my mercy embraces all things . thati shall ordain for those who are the muttaqun , and give zakat ; and those who believe in our ayat ;
except those who repent and reform themselves ; allah is forgiving and merciful .
most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , and the ships that run in the sea with that which profits men , and the water that allah sends down from the cloud , then gives life with it to the earth after its death and spreads in it allanimals , and the changing of the winds and the clouds made subservient between the heaven and the earth , there are signs for a people who understand .
they said :  have you come to us to turn us away from thatwe found our fathers following , - and that you two may have greatness in the land ? we are not going to believe you two ! 
we sent them two messengers whom they rejected . we supported them by sending a third one who told the people ,  we are the messengerswho have been sent to you  .
by the mount
till , when he reached the setting-place of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found a people thereabout . we said : o dhu ' l-qarneyn ! either punish or show them kindness .
but when he came to it , he was called ,  blessed is whoever is at the fire and whoever is around it . and exalted is allah , lord of the worlds .
we shall certainly test you until we know those of you who truly strive and remain steadfast , and will ascertain about you .
he also knowswho taunt the believers that voluntarily give alms , they scoff at those who have nothing to give except what they earn through their hard toil . allah scoffs at them in return . a grievous chastisement awaits them .
say ,  whether you call on god or on the merciful one : his are the finest names .  pray neither in too loud a voice nor in silence , but between these two extremes . seek a middle way
'and of us some are muslims , and of us some are al-qasitun ' . and whosoever has embraced islam , then such have sought the right path . 
believers , do not expose your privacy to the unbelievers . they like to mislead you and see that you are seriously harmed . signs of animosity from their mouths have already become audible , but what they hide in their heads is even worse . we have certainly made our evidence clear , if only you would consider it .
so grant the unbelievers a respite : let them alone for a while .
till he reached the point of the setting sun , and saw it set behind a muddy lake , and near it found a people . we said :  o dhu ' l-qarnain , you may either punish them or treat them with kindness . 
indeed , the cautious , shall live amid shades and fountains
one with whom was knowledge of the scripture said :  i will bring it to you within the twinkling of an eye !  then when ] saw it placed before him , he said :  this is by the grace of my lord to test me whether i am grateful or ungrateful ! and whoever is grateful , truly , his gratitude is forhis ownself , and whoever is ungrateful , . certainly ! my lord is rich , bountiful . 
, had we sent you a book on paper , the unbelievers would have touched it with their hands but would still have said ,  it is no more than plain sorcery  .
such are they on whom are blessings from their lord , and mercy . such are the rightly guided .
indeed i am allah—there is no god except me . so worship me , and maintain the prayer for my remembrance .
gehenna is their recompense ; because they disbelieved and mocked my verses , and my messengers .
if thou obeyest the most part of those on earth they will lead thee astray from the path of god ; they follow only surmise , merely conjecturing .
then i invited them publicly .
, preach ; you are only a preacher .
do you not see that god knows all that is in the heavens and on the earth ? there is not a secret consultation between three , but he makes the fourth among them -- nor between five but he makes the sixth -- nor between fewer nor more , but he is in their midst , wherever they may be : in the end he will tell them the truth about their conduct , on the day of judgement . for god has full knowledge of all things .
nay , seekhelp with patient perseverance and prayer : it is indeed hard , except to those who bring a lowly spirit , -
and he toppled the ruined cities .
yet there never comes to them any sign of their lord 's signs , but they turn away from it .
then will you make the deaf hear , , or guide the blind or he who is in clear error ?
but grieve not over them , nor distress thyself because of their plots .
and know not ; haply it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a season .
it was not proper for the people of madinah and those desert arabs around them to hold back from following god 's messenger , and to prefer their own lives to his life . this is because whenever they suffer from thirst or weariness or hunger for god 's cause , and whenever they take any step which provokes those who deny the truth , or inflicts any loss upon the enemy , it shall be counted as a good deed in the sight of god , god will not deny the righteous their reward ,
they will live condemned forever , will have no relief from the torment , and no attention will be paid to them .
verily those who have disbelieved and have hindered others from the way of allah and have opposed the apostle after the guidance had become manifest unto them , shall not hurt allah at all , and anon he shall render their works of non effect .
and paradise will be brought near for the godwary ,
to god , who possesses whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth . woe to those who deny the truth , for they shall be sternly punished !
surely in the heavens and earth there are signs for the believers ;
how bad is that for which they have sold their ownselves , that they should disbelieve in that which allah has revealed , grudging that allah should reveal of his grace unto whom he will of his slaves . so they have drawn on themselves wrath upon wrath . and for the disbelievers , there is disgracing torment .
they will have from hell a bed and over them coverings . and thus do we recompense the wrongdoers .
would that you understood what that crushing torment is like .
and his is whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth , and unto him is obedience due perpetually ; will ye then fear any other than allah ?
and your lord said :  invoke me , ] i will respond to your . verily ! those who scorn my worship ] they will surely enter hell in humiliation ! 
verily the twain were of our bondmen believing .
the people of madinah and the arabs who dwell around them have no cause to stay behind the messenger of allah , or to prefer their lives to his . they are neither stricken by thirst , nor by tiredness , nor yet by hunger in the way of allah , nor do they take steps that anger the unbelievers , nor gain any gain from an enemy , but that it is counted as a righteous deed . allah does not waste the wage of the gooddoers .
and if any of those who associate others with allah in his divinity seeks asylum , grant him asylum that he may hear the word of allah , and then escort him to safety for they are a people who do not know .
they say , 'we believe in god and the messenger , and we obey . ' then after that a party of them turn away ; those -- they are not believers .
when the most wretched of them rose up .
we have not destroyed any town without its having warners ,
on that day their lord surely knows all about them !
it is not for a prophet to have captivesuntil he inflicts a massacrein the land . some muslims desire the commodities of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter . and allah is exalted in might and wise .
a parable of those who defy their lord : their deeds are like ashes over which the wind blows hard on a tempestuous day : they have no power over anything they have earned . that is extreme error .
but ye turned back thereafter : had it not been for the grace and mercy of allah to you , ye had surely been among the lost .
their messengers said to them :  we are no more than human beings like you , but allah bestows his grace to whom he wills of his slaves . it is not ours to bring you an authorityexcept by the permission of allah . and in allahlet the believers put their trust .
i have truly turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth : i have chosen one way and am not an idolater . 
they ask you about menstruation . tell them :  this is a period of stress . so keep away from women in this state till they are relieved of it . when they are free of it , you may go to them as god has enjoined . for god loves those who seek pardon , and those who are clean . 
you are but a man like ourselves , so bring a sign , if you should be of the truthful . 
there is no changing of my word , nor am i unjust to my creatures . 
and lo ! he is a witness unto that ;
and he it is who hath constrained the sea to be of service that ye eat fresh meat from thence , and bring forth from thence ornaments which ye wear . and thou seest the ships ploughing it that yemay seek of his bounty and that haply ye may give thanks .
said :  never will i send him with you until ye swear a solemn oath to me , in allah 's name , that ye will be sure to bring him back to me unless ye are yourselves hemmed in . and when they had sworn their solemn oath , he said :  over all that we say , be allah the witness and guardian ! 
 is it a falsehood alihaother than allah that you seek ?
in a nearby territory . but following their defeat , they will be victorious .
take this letter of mine , deliver it to them , and then draw back from them , and observe what they do . 
so eat the lawful and good things which god has provided for you , and be thankful for the blessing of god , if it is him you worship .
but will abidethe face of thy lord , - full of majesty , bounty and honour .
reclining upon couches , they will find therein neither the heat of the sun nor bitter , biting cold ,
they ask you about the hour and when it is to come . say : 'none knows except my lord . he alone will reveal it at the appointed time . it is heavy in the heavens and earth . it will not come to you but suddenly ' they will question you , as though you had full knowledge of it . say : 'its knowledge is with allah , though most people are unaware '
and indeed , we destroyed generations before you , when they did wrong while their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they were not such as to believe ! thus do we requite the people who are mujrimun .
and are steadfast in their prayers .
and we preserved his descendants .
o people ! eat of what is lawful and good on earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . he is to you an open enemy .
allah is the guardian of those who believe . he brings them out from darkness into the light . as for those who disbelieve , their guides are idols , they bring them out from the light into darkness . they are the companions of the fire and shall live in it for ever .
at allah ’ s help . he helps whomever he wishes , and he is the all-mighty , the all-merciful .
they will taste therein neither coolness , nor drink .
how many towns have we destroyed ? our punishment took them on a sudden by night or while they slept for their afternoon rest .
except an old woman who was one of those who stayed behind .
they and their wives are in shades , reclining on thrones .
did we give them a scripture before this to which they are holding fast ?
are ye then secure that he will not cause a side of the land to swallow you up , or send over you a sand-storm , and then ye will not find for yourselves a trustee ?
and the bearer of witness and those against whom the witness is borne .
or that the unseen in it their hands , and they write it down ?
those who dlsbelieve assert that they shall not be raised . say thou 'yea ! by my lord , ye shall surely be raised , and then unto you shall be declared that which ye have worked ; and that is for allah easy .
and had they kept to the path surely we would have watered them with rain plenteous .
it is against such that allah 's sentencehas become due . they will join the communities of humans and jinn that have preceded them . verily all of them will court utter loss .
and said , “ are we to abandon our gods for a mad poet ? ”
those who fear their lord in secret and they are fearful of the hour .
andthe one who guarded her chastity , so we blew into herthrough our angel , and we made her and her son a sign for the worlds .
moses threw down his rod and behold , it was a veritable serpent ,
but whosoever seeks beyond that , they are the transgressors .
he is guided whom god guides . as for him he allows to go astray , you will not find a protector other than him . we shall raise them on the day of resurrection in their own image , blind and dumb and deaf : their habitation will be hell . every timesubsides we will intensify its flame .
but the more i called , the farther they fled .
i seek protection from my lord and your lord from your decision of stoning me .
and whoever is given his book in his left hand – he will say , “ alas , if only my account were not given to me ! ”
surely to your lord is your return .
say , “ work . god will see your work , and so will his messenger , and the believers . then you will be returned to the knower of secrets and declarations , and he will inform you of what you used to do . ”
when our wrath struck them , they could do nothing but confess to their sins .
the blast overtook them early one morning .
when abraham said to his father azar : 'will you take idols for gods , surely i see you and your people are in clear error '
it is he who produces gardens trellised , and untrellised , palm-trees , and crops diverse in produce , olives , pomegranates , like each to each , and each unlike to each . eat of their fruits when they fructify , and pay the due thereof on the day of its harvest ; and be not prodigal ; god loves not the prodigal .
they denied the truth when it has come to them ; but soon will reach them the news of what they used to ridicule .
say thou : belike close behind you may be some of that which ye would hasten on .
and no friend will inquire aboutfriend ,
on a parchment scroll unrolled ,
on this wor1d and the here after . and they ask thee of orphans . say thou : to set right affairs for them were best . if ye mix with them , then they are your brethren . allah knoweth the foul-dealer from the fair-dealer . and had allah so willed , he could have harassed you ; verily allah is mighty , wise .
when they dispute with one another in the fire , the weak will say to those who deemed themselves mighty ,  we were your followers ; will you then relieve us of some of the fire ? 
we gave moses the book and made it a guide for the children of israel . 'take no guardian other than me .
moses said to them , “ woe to you . do not fabricate lies against god , or he will destroy you with a punishment . he who invents lies will fail . ”
therefore rely on allah ; you are indeed upon the clear truth .
say , 'truth has come and falsehood has been banished ; it is doomed to banishment . ' 
they will murmur among themselves ,  you remained not but ten . 
give glad tidings to the hypocrites , that for them is a painful punishment .
and when they had scornfully persisted in what they had been forbidden , we said to them : 'be apes , despised '
but as for those who disbelieve and denounce our revelations—these are the inmates of the fire , dwelling therein forever ; and what a miserable fate !
how can there be a treaty with allah and with his messenger for the idolaters save those with whom ye made a treaty at the inviolable place of worship ? so long as they are true to you , be true to them . lo ! allah loveth those who keep their duty .
allah is he who sends the winds that stir up the clouds . then , we drive them on to a dead land and revive the earth after it 's death . such is the raising up .
and guarded it against every defiant devil .
well-nigh the heavens are rent thereat and the earth cleft in sunder and the mountains fall down in pieces . * chapter : 19
other messengers have been mocked before you . but those who scoffed at them were encompassed by that they had mocked '
and if the followers of the book had believed and guardedwe would certainly have covered their evil deeds and we would certainly have made them enter gardens of bliss
certainly we tried the people of pharaoh before them , when a noble apostle came to them ,
and green cropsand goodly places ,
and we took the children of israel across the sea ; then they came upon a people intent in devotion toidols of theirs . they said ,  o moses , make for us a god just as they have gods .  he said ,  indeed , you are a people behaving ignorantly .
he brings forth the living from the dead , takes out the dead from the living , and revives the earth from its death . thus , you will all be brought back to life again .
and we had certainly given abraham his sound judgement before , and we were of him well-knowing
because of that we ordained for the children of israel that if anyone killed a person not in retaliation of murder , orto spread mischief in the land - it would be as if he killed all mankind , and if anyone saved a life , it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind . and indeed , there came to them our messengers with clear proofs , evidences , and signs , even then after that many of them continued to exceed the limitsin the land ! .
your lord knows whatever their breasts conceal , and whatever they disclose .
it was he that made the sun a brightness and the moon a light , and determined it in phases so that you might know the number of years and the reckoning . allah did not create them except in truth , and distinguishes the verses to a nation who know .
then , when they have reached their term , retain them honourably , or part from them honourably . and call in to witness two men of equity from among yourselves ; and perform the witnessing to god himself . by this then is admonished whosoever believes in god and the last day . and whosoever fears god , he will appoint for him a way out ,
there is not an animal in the earth , nor a flying creature flying on two wings , but they are peoples like unto you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then unto their lord they will be gathered .
yet to allah belong this world and the hereafter .
to whosoever blinds himself from the remembrance of the merciful , we shall assign him a satan so he is his companion ,
this is the speech of a noble messenger .
today we will preserve your body , so that you become a sign for those after you . but most people are heedless of our signs .
we have not heard this in the religious community close to our time . this is nothing but a fabrication .
perfect are the words of thy lord in truthfulness and justice ; no man can change his words ; he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
so allah , seized him with punishment for his last ] and first ] transgression .
and he it is who maketh night a covering for you , and sleep repose , and maketh day a resurrection .
satan promises you with poverty and orders you to commit what is indecent . but allah promises you his forgiveness and bounty from him . allah is the embracer , the knower .
and god did not do so but as good tidings for you , and to reassure your hearts for victory comes from god alone , the all-mighty and all-wise --
and do not touch the property of the orphans except for bettering it , until they come of age ; and fulfil the promise made : you will surely be questioned about the promise .
 call on your lord for us ,  they said ,  that he might inform us what kind she should be .   neither old nor young , says god , but of age in between ,  answered moses .  so do as you are bid . 
so that we exalt you
who created all things and fashioned them in good proportion ;
that , then , is allah , your true lord . so what is there after the truth except error ? then where are you being led away ?
so ruin is to those offerers of prayer –
in it they will ask for all kinds of fruit , with safety .
but if he is one of the deniers , the mistaken .
say ,  sufficient is allah between me and you as witness . he knows what is in the heavens and earth . and they who have believed in falsehood and disbelieved in allah - it is those who are the losers . 
have you made the providing of water for the pilgrim and the maintenance of al-masjid al-haram equal toone who believes in allah and the last day and strives in the cause of allah ? they are not equal in the sight of allah . and allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
and , when it is recited to them , they say , 'we believe in it ; surely it is the truth from our lord . indeed , even before ' it we had surrendered . '
at the still centre in the proximity of the king all-powerful .
so we brought out whoever was in the cities of the believers .
at the lote treeof the ending
we have cited in this quran for mankind every ideal , that they may take heed .
so bear with those who deny the truth , and let them be for a little while .
do not covet the bounties which god has bestowed more abundantly on some of you than on others . men shall be rewarded according to their deeds , and women shall be rewarded according to their deeds . you should rather ask god for his bounty . god has knowledge of all things .
say : every oneis awaiting , therefore do await : so you will come to know who is the follower of the even path and who goes aright .
allah 's is the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he createth whatsoever he will . he bestoweth females upon whomsoever he will , and bestoweth males upon whomsoever he will .
say : ' i do not know whether that which you are promised is nigh , or whether my lord will appoint for it a space ;
you had not been present at the side of the mountwhen we called moses , but through our mercy we told you his story so that you might warn the people
and we have madeeasy in thy language only that they may heed .
and allah grants respite to none when his appointed timecomes . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
“ that , ‘ put him into a chest and cast it into the river , so the river shall deposit it on to a shore – therefore one who is an enemy to me and you , shall pick him up ’ ; and i bestowed upon you love from myself ; and for you to be brought up in my sight . ”
nay ! but you love the present life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
his companion will say :  here isi have ready with me . 
say , “ in what was revealed to me , i find nothing forbidden to a consumer who eats it , except carrion , or spilled blood , or the flesh of swine—because it is impure—or a sinful offering dedicated to other than god . but if someone is compelled by necessity , without being deliberate or malicious—your lord is forgiving and merciful .
has not he , , the power to give life to the dead ?
praise belongs to god to whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . to him belongs praise also in the hereafter ; he is the all-wise , the all-aware .
except the prayerful .
as for those who disbelieve , i will sternly punish them in this world and in the everlasting life , there shall be none to help them .
the heaven shall rend asunder thereby ; his promise is ever brought to fulfillment .
'taste ! we shall increase you not save in chastisement . '
guiding to rectitude . we believe in it , and we will not associate with our lord anyone .
 if not him , ye worship nothing but names which ye have named , - ye and your fathers , - for which allah hath sent down no authority : the command is for none but allah : he hath commanded that ye worship none but him : that is the right religion , but most men understand not ...
and we made the children of israel to pass through the sea , then firon and his hosts followed them for oppression and tyranny ; until when drowning overtook him , he said : i believe that there is no god but he in whom the children of israel believe and i am of those who submit .
he will indeed be successful who purifies it ,
we could send down from the heavens a sign to them if we pleased , before which their heads would remain bowed .
the inhabitants of the garden will have the best residence and the finest lodging on that day .
verily we have revealed the book to thee in truth , formankind . he , then , that receives guidance benefits his own soul : but he that strays injures his own soul . nor art thou set over them to dispose of their affairs .
those were a people that have passed away ; what they did is theirs and what you have done is yours . you will not be answerable for their deeds .
the people of fir'awn ; fear they me not ?
and invoke not any other ilahalong with allah , la ilaha illa huwa . everything will perish save his face . his is the decision , and to him youshall be returned .
he said , ‘ what if i bring you somethingunmistakable ? ’
and whatever strikes you of disaster - it is for what your hands have earned ; but he pardons much .
the fish swallowed him up and he deserved .
thereafter , moses threw down his rod and behold , it went about swallowing up all the false devices they had contrived .
he will forgive you your faults and cause you to enter into gardens , beneath which rivers flow , and goodly dwellings in gardens of perpetuity ; that is the mighty achievement ;
and verily , itis in the mother of the book , before us , indeed exalted , full of wisdom .
and then he went to his people , swaggering .
and olive trees and date palms
, say ,  it is only god who deserves all praise . peace be upon his chosen servants . which is better god or the idols ?
and the earth that cracks open .
otherwise , if a calamity befell them as a result of what their hands have perpetrated , they would say , “ our lord , if only you had sent us a messenger , we would have followed your revelations , and been among the believers . ”
she said , 'how shall i have a son whom no mortal has touched , neither have i been unchaste ? '
and we left for him among the later folk
truly , your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
 begone ,  said ,  contemptible and rejected ! as for those who follow you , i shall fill up hell with all of you .
until the day of decision .
and the jews said , “ allah ’ s hand is tied  ; may their hands be tied – and they are accursed for saying so ! in fact , both his hands * are free , he bestows upon whomever he wills ; and o dear prophet , this book which has been sent down upon you from your lord will cause many of them to advance in their rebellion and disbelief ; and we have instilled enmity and hatred between them till the day of resurrection ; whenever they ignite the flame of war , allah extinguishes it , and they strive to create chaos in the land ; and allah does not love the mischievous . .
a guide and a message to men of understanding .
kill not your children for fear of want : we shall provide sustenance for them as well as for you . verily the killing of them is a great sin .
they are glad news and guidance for the believers
now when ye meet those who disbelieve , smite their necks until when ye have slain them greatly , then make fast the bonds ; then , thereafter let them off either freely or by ransom , until the war layeth down the burthens thereof . that ye shall do . and had allah willed , he would have vindicated himself against them , but he ordained fighting in order that he may prove you one by the other . and those who are slain in the way of allah , he shall not send their works astray .
and indeed , we are those who exalt allah . 
scalding water and under a shadow of black smoke ,
the fire ofallah kindled ,
what , is he who walks , falling upon his face , more guided than he who walks upright on a straight path !
when satan provokes you seek refuge in allah ; he is the hearing , the knowing .
allah is not one to leave the believers in the state wherein ye are until he hath discriminated the impure from the pure . and allah is not one to acquaint you with the unseen , but allah chooseth him whomsoever he willeth , of his apostles . believe wherefore in allah and his apostles ; and if ye believe and fear , yours shall be a mighty hire .
of might , hestood firm
until the day of the time appointed .
and messengers we have already told thee of before , and messengers we have not told thee of ; and unto moses god spoke directly --
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their argument is no other than that they say :  bring back ourfathers , if you are truthful ! 
they say , 'no , it is you have no welcome ; you forwarded it for us ; how evil a stablishment ! '
they said ,  should we believe in you when no one has followed you except the lowest ones  .
they descend on every guilty impostor .
that , “ go to your fields at early morn , if you want to harvest . ”
 there is nothing but our first death , and we shall not be resurrected .
his is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and he is the high , the great .
the mental condition of those who rejected the way of allah may be likened to that of the cattle whom the shepherd calls but they hear nothing except the sound of shouts and cries . they are deaf , they are dumb , they are blind ; therefore they do not understand anything .
:  this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . 
and they used to say :  when we die and become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be resurrected ?
and paradise will be brought near to the muttaqunnot far off .
you may deferany of them that you please , and you may receive any you please : and there is no blame on you if you invite one whoseyou have set aside . that is more proper , so that their eyes may be cooled , and so that they may not grieve , and so that they will be satisfied with what you have given them . god knows what is in your hearts ; and god is all knowing , and forbearing .
on that very day some faces shall be radiant with joy ,
those who bear the throne , and those who are around it , glorify their lord with his praise , and believe in him . they ask forgiveness for those who believe , saying ,  our lord , you embrace all things in mercy and knowledge . forgive those who turn to you and follow your path . save them from the punishment of hell
they said : we choose thee not above the clear proofs that have come unto us , and above him who created us . so decree what thou wilt decree . thou wilt end for us only this life of the world .
now surely they are in doubt as to the meeting of their lord ; now surely he encompasses all things .
all glory belongs to the one who has created pairs out of what grow from the earth , out of their soul and out of that which they do not know .
as for the evil-doers , their refuge shall be the fire . every time they want to escape from it they shall be driven back and shall be told : “ taste the chastisement of the fire which you used to reject as a lie . ”
so , when they forgot that they were reminded of ; we delivered those who were forbidding wickedness , and we seized the evildoers with evil chastisement for their ungodliness .
the day of judgment will come within a single roar and they will remain gazing at it .
they will reply ,  they have abandoned us . in fact , we had worshipped nothing  thus does god cause the disbelievers to go astray .
say : 'this is a mighty message
and we left for himamong later generations :
and you greedily devour the inheritance of the weak ,
except lot 's family , of whom we shall save all ,
that is allah ’ s ordinance , which he has sent down to you , and whoever is wary of allah , he shall absolve him of his misdeeds and give him a great reward .
and god gave them the reward of this world and the fairest reward of the world to come ; and god loves the good-doers .
and you laugh , and do not weep !
and we have created for them of the like thereunto , so on them they ride .
“ except those among them who are your chosen bondmen . ”
he said : o my people ! why do you seek to hasten on the evil before the good ? why do you not ask forgiveness of allah so that you may be dealt with mercifully ?
if they could overcome you , they would act as your foes and would hurt you by their hands and tongues , and would love to see you become unbelievers .
,  enter paradise in peace and , therein , you will live forever  .
if thou stretchest forth thine hand against me to slay me , i shall not be stretching forth my hand against thee to slay thee , verily i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book and appointed his brother aaron as his counsellor :
these people say ,
an insight and admonition for every penitent servant .
he said ,  you are granted respite
he said : what was the matter with you when ye solicited yusuf against himself ! they said : how perfect is god ! we knew not of any evil against him . the wife of the aziz said : how hath the truth come to light , even i , solicited him against himself , and verily he is of the truth-tellers .
verily , you have always watched over us . 
those will be given their reward twice for what they patiently endured andthey avert evil through good , and from what we have provided them they spend .
his wife came out lamenting , striking her forehead , and said :  i , am old and barren woman ? 
at last pharaoh decided to uproot moses and the children of israel from the land , but we drowned him together with all who were with him ;
all they had acquired was of no avail to them .
but those who fear their lord will have mansions upon mansions , built high , with streams flowing beneath them . the promise of god ; and god never breaks a promise .
had we sent the angels to them , made the dead speak to them , and resurrected all things before their very eyes , they still would not believe unless god willed it to be so . but , in fact , most of them ignore .
on the day the last hour arrives , the evil-doers will swear they have not even tarried for an hour , they have always been deluded ,
indeed jonah was one of the apostles .
o my prison mates ! are different masters better , or allah , the one , the all-paramount ?
he came to his lord with a pure heart ;
leave those to me who deny , the lovers of ease and comfort ; and bear with them for a while .
it is he who gives life , and makes to die , and to him belongs the alternation of night and day ; what , will you not understand ?
he said , “ what was the matter with you , women , when you tried to seduce joseph ? ” they said , “ god forbid ! we knew of no evil committed by him. ” the governor ’ s wife then said , “ now the truth is out . it was i who tried to seduce him , and he is telling the truth . ”
o mankind worship your lord who hath created you and those before you , haply ye may become god-fearing-
abiding therein ; goodly the abode and the resting-place .
the compassionate on the throne is established .
andfair women with large , eyes ,
bring us our fathers , if what you say is true '
flames of fire and molten brass shall be sent against both of you , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
our messengers said ,  lot , we are the messengers of your lord . they will never harm you . leave the town with your family in the darkness of night and do not let any of you turn back . as for your wife , she will suffer what theywill suffer . their appointed time will come at dawn . surely dawn is not far away !
as for those of your women who may commit whoredom , call against them four witnesses from among them if they testify , confine you them to their houses till death complete their turn of life , or allah appoint for them some other way .
and we are certainly able to show theethat against which they are warned .
but may he be cursed how he plotted ;
but if the right is with them , they come to him willingly with submission .
and let them beware the day whereon we shall gather them all together ; then we shall say unto those who associated : where are your associate-gods whom ye have been asserting ?
o you who have believed , do not be like those who disbelieved and said about their brothers when they traveled through the land or went out to fight ,  if they had been with us , they would not have died or have been killed ,  so allah makes thata regret within their hearts . and it is allah who gives life and causes death , and allah is seeing of what you do .
and as for those who disbelieved : were not my revelations rehearsed unto you ? but ye were stiff necked , and ye were a people guilty .
but they turned away from him , and said , “ educated , but crazy ! ”
except him who comes to allah with a sound heart , ’
said :  get out from this , disgraced and expelled . if any of them follow thee , - hell will i fill with you all .
it is from solomon and it is  in the name of allah , the merciful , the most merciful .
say to them : “ did you even consider : if all the water that you havewere to sink down into the depths of the earth , who will produce for you clear , flowing water ? ”
and walk not on the earth with conceit and arrogance . verily , you can neither rend nor penetrate the earth , nor can you attain a stature like the mountains in height .
say , “ even if you become rocks or iron .
people who lived before them had also said ,  our wealth has been earned by our own merits .  what they had earned was of no benefit to them
no intercessor will they have among their  partners  and they willreject their  partners  .
and ye devour heritages with devouring greed .
allah destroys usury and increases charity ; and allah does not like any ungrateful , excessive sinner .
he will say , “ just as our revelations came to you , and you forgot them , today you will be forgotten . ”
and if we postponed their punishment until a stated time , they would say , “ what holds it back ? ” on the day when it reaches them , it will not be averted from them , and what they used to ridicule will besiege them .
,  seize him and drag him into the midst of hell .
for they say :  the fire will not touch us for more than a few days .  they have been deceived by the lies they have themselves fabricated , and stray from their faith .
and indeed we gave the descendants of israel the book , and the rule , and the prophethood , and gave good things for sustenance and gave them superiority over all others of their time .
the people of lut rejected the messengers .
o believers , forbid not such good things as god has permitted you ; and transgress not ; god loves not transgressors .
there shall go round unto them youths ever-young .
to allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and by those that speedily glide along ,
we certainly bestowed our favor upon moses and aaron
and when the wrath fell upon them , they said , 'moses , pray to thy lord for us by the covenant he has made with thee . if thou removest from us the wrath , surely we will believe thee , and send forth with thee the children of israel . '
joseph said to his servants ,  put their money back into their saddlebags , so that they will recognize it when they return home to their family ; thus they may come back . 
and when they presented themselves before him they said : ' o mighty prince , we and our people are afflicted with distress . we have brought but little merchandise . fill up the measure , and be charitable to us ; allah rewards the charitable '
and had we not made you stand firm , you would nearly have inclined to them a little .
what ! you enjoin righteousness upon people while you forgetyourselves , whereas you read the book ? do you not have sense ?
and his companion , , will say ,  thisis what is with me , prepared . 
and when one evening well-trained and running horses of noble breed were brought to him
on that day he will call to them and he will say : 'what response did you give our messengers '
and we gave them our signs , but they were averse to them .
it is he who sent his messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth , in order to make it prevail over all religions , even though the idolaters dislike it .
those whom they call upon- son of maryam , 'uzair , angel , etc . ] desiremeans of access to their lord , as to which of them should be the nearest and they , 'uzair , angels , etc . ] hope for his mercy and fear his torment . verily , the torment of your lord is something to be afraid of !
verily in the alteration of he night and the day and in that which allah hath created in the heavens and the earth are surely signs unto a people who fear .
if a woman is afraid of her husband 's ill treatment and desertion , it will be no sin for both of them to reach a reconciliation . reconciliation is good even though men 's souls are swayed by greed . if you act righteously and be pious , god is well aware of what you do .
and indeed we tried before them fir'aun'speople , when there came to them a noble messenger ] ,
except those who show patience and do righteous good deeds , those : theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
will you punish us just because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us ? our lord ! shower us with perseverance and cause us to die as those who have submitted . '
and yet among men there are such as dispute about allah , without knowledge , and follow every evil one obstinate in rebellion !
then hallow the praise of thy lord , and ask forgiveness of him . verily he is ever relenting .
in houses which allah hath allowed to be exalted and that his name shall be remembered therein . therein do offer praise to him at morn and evening .
that is not difficult for god .
he sends down water from the sky and the valleysflow each in their measure , and the torrent carries a swelling scum ; and fire from that which they kindle ; desiring ornament or ware , from that rises a scum like it . as such , allah strikes both the truth and the false . as for the scum it is cast away as jetsam , but , that which profits people remains on the earth . as such allah strikes the parables .
forbidder of good , outstepping the limits , sinful ,
and remember when luqman said to his son , and he used to advise him , “ o my son ! never ascribe anything as a partner to allah ; indeed ascribing partners to him is a tremendous injustice . ”
they will say :  aforetime , we were not without fear for the sake of our people .
so ask them for a pronouncement -- are they stronger in constitution , or those we created ? we created them of clinging clay .
he has no associate . thus have i been bidden , and i am the foremost of those who submit themselves . `
what , have they bequeathed it one to another ? nay , but they are an insolent people .
it is not the word of a poet -- how little you believe ! --
say :  see ye what things allah hath sent down to you for sustenance ? yet ye hold forbidden some things thereof andlawful .  say :  hath allah indeed permitted you , or do ye inventto attribute to allah ? 
verily we bestowed our favours on moses and aaron
already another time we favoured thee ,
never will the jews be satisfied with thee , neither the christians , not till thou followest their religion . say : 'god 's guidance is the true guidance . ' if thou followest their caprices , after the knowledge that has come to thee , thou shalt have against god neither protector nor helper .
say : “ show me those whom you have attached to him as his associates . ” nay , allah alone is most mighty , most wise .
they , too , rejected all our signs . so we seized them with the seizure of one mighty , omnipotent .
do they not know that for displeasing god and his messenger , one would be admitted to hell wherein he would live forever . this indeed is a great humiliation .
surely the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters , will abide in the fire of hell . they are the worst of creatures .
do not grieve for them , and do not be upset by their guile .
( and what will show you what is the nightly visitor ?
“ you do not worship anything besides him , but which are merely names coined by you and your forefathers – allah has not sent down any proof regarding them ; there is no command but that of allah ; he has commanded that you do not worship anyone except him ; this is the proper religion , but most people do not know . ”
warn the hypocrites that for them there is a painful punishment .
but he who repents and believes and does good things may well be among the successful .
fight then in allah 's way ; this is not imposed on you except in relation to yourself , and rouse the believers to ardor maybe allah will restrain the fighting of those who disbelieve and allah is strongest in prowess and strongest to give an exemplary punishment .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who have no knowledge .
they say : yea , verily , a warner came unto us ; but we denied and said : allah hath naught revealed ; ye are in naught but a great error .
shaitanwants only to excite enmity and hatred between you with intoxicantsand gambling , and hinder you from the remembrance of allah and from as-salat . so , will you not then abstain ?
have fear of the day when every soul will be responsible for itself , no ransom will be accepted for it , no intercession will be of any benefit to it and no one will receive any help .
and intercession does not benefit with him except for one whom he permits.until , when terror is removed from their hearts , they will say ,  what has your lord said ?  they will say ,  the truth .  and he is the most high , the grand .
surely your lord is allah , who created the heavens and the earth in six periods of time , and he is firm in power ; he throws the veil of night over the day , which it pursues incessantly ; andthe sun and the moon and the stars , made subservient by his command ; surely his is the creation and the command ; blessed is allah , the lord of the worlds .
they are those who bought the life of the world at the cost of the life to come ; and neither will their torment decrease nor help reach them .
but if the two separate , out of his plenty allah will make each dispense with the other . indeed allah is all-bounteous , all-wise .
those who take a small price for the covenant of allah and their own oaths -- surely they shall have no portion in the hereafter , and allah will not speak to them , nor will he look upon them on the day of resurrection nor will he purify them , and they shall have a painful chastisement .
but when he gave them a salihchild , they ascribed partners to himin that which he has given to them . high be allah , exalted above all that they ascribe as partners to him . .
o you who believe ! why do you say that which you do not do ?
but made no reservation , .
also trust in the living one who never dies and glorify him with his praise . he has sufficient knowledge of the sins of his servants .
no food for them but cactus thorn
who believe in god and the last day , who enjoin justice and forbid evil and vie with each other in good works . these are righteous men
but i do not wish to absolve myself , for the soul is prone to evil , unless my lord have mercy . indeed my lord is forgiving and kind .  --
safa and marwa are among the waymarks of god ; so whosoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or the visitation , it is no fault in him to circumambulate them ; and whoso volunteers good , god is all-grateful , all-knowing
then the factions differedfrom among them , so woe to those who disbelieved - from the scene of a tremendous day .
nuun * – by oath of the pen and by oath of what is written by it .
while being one of those who have faith and enjoin one another to patience , and enjoin one another to compassion .
and i will give them time . indeed , my plan is firm .
men are in charge of women , because allah hath made the one of them to excel the other , and because they spend of their property . so good women are the obedient , guarding in secret that which allah hath guarded . as for those from whom ye fear rebellion , admonish them and banish them to beds apart , and scourge them . then if they obey you , seek not a way against them . lo ! allah is ever high , exalted , great .
these two groupsare in dispute about their lord . as for those that disbelieve , garments of fire have been cut out for them ; boiling water shall be poured down over their heads ,
they said : our lord ! lo ! we fear that he may be beforehand with us or that he may play the tyrant .
all foodwas lawful to the children of israel , except what israel made unlawful to themselves before the revelation of the torah . tell them : 'bring the torah and recite any passage of it if you are truthful . '
theyinvoke nothing but female deities besides him , and they invoke nothing but shaitan , a persistent rebel !
and , whenever i am sick , heals me ,
wherein thou wilt see no crookedness neither any curving . '
and we are a host on our guard . '
in the gardens of bliss
it is he who created you from clay , then decided a term—a term determined by him . yet you doubt .
that which we have revealed to youis news of the unseen . this was not known to you and to your people . have patience . the pious will triumph in the end .
they used not to prevent one another from the wrongs they used to commit . evil is what they used to do .
he said , “ o adam , tell them their names. ” and when he told them their names , he said , “ did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know what you reveal and what you conceal ? ”
when jesus came with clear signs , he said ,  now i have come to you with wisdom , in order to make clear to you some of the things about which you dispute : therefore fear god and obey me .
whenever they wish to come out of it due to suffocation , they will be returned to it again and it will be commanded , “ taste the punishment of fire ! ”
for them there will be therein all that they desire , and they will abide . it is a promise binding upon your lord that must be fulfilled .
indeed , in the cattle there is a lesson for you . we give you to drink of that which is in their bellies , between the filthand blood , pure milk , which is sweet to those who drink .
as for him who regardeth himself self-sufficient-
why did they not produce four witnesses ? if they could not produce any witnesses , they were indeed liars in the sight of god !
it is he who has mercy on you , and his angels to bring you out from the darkness into light . he is the most merciful to the believers .
my heart is constrained , my tongue falters , so delegate aaron ;
and we sent after them in their footsteps isa , son of marium , verifying what was before him of the taurat and we gave him the injeel in which was guidance and light , and verifying what was before it of taurat and a guidance and an admonition for those who guard .
why are you then not able to bring them back to life if you are truthful ?
what , when we are bones old and wasted ? '
i shall withdraw from you and that unto which ye pray beside allah , and i shall pray unto my lord . it may be that , in prayer unto my lord , i shall not be unblest .
verily , this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood , and i am your lord and cherisher : therefore serve me .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and will replace you with another people , and you will not harm him at all . and allah is over all things competent .
has he fabricated a lie about god , or is he possessed ?  not so ; but those who believe not in the hereafter are themselves afflicted and far astray .
and rescued them and their people from the great calamity .
is then he who watches over every soul and its actions ? yet they ascribe partners to god . say ,  name them ! or do you presume to inform him of something on the earth of which he does not know ? or , is all this only your verbal assertion ?  indeed , their devices seem fair to those who deny the truth , and they are kept back from the right path . there can be no guide for those whom god lets go astray .
teacheth man that which he knew not .
say , ‘ everyone acts according to his character . your lord knows best who is better guided with regard to the way . ’
they rejoice on account of favor from allah andgrace , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
and after that he spread the earth ,
and if we would , we could show them unto theeso that thou shouldst know them surely by their marks . and thou shalt know them by the burden of their talk . and allah knoweth your deeds .
all heads will be bowed before the living , the eternal ; and whosoever bears a load of iniquity will be full of despair .
preach the quran to those who are concerned about the day of judgment at which time they will be brought before their lord . tell them that their only guardian and intercessor is god so that they may become pious .
and we caused the mount to tower above them attheir covenant : and we bade them : enter the gate , prostrate ! and we bode them : transgress not the sabbath ! and we took from them a firm covenant .
i—i am your lord . take off your shoes . you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage falls only upon the lord of all being .
it is not possible for any person to die except by allah 's command at a term recorded . and whosoever desireth the reward of the world , we vouchsafe unto him thereof . and whosoever desireth the reward of the hereafter , we vouchsafe unto him thereof . and anon will we recompense the grateful .
there , we brought the others near ,
o you who believe , remember god with frequent remembrance .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , all that lies between them , and lies below the earth .
he who repents and does good works truly turns to allah in repentance ,
when you are exposed to danger , pray on foot or while riding ; when you are safe again , remember god , for he has taught you what you did not know .
like unto a rain -- laden cloud from heaven , wherein are darknesses and thunder and lightening . they so put their fingers in their ears because of the thunder-claps , guarding against death , and allah is encompasser of the infidels .
and i follow the religion of my fathers , ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub ; it beseems us not that we should associate aught with allah ; this is by allah 's grace upon us and on mankind , but most people do not give thanks :
and we did not send before you any but men to whom we sent revelation , so ask the followers of the reminder if you do not
and as for those who are fasiqun , their abode will be the fire , every time they wish to get away therefrom , they will be put back thereto , and it will be said to them :  taste you the torment of the fire which you used to deny . 
we had no power over you ; but you yourselves were a rebellious people .
and raise the dust in clouds the while ,
 verily ! i am allah ! la ilaha illa ana , so worship me , and perform as-salatfor my remembrance .
o you who have believed , be supporters of allah , as when jesus , the son of mary , said to the disciples ,  who are my supporters for allah ?  the disciples said ,  we are supporters of allah .  and a faction of the children of israel believed and a faction disbelieved . so we supported those who believed against their enemy , and they became dominant .
those who believe and work righteous deeds , - from them shall we blot out all evilin them , and we shall reward them according to the best of their deeds .
and let not their sayings dishearten you . all power is god ’ s . he is the hearer , the knower .
we are turning their hearts and eyes away from the truth even as they did not believe in the first instance - and we leave them in their insurgence to stumble blindly .
thenaccommodation of scalding water
do not strut about in the land arrogantly . surely you can not cleave the earth , nor reach the heights of the mountains in stature .
and allah will rescue the pious , to their place of salvation ; neither will the punishment touch them , nor shall they grieve .
“ and o my people ! what is the matter with me that i call you towards salvation whereas you call me towards hell ? ”
for the living and for the dead ?
and you see the mountains , thinking them rigid , while they will pass as the passing of clouds.the work of allah , who perfected all things . indeed , he is acquainted with that which you do .
how regrettable of the servants ! there did not come to them any apostle but that they used to deride him .
he once lived among his family joyfully ;
it is he who created you from a single soul , and made from it its mate , that he might find comfort with her . so when he had covered her , she bore a light burden and passedwith it . when she had grown heavy , they both invoked allah , their lord : ‘ if you give us a healthy , we will be surely grateful . ’
and that thought of yours which you thought about your lord , has brought you to destruction , and you have becomeof those utterly lost !
they ask you about the phases of the moon . say ,  these are signs for the people to reckon dates and fix the periods for hajj .  also tell them ,  it is no virtue to enter your houses from their backs during the hajj days ) ; real virtue is that one should refrain from incurring the displeasure of allah ; so enter your houses by their proper doors . and fear allah so that you may gainsuccess .
o believers , you are not allowed to take perforce the womeninto your heritage , or tyrannise over them in order to deprive them of what you have given them , unless they are guilty of open adultery . live with them with tolerance and justice even if you do not care for them . for it may well be you may not like a thing , yet god may have endued it with much goodness .
then did they feel secure from the plan of allah ? but no one feels secure from the plan of allah except the losing people .
and by thatwhich created the male and female ,
to god have you to go back , and he has power over everything .
the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in them belongs to god : he has power over all things .
he will be welcomed with boiling water .
when the prayer ends , disperse through the land and seek the favor of god . remember him often so that perhaps you will have everlasting happiness .
o you who believe ! enter into submission one and all and do not follow the footsteps of shaitan ; surely he is your open enemy .
never does there come to them an admonition from the merciful lord but they turn away from it .
and such is the punishment of your lord when he punishes the towns while they are unjust ; surely his punishment is painful , severe .
 o david , we have made you trustee on the earth . so judge between men equitably , and do not follow your lust lest it should lead you astray from the way of god . surely for those who go astray from the way of god , is severe punishment , for having forgotten the day of reckoning .
no one can bear another 's burden . if a heavily laden one should call another to carry his load , none of it shall be carried by the other , even though he be a near of kin . , you can warn only those who fear their lord without seeing him and establish prayer . whoever purifies himself does so to his own good . to allah is the final return .
o ye who believe ! follow not the footsteps of the satan . and whosoever followeth the footsteps of the satan , then he only urgeth to indecency and abomination . and had there not been the grace of allah upon you and his mercy , not one of you would ever have been cleansed ; but allah cleanseth whomsoever he will and allah is hearing , knowing .
so today we will save you in body that you may be to those who succeed you a sign . and indeed , many among the people , of our signs , are heedless
does man assume that we will never assemble his bones ?
after we have become bones and dust ? 
and whoso comes unto him a believer having done deeds of righteousness , those -- for them await the most sublime degrees ;
and in the alternation of night and day , and in the means of sustenance – water – which allah sends down from the sky whereby he gave life to the earth after its death , and in the movement of the winds –are signs for people of intellect .
he reviewed the birds and said : 'why is it that i do not see the hoopoe here ? or is he among the absent ?
and remember zun-nun , when he departed in wrath : he imagined that we had no power over him ! but he cried through the depths of darkness ,  there is no god but thou : glory to thee : i was indeed wrong ! 
so we proportion it -- how well are we at proportioning .
verily in this in a preaching for a people who are worshippers .
so they ceased not to cry , until we made them stubble , silent and still .
god gave them a taste of humiliation in the life of this world , but the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew it .
to him belongs what is in the heavens and what is on the earth and what is between them and what is under the soil .
except iblees ; he was arrogant and became among the disbelievers .
proclaim , “ who guards you night and day from the most gracious ? ” in fact they have turned away from the remembrance of their lord .
o you who have faith ! be patient , stand firm , and closeranks , and be wary of allah so that you may be felicitous .
on the day we inflict the direst scourge upon all sinners , we will certainly exact retribution .
such are the regulations of hajj . to respect the prohibitions of god is a virtuous deed in the sight of one 's lord . consuming the flesh of certain animals is made lawful for you . stay away from wickedness , idols , and false words .
what ! that which is made in ornaments and which in contention is unable to make plain speech !
and the leg is wound about the leg ,
,  this is your recompense .
or lest you should say : if the book had been revealed to us , we would certainly have been better guided than they , so indeed there has come to you clear proof from your lord , and guidance and mercy . who then is more unjust than he who rejects allah 's communications and turns away from them ? we will reward those who turn away from our communications with an evil chastisement because they turned away .
together with the hordes of iblis .
o my people ! i do not ask of you any reward for it ; my reward is only with him who created me ; do you not then understand ?
those are the companions of the right .
“ by god , we were in evident error .
so on that day no question will be asked of man or jinn as to his sin , .
all intimate friends on that day will become each others enemies except for the pious ,
be quick in the race for forgiveness from your lord , and for a garden whose width is thatof the heavens and of the earth , prepared for the righteous , -
above them they shall have layers of fire and beneath them layers . by this allah puts fear into his worshipers ' ' o my worshipers , fear me '
the coarse-grained , and above all mean and ignoble ;
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they have rejected me . ”
and he shall soon be well-pleased .
and we gave them our signs , and they remained averse to them .
indeed , those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers and wish to discriminate between allah and his messengers and say ,  we believe in some and disbelieve in others ,  and wish to adopt a way in between -
and give to the orphans their properties and do not substitute the defectivefor the good . and do not consume their properties into your own . indeed , that is ever a great sin .
and do not plead on behalf of those who deceive themselves ; indeed allah does not like any treacherous , excessive sinner .
therein shall be a spring running !
how shall the polytheists have anytreaty with allah and his apostle ? !
muhammad is but an apostle ; apostles have passed before him . if he dies or is slain , will you turn back on your heels ? anyone who turns back on his heels , will not harm allah in the least , and soon allah will reward the grateful .
belike allah may appoint between you and those of them whom ye hold as enemies affection . and allah is potent , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods , whom they invoked besides god , availed them nothing when the command of your lord arrived . in fact , they added only to their ruin .
announce to those who believe and have done good deeds , glad tidings of gardens under which rivers flow , and where , when they eat the fruits that grow , they will say :  indeed they are the same as we were given before ,  so like in semblance the food would be . and they shall have fair spouses there , and live there abidingly .
it is not rightful for a muslim to kill another muslim , unless it occurs by mistake ; and the one who mistakenly kills a muslim must set free a muslim slave and pay blood-money to the family of the slain , except if they forego it ; and if the victim is of a people who are hostile to you , and the killer is a muslim , then only the setting free of a muslim slave ; and if the victim is from a people between whom and you there is a treaty , then blood-money must be paid to his family and the setting free of a muslim slave ; therefore one who has no means must fast for two consecutive months ; this is his penance before allah ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
verily men and women who have come to submission , men and women who are believers , men and women who are devout , truthful men and truthful women , men and women with endurance , men and women who are modest , men and women who give alms , men and women who observe fasting , men and women who guard their private parts , and those men and women who remember god a great deal , for them god has forgiveness and a great reward .
and thamood , and he did not spare them ,
do you not see how allah has created seven heavens , one upon the other ,
god is the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he established his dominion over the throne . no one besides him is your guardian or intercessor . will you then not take heed ?
increase your wealth and sons ; and grant you gardens and waterways .
bequest is prescribed for you when death approaches one of you , if he leaves behind wealth for parents and near relatives , according to usage , a dutyupon those who guard .
and other similar to it , joined together .
and thereon ye will drink of boiling water ,
and hell advanced for the perverse .
bythe creation of male and female ; -
we have charged the human to be kind to his parents . but if they bid you to associate with me that which you have no knowledge , do not obey them . to me you will return , and i shall inform you of all that you have done .
she said ,  woe is me ! how can i have a baby when i am barren and my husband is very old ? this is certainly strange  .
when a group of them said , ‘ why do you advise a people whom allah will destroy , or punish with a severe punishment ? ’ they said , ‘ as an excuse before your lord , andthat they may be godwary . ’
‘ o faithless ones ! do not make any excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do . ’
should you have any doubt about what we have revealed to our servant , present one chapter comparable to it and call all your supporters , besides god , if your claim is true .
when you entered your garden why did you not say :  if allah wills ; there is no power except by allah .  though you see me lesser than yourself in wealth and children ,
and they turned away , saying ,  he is a trained and insane person  .
why then was there not a township which believed , so that its faith might have profited it , except the people of yunus ! when they believed , we removed from them the torment of humiliation in the life of the world , and we let them enjoy for a season .
and thus we have revealed to you an inspiration of our command . you did not know what is the book orfaith , but we have made it a light by which we guide whom we will of our servants . and indeed , , you guide to a straight path -
the thamud tribe denied the noble messengers .
who hears allah 's signs being rehearsed to him , and yet persists in his pride , as though he had not heard it . announce to him , then , the tidings of a grievous chastisement .
in our hands are their accounts .
 and be moderate in thy pace , and lower thy voice ; for the harshest of sounds without doubt is the braying of the ass . 
then the magicians flung themselves prostrate .
and he , son of maryam ] shall be a known sign forthe hour descent on the earth ] . therefore have no doubt concerning it . and follow me ! this is the straight path .
the believers and the emigrants from mecca who fight for the cause of god , indeed have hope in receiving the mercy of god ; god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he said :  i shall punish whosoever is wicked . he will then be sent back to his lord who will inflict on him a terrible punishment .
who then really shows you the way in the darkness of the desert and the sea ? and who sends breezes bringing news of his benevolence ? is there any other god along with god ? he is far too exalted for what they associate with him !
o my people ! enter the holy land which god has assigned for you . do not turn back , or you will be the losers . 
the punishment for those who wage war against god and his prophet , and perpetrate disorders in the land , is to kill or hang them , or have a hand on one side and a foot on the other cut off , or banish them from the land . such is their disgrace in the world , and in the hereafter their doom shall be dreadful .
thinks he that none sees him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy—and that is why he created them—and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : ‘ i will surely fill hell with jinn and humans , all together ! ’
and the companions of the left - what are the companions of the left ?
then we raised another generation after them ,
say ,  he will give them life who created them for the first time ! for he is well-versed in every kind of creation ! -
butdisavowed and disobeyed .
verily allah ! with him alone is the knowledge of the hour , and he it is who sendeth down the rain and knoweth that which is in the wombs : and no person knoweth whatsoever it shall earn on the morrow , and a person knoweth not in whatsoever land he shall die . verily allah is knowing , aware .
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , so that our hearts may be reassured , and know that you have told us the truth , and be among those who witness it . ”
and the good land -- its vegetation comes forth by the leave of its lord , and the corrupt -- it comes forth but scantily . even so we turn about the signs for a people that are thankful .
and when she gave birth to her she said , 'lord , i have given birth to her , a female . and i have named her mary , and commend her to thee with her seed , to protect them from the accursed satan . '
nor could he order you to take the angels and prophets as lords . would he order you to disbelief after you had been muslims ?
we were told about this and so were our forefathers before us . but these are no more than fairy tales that have been recounted from ancient times . 
for eachthere arein succession , before and behind him : they guard him by command of allah . allah does not change a people 's lot unless they change what is in their hearts . but whenallah willeth a people 's punishment , there can be no turning it back , nor will they find , besides him , any to protect .
lo ! thou wilt die , and lo ! they will die ;
they swear by allah that they said nothing , but indeed they uttered blasphemy , and they did it after accepting islam ; and they meditated a plot which they were unable to carry out : this revenge of theirs wasonly return for the bounty with which allah and his messenger had enriched them ! if they repent , it will be best for them ; but if they turn back , allah will punish them with a grievous penalty in this life and in the hereafter : they shall have none on earth to protect or help them .
o believers , fight the unbelievers who are near to you ; and let them find in you a harshness ; and know that god is with the godfearing .
but those who disbelieve , and die disbelieving shall incur the curse of allah , the angels , and all people .
lawful to you iswater-game and its use for food - for the benefit of yourselves and those who travel , but forbidden island-game as long as you are in a state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you shall be gathered back .
of a sperm-drop , when it was cast forth ,
otwo companions of prison , are separate lords better or allah , the one , the prevailing ?
then it was said :  o earth , swallow back your water ; and , o sky , desist .  and the water subsided , and the decree was accomplished . the ark came to rest on judi , and it was said :  away with the cursed people ! 
and do not think that by doing such deeds , you have done a great favor to god .
and when they commit an immorality , they say ,  we found our fathers doing it , and allah has ordered us to do it .  say ,  indeed , allah does not order immorality . do you say about allah that which you do not know ? 
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become clear , as though they were being driven into death with their eyes wide open .
and the even and the odd .
the day when man will remember that for which he strove ,
but those to whom knowledge had been given said , 'woe upon you ! the reward of god is better for him who believes , and works righteousness ; and none shall receive it except the steadfast . '
blessed be he who has sovereignty over the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them . he alone has knowledge of the hour , and to him you shall be returned .
or askest thoua fee from them so that they are plunged in debt ?
who shall provide for you if he withholds his sustenance ? nay ; but they persist in rebellion and aversion .
they said :  o musa ! either you throw , or shall we have thethrow ? 
they said :  when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected indeed ?
except those who are patient and do good deeds , for them awaits forgiveness and a mighty wage .
so leave themto speak nonsense and play until they meet the day of theirs , which they have been promised .
when we dispatched toward you a team of jinn listening to the quran , when they were in its presence , they said , ‘ be silent ! ’ when it was finished , they went back to their people as warners .
who responds to the oppressed when he calls out to him , and relieves his suffering and who will make you inheritors of the earth ? then , is there a god besides god ? how little you pay heed !
we have destroyed many townships around you , and diversified the signs , so that they may return .
the unbelievers solemnly swear by god that if they were to be shown some miracle , they would certainly believe . , tell them ,  only with god are all the miracles .  even if a miracle was to take place , they still would not believe .
they will have whatever they desire with their lord . that is the reward of the doers of good -
and recite to them the story of noah when he said to his people , 'my people , if my standing here is grievous to you and my reminding you of the signs of god , in god have i put my trust ; so resolve on your affair , with your associates , then let not your affair be a worry to you , but make decision unto me , and respite me not .
wherefore have warned you of fire flaming ,
a numerous company from among the first ,
and remain turning penitently unto him , and fear him , and establish prayer , and be not of the associaters :
who avoid impious talks ,
that will be the time to be driven to one 's lord .
so when i have proportioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , then fall down in prostration before him . ’
o ye who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his messenger , and keep your duty to allah . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
but when there came unto them the truth from our presence , they said : why is he not given the like of what was given unto moses ? did they not disbelieve in that which was given unto moses of old ? they say : two magics that support each other ; and they say : lo ! in both we are disbelievers .
see how we have preferred some above others . yet the everlasting life is greater in rank and greater in preferment .
and on that day the news will be blinded for them , and they will not ask each other .
when we bestow upon man a measure of our grace and then take it away from him , he yields to despair and becomes ungrateful .
and remember allah took a covenant from the people of the book , to make it known and clear to mankind , and not to hide it ; but they threw it away behind their backs , and purchased with it some miserable gain ! and vile was the bargain they made !
establish worship , and pay the poor-due ; and whatever of good ye send beforefor your souls , ye will find it with allah . lo ! allah is seer of what ye do .
and , when luqman said to his son while he was instructing him ,  o my son , do not associatewith allah . indeed , associationis great injustice . 
all food was lawful for the descendants of israel , except what israel forbade for himself , before the tauratwas sent down ; say , “ bring the taurat and read it , if you are truthful . ”
and indeed , you invite them to a straight path .
the people of the woods disbelieved the messengers .
except one who steals a hearing , and is followed by a visible projectile .
and the people of nuh we destroyed aforetime ; verily they were a people transgressing .
and the day the hour appears the criminals will be in despair .
we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they shall not be victors .
the followers of the book ask you to bring down to them a book from heaven ; so indeed they demanded of musa a greater thing than that , for they said : show us allah manifestly ; so the lightning overtook them on account of their injustice . then they took the calf , after clear signs had come to them , but we pardoned this ; and we gave to musa clear authority .
andthe witness and what is witnessed ,
therein are fruit and palm-trees with their dates in sheaths ,
god is the guardian of the believers , but the disbelievers have no guardian .
and to him belongs praise in the heavens and the earth , and at nightfall and when you are at midday .
this is because they have given preference to this life over the life to come and god does not guide disbelieving people .
and the example of those who disbelieve , is as that of him who shouts to thethat hears nothing but calls and cries.deaf , dumb and blind . so they do not understand .
and leave the sea behind you as calm as ever . surely they are an army that is doomed to be drowned . ”
god raised him towards himself . god is almighty and wise .
those who believe fight in the way of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of the shaitan . fight therefore against the friends of the shaitan ; surely the strategy of the shaitan is weak .
till death overtook us .
so it is that they confess their sins . curse the inhabitants of the blaze !
we appointed them as leaders to guide the people through our command and sent them revelation to strive for good deeds , worship their lord , and pay religious tax . both of them were our worshipping servants .
verily , they were about to tempt you away from that which we have revealedunto you , to fabricate something other than it against us , and then they would certainly have taken you a friend !
god increases or decreases the fortunes of whosoever he will , and they rejoice in the life of this world . yet the life of this world is nothing but a merchandise as compared to the life of the next .
'son of my mother ' he replied , 'do not seize my beard nor my head . i was afraid that you might say :  you have divided the children of israel and did not uphold my word . 
of sin-doubled shall be the chastisement for him on the resurrection day , and he shall dwell therein humbled ,
say : 'had god willed i would not have recited it to you , neither would he have taught you it ; i abode among you a lifetime before it -- will you not understand ? '
o dear prophettake the obligatory charity from their wealth , by which you may cleanse them and make them pure , and pray in their favour ; indeed your prayer is the contentment of their hearts ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
and when harm touches you upon the sea , those that you call upon besides him vanish from you except him . but when he brings you safely to land , you turn away . and man is ever ungrateful .
when the stars are blotted out
as for those of you who repudiate their wives by zihar , they are not their mothers ; their mothers are only those who bore them , and indeed they utter an outrage and a lie . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
given to drink of a spring fiercely boiling .
then when he beheld the moon uprise , he said : this is mine lord . then when it set , he said : were it not that my lord kept me guiding , surely i must have been of the erring people .
he said , “ i witnessed what the people did not witness – i therefore took a handful from the tracks * of the angel , then threw it * * – and this is what seemed pleasing to my soul . ”
butsaid :  o aaron , when you saw that they had gone astray , what hindered you
and never does a noble messenger come to them , but they mock at him .
if you ask them :  who created the heavens and the earth ?  they will surely answer :  god .  say :  all praise be to god .  but most of them do not understand .
and watch them ; soon they will see !
for he thinks he is sufficient in himself .
they said :  shall we put faith in two mortals like ourselves when their people are slaves to us ? 
surely those who disbelieve in allah and his apostles anddesire to make a distinction between allah and his apostles and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and desire to take a course betweenthat .
even if we should be decayed bones ?
then satan whispered to them that he might manifest unto them that which was hidden from them of their shame , and he said : your lord forbade you from this tree only lest ye should become angels or become of the immortals .
it is the star that shines with a piercing brightness --
and draw in your hand to your side ; it will come out white without disease - another sign ,
when they sail in a boat , they sincerely pray to god with pure faith . but when we bring them safely to land , they start considering things equal to god .
except iblis , he became too proud , for he was one of the unbelievers .
surely i am a faithful apostle to you ;
and what will teach thee what is sakar ?
and we made known this decree to him , that the root of thosewas to be cut off in the early morning .
that is of which allah gives the good news to his servants , those who believe and do good deeds . say : i do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives ; and whoever earns good , we give him more of good therein ; surely allah is forgiving , grateful .
they said :  are you expressing your true ideas before us or are you jesting ? 
and if you are upon a journey , and you do not find a writer , then a pledge in hand . but if one of you trusts another , let him who is trusted deliver his trust , and let him fear god his lord . and do not conceal the testimony ; whoso conceals it , his heart is sinful ; and god has knowledge of the things you do .
truly it is allah who causes the grain and the fruit-kernel to sprout . he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living . such is allah . so whither are you tending in error ?
therefor remind , for of use is the reminder .
their lord giveth them good tidings of mercy from him , and acceptance , and gardens where enduring pleasure will be theirs ;
and on the day when he shall say : call on those whom you considered to be my associates . so they shall call on them , but they shall not answer them , and we will cause a separation between them .
they have ranks with allah , and allah watches what they do .
and whosoever submits his will to god , being a good-doer , has laid hold of the most firm handle ; and unto god is the issue of all affairs .
and of everything we have created pairs that you may be mindful .
he hath ordained for you that religion which he commended unto noah , and that which we inspire in thee , and that which we commended unto abraham and moses and jesus , saying : establish the religion , and be not divided therein . dreadful for the idolaters is that unto which thou callest them . allah chooseth for himself whom he will , and guideth unto himself him who turneth .
he said , “ your appointment is the day of the festival , so let the people be gathered together at mid-morning . ”
therefore be not in haste against them , we only number out to them a number .
him shall i fling unto the burning .
it is because of their disrespect of a sacred month that you are also allowed to retaliate against them in a sacred month . if any one transgresses against you , you also may retaliate against them to an equal extent . have fear of god and know that he supports the pious .
and listen on the day when the crier crieth from a near place ,
say , which is better , my fellow-prisoners -- many gods at variance , or god the one , the omnipotent ?
then he turned away hastily ,
 after the manner of the people of pharaoh and of those before them : they rejected the signs of allah , and allah punished them for their crimes : for allah is strong , and strict in punishment :
and whoso desireth the hereafter and striveth for it with the effort necessary , being a believer ; for such , their effort findeth favour .
and we rained down upon them a rain . it was an evil rain for those who had already been warned .
so be not thou in dubitation concerning that which these people worship . they worship not save as their fathers worshipped afore ; and verily we will repay unto them in full their portion , undiminished .
and the camels and cattle we have appointed for you as among the symbols of allah ; for you therein is good . so mention the name of allah upon them when lined up ; and when they areon their sides , then eat from them and feed the needy and the beggar . thus have we subjected them to you that you may be grateful .
observest thou not that allah knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ! there is no whispering among three but he is their fourth , nor among five but he is their sixth , nor fewer than that nor more but he is with them wheresoever they may be ; and thereafter he will declare unto them , on the day of judgment , that which they have worked . verily allah is of everything knower .
and at night . then will you not use reason ?
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
we have indeed turned it about them , so that they remember ; yet most people refuse all except disbelief .
we granted them a clear book ,
that is because they opposed god and his messenger . whoever opposes god and his messenger—god is severe in retribution .
if thou wouldst wonder , surely wonderful is their saying , 'what , when we are dust shall we indeed then be raised up again in new creation ? ' those are they that disbelieve in their lord ; those -- on their necks are fetters ; those shall be the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
when you were on the nearer sideand they were on the farthest side , while the caravan was in a lower place than you ; and if you had mutually made an appointment , you would certainly have broken away from the appointment , but -- in order that allah might bring about a matter which was to be done , that he who would perish might perish by clear proof , and he who would live might live by clear proof ; and most surely allah is hearing , knowing ;
and on the day when he will gather them as though they had not stayed but an hour of the day , they will know each other . they will perish indeed who called the meeting with allah to be a lie , and they are not followers of the right direction .
then indeed your lord ? to those who emigrated , after they were persecuted , and then strove and were patient , surely , your lord is thereafter forgiving , the most merciful .
o prophet , enjoin your wives and your daughters and the believing women , to draw a part of their outer coverings around them . it is likelier that they will be recognised and not molested . allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
god gave confidence to his messenger and the believers and helped them with an army which you could not see . god punished the unbelievers ; this is the only recompense that the unbelievers deserve .
'we are debt-loaded ;
whoever does an evil , he shall not be recompensedbut the like of it , and whoever does good , whether male or female , and he is a believer , these shall enter the garden , in which they shall be given sustenance without measure .
and raised couches ,
they denied them unjustly out of pride , though their souls acknowledged them . see , how was the end of the corrupt workers !
verily it is a word brought by a messenger honoured ,
“ and leave the sea as it is , parted in several places ; indeed that army will be drowned . ”
nor can goodness and evil be equal . repelwith what is better : then will he between whom and thee was hatred become as it were thy friend and intimate !
have they not travelled the earth and seen how those before them met their end ? god destroyed them utterly : a similar fate awaits those who deny the truth .
then we placed it in a place of safety ,
among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and whatever creatures he has scattered in them , and he is able to gather them whenever he wishes .
that day shall you be brought to judgement , not a secret of you will be hidden .
save only to such a messenger as he is well-pleased with ; then he despatches before him and behind him watchers ,
thus we have tried some of them with others , that they might say :  is it thesethat allah has favoured from amongst us ?  does not allah know best those who are grateful ?
. say :  o you mankind ! now truth , has come to you from your lord . so whosoever receives guidance , he does so for the good of his own self , and whosoever goes astray , he does so to his own loss , and i am notover you as a wakil . 
and we kept their praise among the latter generations .
obstructing virtues , a sinful transgressor ,
choking food and a painful punishment .
she said :  i seek refuge from thee tomost gracious : if thou dost fear allah . 
what ! have they appointed supporters other than allah ? soallah only is the supporter , and he will revive the dead ; and he is able to do all things .
that was because there came to them messengers with clear signs , but they said :  shallhuman beings direct us ?  so they rejectedand turned away . but allah can do without : and allah is free of all needs , worthy of all praise .
god has helped you on many occasions including the day of hunayn . when you were happy with the number of your men who proved to be of no help to you and the whole vast earth seemed to have no place to hide youand you turned back in retreat .
and they had been guidedto good speech , and they were guided to the path of the praiseworthy .
believers , safeguard yourselves and your families from a fire fuelled by people and stones , and watched over by angels , stern and strong : angels who never disobey god 's commands to them , but promptly do as they are commanded .
therefore be patient ; surely the promise of allah is true and let not those who have no certainty hold you in light estimation .
god has made the kabah , the sacred house , the sacred months , the unmarked and marked sacrificial animals for the welfare of men and in order to inform you that god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . he has the knowledge of all things .
they whose labor is lost in this world 's life and they think that they are well versed in skill of the work of hands .
,  strikewith your foot ; this is aa cool bath and drink . 
and of the dwellers of the desert is one who taketh that which he expen deth as a fine , and waiteth for evil turns of fortune for you . upon them shall be the evil turn of fortune . and allah is hearing , knowing .
do they only wait for the hour - that it should come on them all of a sudden , while they perceive not ?
your lord inspired the bees ,  make hives in the mountains , in the trees and in the trellises ,
they regard it as a favor to you that they have submitted ! say : 'do not regard your submission as a favor to me , rather , it is allah who bestows upon you a favor by guiding you to belief , if you are truthful '
we enjoined every nation with certain worship acts which they perform . the unbelievers must not dispute with you about the manner of your worship . invite them to follow the right path of the lord .
: he said :  o lord , i fear that they will deny me .
indeed it will close in upon them
and a large group of those of later times .
and it is he who has spread you in the earth , and towards him you are to be raised .
hath he invented a lie concerning allah , or is there in him a madness ? nay , but those who disbelieve in the hereafter are in torment and far error .
and we have not sent thee except as a mercy unto the worlds .
and verily thine lord is full of grace for mankind , but most of them give not thanks .
and say , ‘ the truth from your lord : let anyone who wishes believe it , and let anyone who wishes disbelieve it. ’ indeed , we have prepared for the wrongdoers a fire whose curtains will surround them . if they cry out for help , they will be helped with a water like molten copper , which will scald their faces . what an evil drink , and how ill a resting place !
whether we let thee see something of that which we have promised them , or make thee die , thine is but conveyance . ours the reckoning .
cast lots , and was among the losers .
wherever you look , you will see bliss and a great kingdom :
verily those who believe and do righteous works , unto them shall be gardens of paradise for an entertainment .
they said : we will surely entice away his father from him ; and verily we are doers .
if he asks for all you possess and insist upon it , you will become niggardly , and it will bring out your malevolence .
gave them alliances during both their travels of winter and summer .
have patience upon what they say , and remember our bondman dawud , the one blessed with favours ; he is indeed most inclined .
they said ,  it does not matter . we shall be returning to our lord .
or has he taken daughters out of what he has created , and he has selected for you sons ?
say :  the truthhas come , and albatil ] can neither create anything nor resurrect . 
the higher rank with allah is for those who believed and migrated and strove in his cause with their belongings and their persons . it is they who are triumphant .
say :  i invoke only my lord , and i associate none as partners along with him . 
they said ,  but we have come to you with that about which they were disputing ,
we shaded you with clouds , and sent down to you manna and quails : ‘ eat of the good things we have provided for you. ’ and they did not wrong us , but they used to wrongthemselves .
they replied : 'no , but we found our fathers doing so '
then , when he saw the sun rising , he said , “ this is my lord , this is bigger. ” but when it set , he said , “ o my people , i am innocent of your idolatry .
what ! has then your lord preferred to give you sons , andtaken daughters from among the angels ? most surely you utter a grievous saying .
there is surely reward unending for you ,
and they say : why are not portents sent down upon him from his lord ? say : portents are with allah only , and i am but a plain warner .
so it will come upon them suddenly , whilst they will be unaware .
by the winds that scatter the dust ,
those who are true to their trust ,
give the good news to those who believe and do good works , that they will have gardens through which rivers flow : whenever they are given fruit to eat they will say ,  this is what we were provided with before ,  because they were given similar things . and there will be pure spouses for them , and they will abide there forever .
and to him belongs whatsoever inhabits the night and the day ; and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . '
so it was that we aroused themso that they might question one another . one of them said , ‘ how long have you stayed ? ’ they said , ‘ we have stayed a day , or part of a day. ’ they said , ‘ your lord knows best how long you have stayed . send one of you to the city with this money . let him observe which of them has the purest food , and bring you provisions from there . let him be attentive , and let him not make anyone aware of you .
such have guidance from their lord . such are the successful .
nor those who do wrong and then make up forfault with goodness , for indeed i am all-forgiving , all-merciful . ’
we have certainly sent down to you a book in which is your mention . then will you not reason ?
say :  verily , my salat , my sacrifice , my living , and my dying are for allah , the lord of the 'alamin .
then you will surely be asked that day about pleasure .
worship allah and do not associate anything with him . be kind to parents and near kinsmen , to the orphans and to the needy , to your neighbor who is your kindred , and to the neighbor at your far side , and the companion at your side , and to the destitute traveler , and to that which your right hands owns . allah does not love he who is proud and struts ,
he seated his parents by his side on the throne ; and they fell down before him in homage .  o my father ,  said joseph ,  this is the meaning of my earlier dream . my lord has made it come true . he was gracious in getting me out of the prison , and bringing you out of the desert to me after the discord created by satan between me and my brothers , for my lord is gracious to whomsoever he please . he is indeed all-knowing and all-wise .
on the day when we roll up the heavens as if it were a written scroll and bring it back into existence just as though we had created it for the first time . this is what we have promised and we have always been true to our promise .
do not argue with the people of the book unless in a fair way , apart from those who act wrongly , and say to them :  we believe what has been sent down to us , and we believe what has been sent down to you . our god and your god is one , and to him we submit . 
and indeed , for him is nearness to us and a good place of return .
thus we made it a deterrent for their generation , and for subsequent generations , and a lesson for the righteous .
for them who have done good is the bestand extra . no darkness will cover their faces , nor humiliation . those are companions of paradise ; they will abide therein eternally
or have they partnerswho have made lawful for them in religion that which allah allowed not ? and but for a decisive word , it would have been judged between them . lo ! for wrong-doers is a painful doom .
and whatever ye spend in charity or devotion , be sure allah knows it all . but the wrong-doers have no helpers .
when it is said to them :  believe as the others believe :  they say :  shall we believe as the fools believe ?  nay , of a surety they are the fools , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , no one will speak , except for those to whom the lord of mercy gives permission , and who will say only what is right .
 and follow the best of that which is sent down to you from your lord , before the torment comes on you suddenly while you perceive not ! 
there will profit you neither your kindred nor your children on the day of resurrection . he shall decide between ; and allah is of that which ye you work beholder .
on the day when allah will resurrect them all and inform them of what they did . allah had enumerated it , while they forgot it ; and allah is , over all things , witness .
and divorced women shall restrain themselves for three menstrual periods ; and it is not lawful for them to conceal what allah has created in their wombs if they believe in allah and the last day ; and their husbands have the right to take them back , during this time , if they desire reconciliation ; and the women also have rights similar to those of men over them , in accordance with islamic law – and men have superiority over them ; and allah is almighty , wise .
they will say ,  they have been lost to us ; nay , we did not invoke anything before .  thus god leaves the deniers of the truth to stray ;
if you confront them in battle , make of them a fearsome example for those who follow them , that they may take heed .
allah has created you , then he takes you away , and there are some among you who are relegated to the nethermost age so that he knows nothing aftersome knowledge . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-powerful .
truly dost thou marvel , while they ridicule ,
he said : then go thou forth from hence , for lo ! thou art outcast .
they unto whom we vouchsafed the book rejoice at that which hath been sent down unto thee ; and of their bands are some who deny some of it . say thou : have only been commanded that : should worship allah and should associate not with him . unto him i call , and unto him is my return .
believers ! always be on your guard against encounters . theneither advance in detachments or advance in a body .
such is the good news that allah gives to his servants who have faith and do righteous deeds ! say , ‘ i do not ask you any reward for it except the love ofrelatives. ’ whoever performs a good deed , we shall enhance its goodness for him . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-appreciative .
and whoever is on earth entirelythen it could save him .
he said : 'lord , i have none but myself and my brother . set a barrier between us and the wicked people '
who doth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie against allah or denieth his revelations ? lo ! the wrongdoers will not be successful .
and a few of later ages ,
the offspring of those whom we carried in the ark with noah , a thankful servant .
loving companions , matching in age ,
call to mind when joseph said to his father :  my father ! i saweleven stars and the sun and the moon : i saw them prostrating themselves before me . 
that he may warn whosoever is living , and that the word may be realized against the unbelievers .
had thesebeen aliha , they would not have entered there , and all of them will abide therein .
 for me , i have set my face , firmly and truly , towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and never shall i give partners to allah . 
or did you suppose you should enter paradise without god know who of you have struggled and who are patient ?
“ o our lord ! and forgive me , and my parents , and all the muslims on the day when the account will be established . ”
he has sent down to youthis true book , confirming the books before it , and he sent down the tauratand the injeel . –
does man think that he is to be left to wander without an aim ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of all that you do .
and admonish thy nearest kinsmen ,
some of them have already confessed their sins and have mixed virtuous deeds with sinful ones . perhaps god will forgive them . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
indeed , the righteous will be in a secure place ;
a day when mankind shall be like scattered moths
and noah called out to his lord , saying : 'my lord ! my son is of my family . surely your promise is true , and you are the greatest of those who judge .
so now allah has made an ease upon you and he knows that you are weak ; so if there are a hundred persevering men among you , they shall overcome two hundred ; and if there are a thousand among you , they shall overcome two thousand by the command of allah ; and allah is with those who patiently endure .
call upon your lord humbly and in secret . lo ! he loveth not aggressors .
and he who believed said :  o my people ! verily , i fear for you a fate like that dayof the confederates !
if you fear that you may not deal justly with the orphans , then marrywomen that you like , two , three , or four . but if you fear that you may not treat them fairly , thenone , oryour slave-women . that makes it likelier that you will not be unfair .
if you give alms openly , it is well , and if you hide it and give it to the poor , it is better for you ; and this will do away with some of your evil deeds ; and allah is aware of what you do .
will surely have hell for his abode .
so the devil destabilised them in it and removed them from where they were – and we said , “ go down , one of you is an enemy to the other ; and for a fixed time you shall stay on earth and feed in it . ”
surely your strivings are divergent .
he said , ‘ moses , your request has been granted !
truly , for those who do wrong there is a punishment besides that , though most of them do not know it .
and he drew forth his hand and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
but if you desire allah and his messenger , and the home of the hereafter , then verily , allah has prepared for almuhsinatamongst you an enormous reward .
the day the resurrection comes the sinners will be overwhelmed with despair .
know that allah is severe in punishment , but that allahis forgiving , merciful .
and who is more unjust than one who forges a lie against allah , or gives the lie to the truth when it has come to him ? will not in hell be the abode of the unbelievers ?
they said :  whatever be the signs thou bringest , to work therewith thy sorcery on us , we shall never believe in thee .
they are dead , not living ; and they do not know when they will be raised .
 but we can surely produce magic to match thine ! so make a tryst between us and thee , which we shall not fail to keep - neither we nor thou - in a place where both shall have even chances . 
“ and i do not ask from you any fee for it ; my reward is only upon the lord of the creation . ”
and have made the night as a covering ,
say :  if i had that which you are asking for impatiently , the matter would have been settled at once between me and you , but allah knows best the zalimun . 
pharaoh and his men were defeated and put to shame ,
who is better in speech than one who callsto allah , works righteousness , and says ,  i am of those who bow in islam  ?
indeed , we created the human . we know the whisperings of his soul , and are closer to him than the jugular vein .
and the certain promisecomes near . then the eyes of unbelievers will be fixed in horror ,  ah , woe betide , we were indeed heedless of this , and were oppressors and unjust . 
your wives are a tilth for you , so go into your tilth when you like , and do good beforehand for yourselves , and be carefulto allah , and know that you will meet him , and give good news to the believers .
when their apostles brought them manifest proofs , they boasted about the knowledge they possessed , but they were besieged by what they used to deride .
therefore continue to give warning , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer or a madman .
so we saved him and his whole family
therefore if you overtake them in fighting , then scatter bythem those who are in their rear , that they may be mindful .
whoever desires a reward in this life of the world , then with allahis the reward of this worldly life and of the hereafter . and allah is ever all-hearer , all-seer .
look , how they double up their breasts in order to hide from him . but when they cover themselves up with their garments , he knows what they hide and what they expose . indeed , he knows the secrets of the hearts .
say ,  flight shall not avail you : if you manage to escape from death or killing , you will enjoy life only for a short while . 
it is they who disbelieved , and barred you from the sacred mosque , and prevented the offering from reaching its destination . were it not for faithful men and faithful women , whom you did not know , you were about to hurt them , and became guilty of an unintentional crime . thus god admits into his mercy whomever he wills . had they dispersed , we would have punished those who disbelieved among them with a painful penalty .
in the gardens of delight ,
say , ‘ perhaps there is right behind you some of what you seek to hasten . ’
he said :  what ! even if i brought you better guidance than that which ye found your fathers following ?  they said :  for us , we deny that yeare sent . 
 and we are not the ones to receive pains and penalties ! 
the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him , just like they swear to you , supposing that they stand on something . look ! they are indeed liars !
then after them , we created another generation .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even if they are near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are people of hellfire .
when comes the help of allah , and victory ,
how should we not believe in allah and that which hath come unto us of the truth . andhope that our lord will bring us in along with righteous folk ?
my lord alone can bring them to account , if only you could understand ,
and to us belongs the hereafter as well as the present world --
who has fed them against hunger and secured them from fear .
many of them will be from the ancient people
other uses also they have in them , and beverages . what , will they not be thankful ?
do not yield to the unbelievers but launch a great campaign against them with the help of the quran .
fighting has been enjoined upon you while it is hateful to you . but perhaps you hate a thing and it is good for you ; and perhaps you love a thing and it is bad for you . and allah knows , while you know not .
said ,  seize it , and fear not : we shall return it at once to its former condition  ..
very nervous when touched by misfortune .
, leaving him , call but upon female deities : they call but upon satan the persistent rebel !
when a chapteris revealed , some people ask others ,  whose faith among you people has received strength from this ?  itcertainly strengthens the faith of the believers and they consider it to be a glad news .
 go you and your brother with my ayat , and do not , you both , slacken and become weak in my remembrance .
except for an old woman among those who tarried .
your relatives and children will not avail you on the day of resurrection : he will separate you , and allah watches what you do .
he has no partner , and i have been commandedthis , and i am the first of those who submit . ’
and of the camels , two and of the cattle , two . say ,  is it the two males he has forbidden or the two females or that which the wombs of the two females contain ? or were you witnesses when allah charged you with this ? then who is more unjust than one who invents a lie about allah to mislead the people byother than knowledge ? indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoing people . 
they and their companions will recline on couches in the shade .
knoweth he not that allah doth see ?
have you not heard about the stories of the armies
like the behavior of the people of pharaoh , and those before them . they rejected the signs of god , so god seized them for their sins . god is powerful , severe in punishment .
hesaid : ' i am the worshiper of allah . allah has given me the book and made me a prophet .
the folk of pharaoh . will they not ward off ?
allah cites an example of the faithless : the wife of noah and the wife of lot . they were under two of our righteous servants , yet they betrayed them . so they did not avail them in any way against allah , and it was said , ‘ enter the fire , along with those who enter . ’
but the noble messenger and those who accepted faith with him , fought with their wealth and lives ; and for them only are the virtues ; and it is they who have achieved the goal .
say : 'had allah willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i lived among you all my life before it . will you not understand ?
we have faith in our lord so that he will forgive our sins and our magical performances that you forced us to show . god is better than all things and his rewards last longer . 
one of them said ,  this is my brother who has ninety-nine ewes when i have only one . he has demanded me to place that one in his custody ; he had the stronger argument  .
then some of them advanced against others , blaming each other .
everlasting gardens , which they will enter , along with the righteous among their parents , and their spouses , and their descendants . and the angels will enter upon them from every gate .
then we exacted retribution from them . so do consider the end of those who gave the lie .
no , indeed ! they shall deny their service , and they shall be against them pitted .
and when it comes to pass , will you believe in it ? what ! now , and already you wished to have it hastened on .
 and my curse shall be on thee till the day of judgment . 
say : 'whosoever is in error , let the all-merciful prolong his term for him ! till , when they see that they were threatened , whether the chastisement , or the hour , then they shall surely know who is worse in place , and who is weaker in hosts . '
as a gift from the forgiving , ever-merciful . 
o people who believe ! spend in allah 's cause , from what we have provided you , before the advent of a day in which there is no trade , and for the disbelievers neither any friendship nor intercession ; and the disbelievers themselves are the unjust .
they have certainly disbelieved who say ,  allah is the third of three .  and there is no god except one god . and if they do not desist from what they are saying , there will surely afflict the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
but they said :  our lord ! make the stages between our journey longer ,  and they wronged themselves , so we made them as tales , and we dispersed them all , totally . verily , in this are indeed signs for every steadfast grateful .
when shuaib said to them , “ do you not fear ?
then after him , we sent other noble messengers to their respective people – so they came to them with clear proofs – so they were not such as to believe in what they had denied before ; this is how we set seals upon the hearts of rebels .
“ indeed it is me , allah – there is no god except i – therefore worship me and keep the prayer established for my remembrance . ”
think not that allah doth not heed the deeds of those who do wrong . he but giveth them respite against a day when the eyes will fixedly stare in horror , -
and made the moon therein a light , and made the sun a lamp ,
they are those who disbelieved and barred you from the holy mosque and the offering detained so as not to reach its place of sacrifice if it had not been for certain believing men and certain believing women whom you did not know , you might have trampled upon them , and so sin reached you because ofthem while you did not know . in order that allah admits into his mercy whom he will , had theybeen easy to distinguish , we would have punished the unbelievers among them with a painful punishment .
say : i am not the first of the apostles , and i do not know what will be done with me or with you : i do not follow anything but that which is revealed to me , and i am nothing but a plain warner .
but my calling has only increased them in flight .
had god willed , he would have made you one congregation , but he leaves astray whom he wills , and he guides whom he wills . and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
and they themselves are witnesses to what they were doing to the muslims !
they are cursed ; wherever they are found , they should be captured and killed outright .
peace be upon ibrahim !
a written record ,
they have made their oaths a screen : thus they obstructfrom the path of allah : truly evil are their deeds .
surely those who conceal any part of the book that allah has revealed and take for it a small price , they eat nothing but fire into their bellies , and allah will not speak to them on the day of resurrection , nor will he purify them , and they shall have a painful chastisement .
 so fear allah and obey me .
and leave the sea intervening ; surely they are a host that shall be drowned .
and incline not to those who do wrong , or the fire will seize you ; and ye have no protectors other than allah , nor shall ye be helped .
this koran could not have been forged apart from god ; but it is a confirmation of what is before it , and a distinguishing of the book , wherein is no doubt , from the lord of all being .
we are eager that our lord should forgive us our offences , for that we are the first of the believers . '
has there reached you the story of moses ? -
do they then who plan evilfeel securethat allah will not cause the earth to swallow them or that punishment may not overtake them from whence they do not perceive ?
verily , those who say :  our lord isallah ,  and thereafter istaqamu , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
no ! but you do not honor the orphan
and be not like those who started from their homes insolently and to be seen of men , and to hinderfrom the path of allah : for allah compasseth round about all that they do .
when whither go ye ?
and truly , unto usthe lastand the first .
by the angels which distribute the affairs ,
god does not charge a soul with more than it can bear . it shall be requited for whatever good and whatever evil it has done . ,  our lord , do not take us to task if we forget or make a mistake ! our lord , do not place on us a burden like the one you placed on those before us ! our lord , do not place on us a burden we have not the strength to bear ! pardon us ; and forgive us ; and have mercy on us . you are our lord and sustainer , so help us against those who deny the truth . 
and we lifted him to a high position .
your god is indeed one .
so we took vengeance on them and drowned them in the sea , for they denied our signs and were oblivious to them .
then turn back the eye again and again ; your look shall come back to you confused while it is fatigued .
save those that repent and amend , and make manifest the truth i these it is toward whom i relent . and i am the relenting , the merciful !
guide us on the straight path ,
and indeed you , are taught the qur ’ an from the wise , the all knowing .
those townships ! we recount unto thee some tidings thereof . assuredly there came unto them their apostles with evidences , but they were not such as to believe that which they had erst belied . thus doth allah put a seal upon the hearts of the infidels .
allah has created every movingcreature from water . of them there are some that creep on their bellies , some that walk on two legs , and some that walk on four . allah creates what he wills . verily ! allah is able to do all things .
and among his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; do not prostrate to the sun nor to the moon ; and prostrate to allah who created them , if him it is that you serve .
by the wise qur'an .
or be admonished , and the admonition profit him ?
he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that you reveal or conceal . god knows best whatever the hearts contain .
their account is only with my lord , if you could perceive
suad . by the quran bearing the reminder ,
surelythose who believe and do good , we do not waste the reward of him who does a good work .
and what is this in your right hand , o musa !
the day whereon each soul shall find presented whatsoever it hath worked of good and whatsoever it hath worked of evil , it would fain that there were betwixt it and that day a wide space . and allah maketh you beware of himself : allah is tender unto his bondsmen .
'begone ! your lot in this life is to cry :  untouchable ! ' said he . 'an appointment awaits you that you can not fail to keep . look at your god which you clung to indeed we will burn it and scatter its ashes upon the sea '
it will be said : “ this is what you were promised , a promise made to everyone who turned muchand was watchful of his conduct ,
he said : 'would that i had the strength to set you straight , or could seek refuge in some powerful support . '
o ye who believe ! when it is said unto you : make room in your assemblies , then make room ; allah will make room for you . and when it is said : rise up , then rise up ; allah will exalt those who believe among you and those who are vouchsafed knowledge , in degrees . and allah is of whatsoever ye work aware .
and we bestowed on him isaac and jacob , and we established the prophethood and the scripture among his seed , and we gave him his reward in the world , and lo ! in the hereafter he verily is among the righteous .
so when there came to them the truth from us , they said ,  indeed , this is obvious magic . 
messengers indeed were belied before you , yet they became patient with that which they were belied , and were hurt until our help came to them . there is none to alter the words of allah ; and there has already come to you some news of the messengers .
whose way is better than that of the man who has submitted to god , and does good , and who follows the creed of abraham the upright ? and god chose abraham as friend .
those that deny the day of judgment .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear allah ? 
those who disbelieved said , “ shall we point out to you a man , who will tell you that , once torn into shreds , you will be in a new creation ?
and as for the petitioner , do not repel .
we never sent a warner to any town but its wealthy ones said : “ we disbelieve in the message you have brought . ”
the semblance of paradise promised the pious and devoutwith streams of water that will not go rank , and rivers of milk whose taste will not undergo a change , and rivers of wine delectable to drinkers , and streams of purified honey , and fruits of every kind in them , and forgiveness of their lord . are these like those who will live for ever in the fire and be given boiling water to drink which will cut their intestines to shreds ?
o mankind ! be wary of your lord and fear the day when a father will not atone for his child , nor the child will atone for its father in any wise . indeed allah ’ s promise is true . so do not let the life of the world deceive you , nor let the deceiver deceive you concerning allah .
they said : hast come unto us that we should serve allah alone , and forsake what our fathers worshipped ? then bring upon us that wherewith thou threatenest us if thou art of the truthful !
when our messengers came to lot , he was distressed on their account and in a predicament for their sake , and he said , ‘ this is a terrible day ! ’
with the help of allah ; he helps whom he pleases ; and he is the mighty , the merciful ;
if they charge thee with falsehood , say :  my work to me , and yours to you ! ye are free from responsibility for what i do , and i for what ye do ! 
and verily , thisis indeed a reminder for youand your people , and you will be questioned .
‘ o my son ! even if it should be the weight of a mustard seed , andit should be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , allah will produce it . indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
say :  i have no power over my own gain or loss other than what god may please .  every people have a certain term . when their time is come they can neither delay it an hour nor advance it a moment forward .
when the truth from us came , they called it simply magic .
they will be served therein with a cup whose flavor is zanjabeel .
and ibrahim kept this declaration among his progeny , in order that they may desist .
we gave david bounty from us . ' o mountains , and birds , echowith him ' and we softened iron for him ,
they will call to them :  were we not with you ?  they will answer :  certainly ; but then you let yourselves be tempted , and waited in expectation but were suspicious and were deceived by vain desires , till the decree of god came to pass , and the deceiver duped you in respect of god .
 it may be that my lord will give me something better than thy garden , and that he will send on thy garden thunderboltsfrom heaven , making itslippery sand ! -
he said , “ you are a people unknown to me . ”
will you be left secure in this here ,
behold , ye are those invited to spendin the way of allah : but among you are some that are niggardly . but any who are niggardly are so at the expense of their own souls . but allah is free of all wants , and it is ye that are needy . if ye turn back , he will substitute in your stead another people ; then they would not be like you !
whispering is an act of satan , one that aims at causing grief to the believers ; yet without allah 's leave no harm can be caused to them . so in allah should the believers put all their trust .
hath your lord then distinguished youby giving you sons , and hath chosen for himself females from among the angels ? lo ! verily ye speak an awful word !
 and we used to belie the day of recompense
do they not consider how many of the generations have we destroyed before them , because they do not turn to them ?
and her lord accepted her with full acceptance and vouchsafed to her a goodly growth ; and made zachariah her guardian . whenever zachariah went into the sanctuary where she was , he found that she had food . he said : o mary ! whence cometh unto thee this ? she answered : it is from allah . allah giveth without stint to whom he will .
those who had stayed behind will say :  when you depart for taking the spoils , allow us to follow you .  they wish to change the word of god . tell them :  you will not follow us . that is what god has already said before .  they will say :  you are envious of our gain .  the fact is they understand but little .
and shall live for ever in everlasting gardens beneath which rivers flow . such will be the reward of those who purify themselves .
ha mim .
this united group will soon run away in defeat .
but lo ! with hardship goeth ease ,
as for those who deny , neither their wealth nor their children will help them in the least against god . they shall be but faggots forhell ,
it is they who receive the blessings of their lord andmercy , and it is they who are theguided .
going into the blazing fire .
satan would try to tamper with the desires of every prophet or messenger whom we sent . then god would remove satan 's temptations and strengthen his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
two parties of you were about to fail , though allah was their guardian , and in allah believers put all their trust .
certainly the creation of the heavens and the earth is far greater than the creation of men , but most people do not know .
they said : 'we predict an evil omen from you and those who are with you ' he replied : 'your prediction is with allah , you are a nation being tested '
so think not that allah will fail to keep his promise to his messengers . certainly , allah is all-mighty , - all-able of retribution .
which will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger .
do they have deitieswho have ordained for them a religion not permitted by allah ? were it not for aconclusive word , judgement would have been made between them , and indeed a painful punishment awaits the wrongdoers .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you can bring to me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
allah knows what every female bears , and that of which the wombs fall short of completion and that in which they increase ; and there is a measure with him of everything .
and assuredly there hath come unto them tidings wherein is a deterrent .
and who believe in that which is revealed unto theeand that which was revealed before thee , and are certain of the hereafter .
and on the day he shall call out to them and say ,  where are those whom you alleged were my partners . 
every soul shall taste of death ; then unto us ye shall be returned .
mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and made you into peoples and tribes , so that you might come to know each other . the noblest of you in god 's sight is the one who fears god most . god is all knowing and all-aware .
a group among the people given the book desire that if only they could lead you astray ; and they only make themselves astray , and they do not have sense .
i myself have chosen thee ; therefore give thou ear to this revelation .
surely man is greedy by nature .
near to flowing water
lo ! allah will cause those who believe and do good works to enter gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will be allowed armlets of gold , and pearls , and their raiment therein will be silk .
but his lord chose him : he turned to him , and gave him guidance .
but the messenger and those who believed with him fought with their wealth and their lives . those will havegood , and it is those who are the successful .
those who purchase disbelief at the price of faith harm allah not at all , but theirs will be a painful doom .
and the first of them will say to the last of them ,  then you had not any favor over us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . 
 thou causest the night to gain on the day , and thou causest the day to gain on the night ; thou bringest the living out of the dead , and thou bringest the dead out of the living ; and thou givest sustenance to whom thou pleasest , without measure . 
we dispersed them into communities around the earth : some of them were righteous , and some of them otherwise , and we tested them with good and badso that they may come back .
those who do not believe in the hereafter , for them only is the evil state ; and the majesty of allah is supreme ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for our own amusement .
the prople of lout belied the messengers .
he said , ‘ of course ; and you will be among members of my inner circle . ’
and verily they hinder them from the way , whilst they deem that they are rightly guided .
therefore publicly announce what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
and to you we have revealed the book with the truth confirming the book that was revealed before it , and a guardian over it . therefore , give judgment among them in accordance to what allah has sent down and do not yield to their fancies from the truth that has come to you . we have ordained a law and a path for each of you . had allah willed , he could have made you one nation but that he might try you by that which he has bestowed upon you . race with one another in good works , to allah you shall all return and he will declare to you what you were at variance .
until , when we open for them the gate of severe punishment , then lo ! they will be plunged into destruction with deep regrets , sorrows and in despair .
there is no animal on the earth , but that its sustenance lies with allah , and he knows itsabode and its temporary place of lodging . everything is in a manifest book .
the leaders , the arrogant party among his people , said :  o shu'aib ! we shall certainly drive thee out of our city -and those who believe with thee ; or else yeshall have to return to our ways and religion .  he said :  what ! even though we do detest ?
say ,  god is sufficient as a witness between you and me . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and reject god will surely be the losers . 
your relationship would not profit you , nor your children on the day of resurrection ; he will decide between you ; and allah sees what you do .
if you are true believers then know that the profit which god has left for you is better for you . i am not responsible for your deeds . 
and had chosen seclusion from them . then we sent unto her our spirit and it assumed for her the likeness of a perfect man .
verily the god-fearing will be in gardens and among rivers .
by the managersaffair .
the wealth they spend in this worldly life is like a freezing wind that smites the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves and destroys it . allah has not wronged them , but they wronged themselves .
so go forth , both you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in remembering me .
who , when allah is mentioned , their hearts are fearful , andthe patient over what has afflicted them , and the establishers of prayer and those who spend from what we have provided them .
seest thou one who turns back ,
o children of israel , call to mind my favor which i bestowed on you and that i made you excel the nations .
and we have indeed illustrated all kinds of examples for mankind in this qur ’ an ; and man is the most quarrelsome of all .
it is not for any believer , man or woman , when god and his messenger have decreed a matter , to have the choice in the affair . whosoever disobeys god and his messenger has gone astray into manifest error .
our lord ! you will indeed gather mankind on a day in which there is no doubt . indeed allah does not break his promise . ’
whatever is in the heavens and the earth and in between them , belongs to him , as whatever lies under the earth .
so he showed him the great sign ,
and do not incline towards those who do wrong , or the fire may touch you ; and you will have no protectors besides god , and you will not be saved .
they do as the people of pharaoh and those who lived before them did . they called our revelations mere lies . god punished them for their sins . god is stern in his retribution .
but you thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families , ever , and that was made pleasing in your hearts . and you assumed an assumption of evil and became a people ruined . 
verily those who hide that which allah hath sent down in the book and purchase therewith a small gain , these are they who eat in their bellies naught but fire . allah will not speak unto them on the day of resurrection , nor purify them ; and unto them shall be a torment afflictive .
and we saved musaand all those with him .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy unto you , and that allah is clement , merciful , .
who , then , can give the lie to you , , about the reward and the punishment ?
and without exception , all of them will be brought forth before us .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and earth and did not fail in their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes . indeed , he is over all things competent .
we granted isaac and jacob to abraham and we bestowed upon his offspring , prophethood and the book . we gave him his reward in this world and in the next life , he will be among the pious ones .
allah shall admit those who believe and do righteous works to the gardens beneath which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they enjoy the pleasures of this transient life and eat as cattle eat . the fire shall be their resort .
and we rescued lut when he said to his people , “ you indeed commit the shameful ; such that no one in the creation has ever done before you . ”
it was nothing but the evildoers who led us astray .
he said , “ o my people ! i am indeed a herald of clear warnings to you . ”
those who were arrogant will say to those who were abased , ‘ did we keep you from guidance after it had come to you ? no , you were guilty . ’
and lot , when he said to his people , 'what , do you commit such indecency as never any being in all the world committed before you ?
believers ! if any of you should ever turn away from your faith , remember that allah will raise up a people whom he loves , and who love him ; a people humble towards the believers , and firm towards the unbelievers ; who will strive hard in the way of allah and will not fear the reproach of the reproacher . this is the favour of allah which he grants to whom he wills . allah is vast in resources , all-knowing .
verily for those who deny our signs and turn away in haughtiness from them , the gates of heaven shall not be opened , nor will they enter paradise , not till the camel passes through the needle 's eye . that is how we requite the transgressors :
be humble and merciful towards them and say ,  lord , have mercy upon them as they cherished me in my childhood . 
maybe our lord will give us a better orchard in its place ; to our lord do we penitently turn . ”
call upon your lord in humility and privately ; indeed , he does not like transgressors .
glory towho did take his servant for a journey by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque , whose precincts we did bless , - in order that we might show him some of our signs : for he is the one who heareth and seeth .
eventually allah saved the person endowed with faith from all the evils of their guile , and a woeful chastisement encompassed the pharaonites .
thou wilt see the guilty on that day linked together in chains ,
andthose who glideswimming
aye ! we are deprived !
say :  o mankind ! i amto you only as a plain warner . 
enter the gates of gehennato be in it for ever . evil is the lodging of the proud .
when the servant of god stood calling on him , they were wellnigh upon him in swarms .
they said :  o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left yusufby our belongings and a wolf devoured him ; but you will never believe us even when we speak the truth . 
eat of the taiyibatwherewith we have provided you , and commit no oppression therein , lest my anger should justly descend on you . and he on whom my anger descends , he is indeed perished .
there is nought but our life of the world ; we die and we live , and we are not going to be raised up .
 certainly , you shall have no authority over my slaves , except those who follow you of the ghawin .
so for one whose scales prove heavy ,
those who trade on the promises of god , and who purchase a little gain from their oaths , will have no share in the life to come . god will not address or even regard them on the day of resurrection , nor perfect them , and their suffering will be painful .
all this shall be theirs as a reward for their deeds .
then their only argument will be to say , “ by god , our lord , we were not idolaters . ”
then we delivered him and his household , save his wife : she was among the lingerers .
and whether we shew thee soome of that which we have promised them , or we cause thee to die , unto us is their return , and allah is witness of that which they do .
and of the night -- keep the vigil therein , as an act of supererogation for thee ; belike thy lord will raise thee up in a station praised .
relate to them the account of abraham
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path . 
lo ! man is a state of loss ,
so i swear by the twilight glow
o you who believe ! when the call is made for prayer on congregation day , hasten to the remembrance of god , and drop all business . that is better for you , if you only knew .
and the angels shall be on the sides thereof ; and above them eight shall bear on that day your lord 's power .
and he who , long , shall forgive me my faults , on the day of requital .
when earth is shaken with herearthquake
we shall make satan the companion of whoever ignores the remembrance of the beneficent god .
they said ,  burn him and protect your gods , if ye do ! 
all the people turned away from him
and there never came an apostle to them but they mocked him .
god said ,  noah , go ashore in peace ; our blessings upon you and upon the people who are with you and upon some of the descendants of those who are with you.we shall grant provision for a time , then a grievous punishment from us shall afflict them . 
to thamud we sent their brother salih . he said ,  serve none but god .  but they divided themselves into two factions contending with one another .
he said to his people ,  have you no fear
wherein they shall dwell : no change will they wish for from them .
we have indeed revealed to you as we revealed to noah and the prophets after him , andwe revealed to abraham and ishmael , isaac , jacob , and the tribes , jesus and job , jonah , aaron , and solomon—and we gave david the psalms—
he submitted , “ o my lord – my bones have become weak and old age shines forth from my head , and o my lord , i have never been disappointed in my prayer to you . ”
indeed ease accompanies hardship .
believers , remember the favor of allah to you when there came against you hosts . we unleashed against them a wind and hostsyou could not see . allah sees the things you do .
how beit whosoever apprehendeth from the testator a mistake or a sin and thereupon he maketh up the matter between them , on him there shall be no sin ; verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
like those who lately preceded them , they have tasted the evil result of their conduct ; andfor them a grievous penalty ; -
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself and when every soul will be recompensed in full for what it did they shall not be wronged .
it was revealed to noah :  none of thy people will believe except those who have believed already ! so grieve no longer over theirdeeds .
indeed , allahhas knowledge of the hour and sends down the rain and knows what is in the wombs . and no soul perceives what it will earn tomorrow , and no soul perceives in what land it will die . indeed , allah is knowing and acquainted .
the hypocrites , men and women , with each other : they enjoin evil , and forbid what is just , and are close with their hands . they have forgotten allah ; so he hath forgotten them . verily the hypocrites are rebellious and perverse .
the lord asked ,  moses , what made you attend your appointment with me before your people ? 
aliflaamra.a book whose verses are clear , and then distinguished from him , the wise , the aware .
see what they compared you to . they have surely gone astray and can not find a path .
we will facilitate for him the difficult end .
your wealth and your children are only a trial ; and with god is a mighty wage .
say ,  he is the most merciful ; we have believed in him , and upon him we have relied . and you willknow who it is that is in clear error . 
theywill say :  glorified be you ! you are our waliinstead of them . nay , but they used to worship the jinns ; most of them were believers in them . 
has there not come to you the tidings of those that disbelieved before , then tasted the mischief of their action , and there yet awaits them a painful chastisement ?
it is he who created you , and among you is the disbeliever , and among you is the believer . and allah , of what you do , is seeing .
so travel freely , , throughout the landfour months but know that you can not cause failure to allah and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
and recall when the hypocrites and those whose hearts were diseased said : 'their faith has deluded these . but he who puts his trust in allah shall find allah all-mighty . all-wise . '
and as for those who choose protecting friends beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art in no wise a guardian over them .
we have indeed sent down the qur ’ an in the night of destiny .
no son did allah beget , nor is there any god along with him : , behold , each god would have taken away what he had created , and some would have lorded it over others ! glory to allah ! from thethings they attribute to him !
what , one who is reared amid ornaments and , when the time of altercation comes , is not to be seen ?
we had assigned to them close companions who made their past and present look attractive to them ; and the fate that had once befallen the communities of jinns and men before them was justified upon them . they were indeed bound to perish .
with clear signs and books of dark prophecies ; and we have sent down unto theethe message ; that thou mayest explain clearly to men what is sent for them , and that they may give thought .
yet they have no knowledge of this , and follow nothing but conjecture , but conjecture can not replace the truth .
but they belied him , so the torment of the day of shadowseized them , indeed that was the torment of a great day .
orchards and vineyards ,
they said :  o musa ! we shall never enter it as long as they are there . so go you and your lord and fight you two , we are sitting right here . 
and remember when moosa said to his people , “ o my people ! why do you trouble me , whereas you know that i am allah ’ s noble messenger towards you ? ” so when they deviated , allah deviated their hearts ; and allah does not guide the sinning people .
they will say ,  indeed , we were previously among our people fearful .
and when you have performed your holy rites remember god , as you remember your fathers or yet more devoutly . now some men there are who say , 'our lord , give to us in this world ' ; such men shall have no part in the world to come .
as a warning to humanity -
that they might eat of its fruits and their hands ' labour . what , will they not be thankful ?
you will be left secure here
and gives a little , and then grudgingly ?
and they say : whenthis promise , if ye are truthful ?
and made the moon therein alight and made the sun a burning lamp ?
they will abide in this : and grievous will the burden be to them on that day , -
then did he become a leech-like clot ; then didmake and fashionin due proportion .
as for those who are bent on not believing , tell them : 'work according to your way and we are working according to our way .
we have sent you with the knowledge of the truth and made you a bearer of good tidings and a warner ? now , you are not responsible and answerable for those who are bent upon going to hell .
but they further asked ,  please request your lord to make it clear to us of what colour she should be .  moses answered ,  he says that she should be of yellow colour , so deep and bright as to delight the beholders . 
on the day when they shall be thrust into hell with a violent thrust :
and diminish not the goods of the people , and do not mischief in the earth , working corruption .
say , ,  bring forward your witnesses who will testify that allah has prohibited this .  and if they testify , do not testify with them . and do not follow the desires of those who deny our verses and those who do not believe in the hereafter , while they equatewith their lord .
and they ask you to hasten on the punishment , and allah will by no means fail in his promise , and surely a day with your lord is as a thousand years of what you number .
say : 'people of the book ! come now to a word common between us and you , that we serve none but god , and that we associate not aught with him , and do not some of us take others as lords , apart from god . ' and if they turn their backs , say : 'bear witness that we are muslims . '
and calf is inter-twined with calf .
a revelation from the most gracious , the most merciful .
allah it is he who has subjected to you the sea , that ships may sail through it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful ,
the resurrection verifier ;
we showed them miracles but they ignored them .
for the present , allah hath lightened your , for he knoweth that there is a weak spot in you : but , if there are a hundred of you , patient and persevering , they will vanquish two hundred , and if a thousand , they will vanquish two thousand , with the leave of allah : for allah is with those who patiently persevere .
 then taste you my torment and my warnings . 
but if they turn away , say :  allah sufficeth me : there is no god but he : on him is my trust , - he the lord of the thronesupreme ! 
and whosoever has done even an atom 's weight of evil will behold that .
you may also obtain other benefits from them . you may ride them to seek whatever you need or be carried by them as ships carry you by sea .
god has knowledge of whatever is unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows best what the hearts contain .
yet it is a certain truth .
god strengthens the faith of the believers by the true words in this world and in the life to come . he causes the unjust to go astray and does whatever he pleases .
in order that we may revive a dead city with it , and give it to the many beasts and men that we have created , to drink .
and he has set up the earth for all beings .
verily we ! we shall guicken the dead . and we write down that which they send before and their footsteps . and everything we have counted up in a book luminous .
and if you do not , then be certain of a war with allah and his noble messenger ; and if you repent , take back your principal amount ; neither you cause harm to someone , nor you be harmed .
indeed the muslims , and the jews , and the sabeans , and the christians and the fire worshippers and the polytheists – indeed allah will decide between all of them on the day of resurrection ; indeed allah witnesses all things .
and when the book from allahcame to them , which confirms the book in their possession– and before that they used to seek victory through the medium of this very prophetover the disbelievers ; so when the one whom they fully recognisedcame to them , they turned disbelievers – therefore allah ’ s curse is upon the disbelievers .
and marry those among you who are singleandthe salihunof yourslaves and maid-servants . if they be poor , allah will enrich them out of his bounty . and allah is all-sufficent for his creatures ' needs , all-knowing .
have they taken gods besides god ? say :  then bring your proof . here is the book of those who are with me , and the book of those who have gone before me .  but most men do not know the truth and turn away .
he said : my lord ! forgive me and my brother and cause us to enter into thy mercy , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful ones .
to god belongs all that is in the heavers and earth . whether you publish what is in your hearts or hide it , god shall make reckoning with you for it . he will forgive whom he will , and chastise whom he will ; god is powerful over everything .
he said ,  i am only the messenger of your lord to give youa pure boy . 
o my father , there has come to me knowledge that never came to you . so follow me , and i will guide you along a straight way .
 and exalt notagainst allah . truly , i have come to you with a manifest authority .
and made them like straw eaten up .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , and the lord of the easts .
thereafter we cause him to return to the lowest of the low ,
by a command from us – indeed it is we who send .
he said , “ do you worship , instead of god , what can neither benefit you in anything , nor harm you ?
or are you asking them for a payment ? the revenue from your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and give good news to those who have faith and do righteous deeds , that for them shall be gardens with streams running in them : whenever they are provided with their fruit for nourishment , they will say , ‘ this is what we were provided before , ’ and they were given something resembling it . there will be chaste mates for them , and they will remain therein .
and i swear by the self-reproaching person .
 and they say : 'glory to our lord ! truly has the promise of our lord been fulfilled ! ' 
these will be given their reward twice , because they persevered ; and they counter evil with good ; and from our provisions to them , they give .
and there is not a town but we will destroy it before the day of resurrection or chastise it with a severe chastisement ; this is written in the divine ordinance .
and ad , and thamood , and the men of er-rass , and between that generations a many ,
so they said , “ our lord ! make the stage between our journeys longer ” and they wronged themselves – we therefore turned them into fables and scattered them completely with adversity ; indeed in this are signs for every greatly enduring , most grateful person .
and they used to persist in immense wrongdoing .
he said , ' o my lord , i rule no one except myself and my brother . so do thou divide between us and the people of the ungodly . '
we gave them not bodies that would not eat food , nor were they immortals .
your lord surely knows those who have strayed from his path , and knows those who are rightly guided .
one day will allah gather the messengers together , and ask :  what was the response ye received ?  they will say :  we have no knowledge : it is thou who knowest in full all that is hidden . 
who in their spending are neither extravagant nor stingy but maintain moderation ,
lo ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of night and day , and the ships which run upon the sea with that which is of use to men , and the water which allah sendeth down from the sky , thereby reviving the earth after its death , and dispersing all kinds of beasts therein , andthe ordinance of the winds , and the clouds obedient between heaven and earth : are signsfor people who have sense .
and enjoin prayer upon your familyand be steadfast therein . we ask you not for provision ; we provide for you , and theoutcome is forrighteousness .
and we bestowed on him , out of our mercy , his brother harun , a prophet .
to the day of decision .
you have already come across an instructive sign in the two hosts that encountered each other in battle : one host fighting in the way of allah , and the other that of unbelievers . they saw with their own eyes that one host was twice the number of the other . butallah succours with his victory whomsoever he wills . in this there is surely a lesson for all who have eyes to see .
it is he who first creates and then reverts it . this is how his law works inevitably . his semblance is of the most sublime in the heavens and the earth . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
and the earth – we spread it out , and how well have we smoothed it !
that the people of the scripture may know that they control naught of the bounty of allah , but that the bounty is in allah 's hand to give to whom he will . and allah is of infinite bounty .
by the promised day ,
he reviewed the birds , and said , ‘ why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he absent ? ’
so he gathered the people , and proclaimed .
they swear by allah that they said nothing . yet they did utter the word of disbelief and disbelieved after they had submitted . they intended what they never attained to , and took revenge only that allah enriched them , and his messenger , of his bounty . if they repent , it will indeed be better for them ; but if they turn away , allah will sternly punish them both in this world and in the everlasting life . they have none on earth to protect or help them .
and by the soul and by him who perfectly proportioned it ,
he therefore emerged upon his people from the mosque , and told them through gestures , “ keep proclaiming the puritymorning and evening . ”
take this my letter and hand it over to them , then turn away from them and see whatthey return .
but when he delivers them , behold , they commit violations on the earth unduly ! o mankind ! your violations are only to your own detriment.the wares of the life of this world ; then to us will be your return , whereat we will inform you concerning what you used to do .
until when gog and magog are let loose , and they race down from every slope ,
will they not then consider the camels , how they are created ?
he said : 'my lord has knowledge of what is said in the heavens and on earth . he is the hearer , the knower '
this is gehenna , then , the same that you were promised ;
he said , ‘ begone hence , for you are indeed an outcast ,
he knows that which is before them and that which is behind them , and to allah all matters are returned .
they said ,  ask your lord to make it clear to us the exact type of heifer she should be , for to us all heifers look alike . if god wills , we shall be rightly guided . 
it is allah who has created the seven heavens , and seven earthly worlds like them ; the command descends within them , so that you may know that allah is able to do all things , and that allah ’ s knowledge encompasses everything .
had it been our will we would have obliterated their sight so that they raced to the path . but , how would they see ?
ask the children of israel how many a clear sign we had given them . but if one changes the favour of god after having received it , then remember , god is severe in revenge .
he knows whatever goes into the earth and whatever comes forth from it , and whatever descends from heaven and whatever ascends into it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
this is announced lest ye sorrow for the sake of that which hath escaped you , or exult over that which he hath vouchsafed unto you : and allah loveth not any vainglorious boaster :
so we removed the people who had faith , from that town .
zechariah said : ' o my lord ! appoint a sign for me . ' the angel said : 'the sign for you shall be that you shall not speak to men for three days except by gesture . remember your lord and extol his glory by night and by day . '
and worship allah and associate not aught with him ; and unto parents show kindness , and also unto kindred and orphans and the needy and the near neighbour and the distant neighbour and the companion by your side and the wayfarer and those whom your right hands own verily allah loveth not one who is vainglorious , boaster-
for them is good news in this life , and in the hereafter . there is no alteration to the words of god . that is the supreme triumph .
perhaps his lord , if he divorced you , would substitute for him wives better than you - submitting , believing , devoutly obedient , repentant , worshipping , and traveling -previously married and virgins .
and who speaks fairer than he who calls unto god and does righteousness and says , 'surely i am of them that surrender ' ?
say , ‘ tell me , should allah ’ s punishment overtake you suddenly or visibly , will anyone be destroyed except the wrongdoing lot ? ’
the book will be set up . then you will see the guilty apprehensive of what is in it . they will say , ‘ woe to us ! what a book is this ! it omits nothing , big or small , without enumerating it. ’ they will find present whatever they had done , and your lord does not wrong anyone .
other messengers before you were also mocked , but those who scoffed at the messengers were overtaken by the same scourge that they had scoffed at .
thosewho bear the throneand those around it glorify the praises of their lord , and believe in him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe :  our lord ! you comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge , so forgive those who repent and follow your way , and save them from the torment of the blazing fire !
this is an explanation for mankind , and a guidance and advice for the godwary .
we sent noah and abraham , and established in their line prophethood and the scripture . some of them are guided , but many of them are sinners .
how many a nation did we destroy before them that were stronger in prowess than these . they searched about the lands of the world . but could they find a refuge ?
such has been the way of allah with those who have passed before them , and you shall find no change in the ways of allah .
about the guilty ones :
we would have been the chosen creatures of god . 
as for the disbelievers , whether thou warn them or thou warn them not it is all one for them ; they believe not .
but only as a reminder for those who fear-
and some among them believed in it , and some among them were averse to it . and sufficient is hell as a blaze .
when their messengers came unto them from before them and behind them , saying : worship none but allah ! they said : if our lord had willed , he surely would have sent down angels , so lo ! we are disbelievers in that wherewith ye have been sent .
and believed the best matter to be true
toto your heart that you may be a warner
then he will leave it a level plain .
those who swear allegiance to you swear allegiance to allah . the hand of allah is above their hands . he who breaks his oath breaks it against his self , but for he that keeps his covenant made with allah , allah shall give him a mighty wage .
for your lord will certainly give you , and you will be content .
have fear of god and obey me .
by those who separatedistinctly ,
so she took a veilfrom them ; then we sent to her our spirit , and there appeared to her a well-made man .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ark .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and sends down water from the heaven with which he brings forth fruits for your provision . he has subjected to you ships which , by his command , run upon the sea . he has subjected to you rivers ,
we subjugated the chiefsto struggle day and night with him ,
on that day no intercession availeth savehim unto whom the beneficent hath given leave and whose word he accepteth .
they will say : unto allah . say : will ye not then keep duty ?
then whoso doeth some good works and is a believer , there will be no rejection of his effort . lo ! we recordfor him .
o children of adam ! put on your adornment on every occasion of prayer , and eat and drink , but do not waste ; indeed , he does not like the wasteful .
is this better as a welcome , or the tree of zaqqum ?
and if thou obeyedest most of those on the earth , they would lead thee astray from the way of allah ; they follow not but their fancy , and they only conjecture .
have you not seen those who claim themselves to be pure ? rather , allah purifies whom he wills , and injustice is not done to them , as much as a thread .
though they will be given sight of them . the guilty man will long to be able to ransom himself from the punishment of that day at the price of his children
god has made your houses places of rest for you and made tents for you out of cattle hides , which are light for you to carry , both when you are travelling and when you are staying in one place . he provides for you from the wool and fur and hair of cattle , household goods and articles for use for a time .
for one who brings one good deed , are ten like it ; and one who brings an ill-deed will not be repaid but with one like it , and they will not be wronged .
for we assuredly sent amongst every people a messenger , ,  serve allah , and eschew evil  : of the people were some whom allah guided , and some on whom error became inevitably . so travel through the earth , and see what was the end of those who denied .
then he turned aside to their gods secretly and said : what ! do you not eat ?
, ‘ i have been commanded to worship the lord of this city who has made it inviolable and to whom all things belong , and i have been commanded to be among those who submit ,
those who do not favorably respond to the messenger of god should know that they can not challenge god on earth and will not have anyone as their guardian besides him . such people are in plain error  .
then what message , after that , will they believe in ?
it sailed on waves like mountains , and noah called to his son who was separated from him :  embark with us , o my son , and be not one of those who do not believe . 
you shall proceed onwards from stage to stage .
when you were at one end of the valley , at the other , and the caravan below you , you would surely have declined to fight ifhad offered you battle.that god may end the matter which had been accomplished , so that he who had to die may perish after a clear demonstration , and he who had to live may survive in the light of positive proof , for god hears all and knows everything .
every soul will come to know what it has sent ahead and what it left behind .
thamood , too , belied our warnings .
it is god who has given you the night in which to rest and the day in which to see . god is truly bountiful to people , but most people do not give thanks .
and as for the beggar , scold him not ;
they ask you o dear prophetconcerning the war booty ; say , “ allah and the noble messenger are the owners of the war booty ; so fear allah and maintain friendship among yourselves ; and obey allah and his noble messenger , if you have faith . 
and whatever you lay out as usury , so that it may increase in the property of men , it shall not increase with allah ; and whatever you give in charity , desiring allah 's pleasure -- it is thesethat shall get manifold .
thus he fooled his people , and they obeyed him . they were wicked people .
let not those grieve thee who rush headlong into unbelief : not the least harm will they do to allah : allah 's plan is that he will give them no portion in the hereafter , but a severe punishment .
allah does not impose blame upon you for what is unintentional in your oaths , but he imposes blame upon you for what your hearts have earned . and allah is forgiving and forbearing .
so , if god brings you back to a group of them , and should they ask your leave to go forth with you , say ,  you shall never go forth with me and shall never fight an enemy with me . you chose to sit at home the first time , so sit now with those who remain behind . 
they will also say ,  are thesethe ones of whom you swore would receive no mercy from god ?  they will continue ,  people of paradise , live therein without any fear or grief . 
and he who finds notmust fast two successive months before they both touch each other . and for him who is unable to do so , he should feed sixty of miskin . that is in order that you may have perfect faith in allah and his messenger . these are the limits set by allah . and for disbelievers , there is a painful torment .
he is allah , than whom there is no other allah , the sovereign lord , the holy one , peace , the keeper of faith , the guardian , the majestic , the compeller , the superb . glorified be allah from all that they ascribe as partner .
then will you not be reminded ?
'and exalted is the majesty of our lord : he has taken neither a wife nor a son .
and besides them , there are two more gardens .
 and burn ye him in the blazing fire .
we have decked the lowest heavens with torches . with these torches we have stoned the devils and we have prepared for them the torment of hell .
but what prevents allah from chastising them now when they are hindering people from the holy mosque , even though they are not even its true guardians . for its true guardians are none but the god-fearing , though most of them do not know that .
we will certainly test you , until we know those among you who strive , and those who are steadfast , and we will test your reactions .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a base fluid .
he said , “ do not fear – i am with you , all hearing and all seeing . ”
protecting them against every wayward devil ,
but as for him whose balancewill be light ,
andothers of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
said he , 'now we will see whether thou hast spoken truly , or whether thou art amongst those that lie .
so give the relative his right , as well as the needy and the traveler . that is best for those who desire the countenance of allah , and it is they who will be the successful .
and those on the left – howare those on the left !
and those that glide with ease
god is the knower of the unseen and the seen : he is the almighty , the wise one .
deaf , dumb and blind - so they will not return .
they say , 'when shall this promise come to pass , if you speak the truth ? '
surely those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness -- surely we leave not to waste the wage of him who does good works ;
did they not find guidance in the many generations we had destroyed before them , over whose dwellings theywalk ? there were indeed signs in this . will they even then not listen ?
say : allah knows best how long they remained ; to him arethe unseen things of the heavens and the earth ; how clear his sight and how clear his hearing ! there is none to be a guardian for them besides him , and he does not make any one his associate in his judgment .
enjoin you al-birron the people and you forgetyourselves , while you recite the scripture ] ! have you then no sense ?
and we placed therein lofty , firmly set mountains and have given you to drink sweet water .
and we have created you in pairs .
she said ,  woe to me ! shall i give birth while i am an old woman and this , my husband , is an old man ? indeed , this is an amazing thing ! 
and if they dispute with you , say :  allah knows well what you do .
recompense from thy lord , a gift , sufficient ,
the day when the excuses offered by the wrong-doers shall not avail them . they shall be victims of the curse and a woeful abode .
 what has caused you to enter hell ? 
say thou : bethink ye , if allah made night continuous for you till the day of resurrection , what god is there beside allah , who would bring you light ? hearken ye not ?
it is god who made for you the night , to repose in it , and the day , to see . surely god is bountiful to men , but most men are not thankful .
they are the ones whom allah knows as to what is in their hearts . so let them alone , and advise them , and speak to them concerning themselves far-reaching words .
they shall have none to protect or help them other than allah . he whom allah leads astray there is no way for him .
it is allah , except whom there is no god ; the king , the pure , the giver of peace , the bestower of safety , the protector , the most honourable , the compeller , the proud ; purity is to allah from all what they ascribe as partners !
then after grief , he sent down a peaceful slumber , which engulfed a group among you – and another party kept fearing for their own lives , thinking wrongfully of allah – like the thoughts of ignorance ; they say , “ do we have any authority in this matter ? ” say , “ all authority lies only with allah ” ; they hide in their hearts what they do not reveal to you ; they say , “ had we any control , we would not have been slain here ” ; say , “ even if you had been in your houses , those destined to be slain would have come forth to their places of slaying ; and in order that allah may test what is in your breasts and reveal whatever is in your hearts ” ; and allah knows well what lies within the hearts .
and remove the anger from their breasts ; for god turns to whosoever desires . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
so they plotted a plot : and we plotted a plot , while they perceived not .
they use their oaths as a shield therefore preventing from allah ’ s way – so for them is a disgraceful punishment .
they said ,  have you come to tell us to serve god alone and to forsake the gods our forefathers served ? bring us then what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . 
beware ! do not obey him , but bow in adoration and draw near .
proclaim , “ he only is the most gracious – we have accepted faith in him and have relied only upon him ; so you will now realise who is in open error . ”
and when the caravan had departed , their father said : most surely i perceive the greatness of yusuf , unless you pronounce me to be weak in judgment .
and the earth we have spread out ; set thereon mountains firm and immovable ; and produced therein all kinds of things in due balance .
aliflaamra . those are the verses of the clear book .
ya seen .
so we seized the unbelievers . how great was the change i wrought in their condition then !
or it is like that of a rain storm with darkness , thunder , and lightning approaching . they cover their ears for fear of thunder and death . god encompasses those who deny his words .
allah—there is no god except him—is the living one , the all-sustainer .
would you rather demand of your messenger that which was once demanded of moses ! he who exchanges belief for disbelief has surely strayed from the right path .
when you set forth to take the spoils , those bedouins who lagged behind will say : 'let us follow you ' they hope to change the words of allah . say : 'youshall not follow us . allah has said so before ' they will reply : 'no , you are envious of us ' rather , they have only understood a little !
and on them , as well as in ships , ye ride .
and be patient , , and your patience is not but through allah . and do not grieve over them and do not be in distress over what they conspire .
on the day when you will see it : every nursing mother will discard her infant , and every pregnant woman will abort her load , and you will see the people drunk , even though they are not drunk—but the punishment of god is severe .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may be shown mercy . and hasten to the for-giveness of your lord and to a paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the god-fearing who spend in the way of allah both in plenty and hardship , who restrain their anger , and forgive others . allah loves such good-doers . 
and o listener ! if the devil provokes you , seek the refuge of allah ; indeed he is all hearing , all knowing .
those who do not know say , “ if only god would speak to us , or a sign would come to us. ” thus said those who were before them . their hearts are alike . we have made the signs clear for people who are certain .
said : she it was who asked of me an evil act . and a witness of her own folk testified : if his shirt is torn from before , then she speaketh truth and he is of the liars .
andthine abasement among those who fall prostrate .
the night of decree is better than a thousand months .
they will reply ,  all glory belongs to you . you are our guardian , not they . they had been worshipping the jinn and most of them had strong faith  .
he therefore made a calf for them – a lifeless body , making sounds like a cow – so they said , “ this is your god and the god of moosa ; whereas moosa has forgotten . ”
 instead of allah , and lead them on to the way of flaming fire ;
and man says , “ what has happened to it ? ”
if they refuse , be sure that allah is your protector - the best to protect and the best to help .
had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the declaration from me will come true : “ i will fill hell with jinn and humans , altogether . ”
there are some who listen to you ; but as soon as they go from you they say to those who were given knowledge :  what is this he is saying now ?  they are those whose hearts have been sealed by god , and they follow their own lusts .
and indeed itwill be an anguish for the disbelievers .
it is but a reminder to mankind .
though every sign should come to them , until they witness the painful chastisement .
and when two of you commit indecency , punish them both ; but if they repent and make amends , then suffer them to be ; god turns , and is all-compassionate .
and they used to hew out dwellings from the hills , secure .
those who do things only to be seen by others .
and certainly we bestowed on you a favor at another time ;
allah was much pleased with the believers when they swore fealty to you under the tree . he knew what was in their hearts . so he bestowed inner peace upon them and rewarded them with a victory near at hand
they said , 'art thou come to us to turn us from that we found our fathers practising , and that the domination in the land might belong to you two ? we do not believe you .
she had been barredby what she used to worship besides allah , for she belonged to a faithless people .
and there were nine persons in the city who used to cause turmoil in the land and did not wish reform .
they will surely say : god . say thou : will ye not then fear ?
 will ye be left secure , inall that ye have here ? -
that you let the children of israel leave with us . ’ ’ ’
and in 'adwhen we sent against them the barren wind ;
the likeness of those who were charged withthe torah which they did not observe , is that of a donkey who carries a load of books . how wretched the semblance of the people who deny the words of god ! god does not show an unjust people the way .
'we are missing the goblet of the king ' he replied . 'whosoever restores it shall have a camelload , that i guarantee '
do they say ,  he has invented a lie about god  ? if god so willed , he could seal your heart . god wipes out falsehood and vindicates the truth by his words . he has full knowledge of what is in men 's hearts --
by those who snatch violently .
fight them , till there is no persecution and the religion is god 's entirely ; then if they give over , surely god sees the things they do ;
of the people of moses there is a section who guide and do justice in the light of truth .
say :  is there of yourpartners one that guides to the truth ?  say :  it is allah who guides to the truth . is then he , who gives guidance to the truth , more worthy to be followed , or he who finds not guidanceunless he is guided ? then , what is the matter with you ? how judge you ? 
say , ‘ o people of the book ! come to a common word between us and you : that we will worship no one but allah , that we will not ascribe any partner to him , and that some of us will not take some others as lords besides allah. ’ but if they turn away , say , ‘ be witnesses that we have submitted . ’
we did not give them bodies that needed no food , nor were they to live forever .
in the morning , they called to one another .
for he thought and he plotted --
indeed , those who purchase disbelieffor faith - never will they harm allah at all , and for them is a painful punishment .
but to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness , he will give theirrewards , - and more , out of his bounty : but those who are disdainful and arrogant , he will punish with a grievous penalty ; nor will they find , besides allah , any to protect or help them .
our commandment is but one word , as the twinkling of an eye .
they set aside for god a share in what he has produced , such as crops and livestock , and they say ,  this is for god ,  so they claim ! , and  this is for our associate-gods ?  their associate-gods ' share does not reach god , whereas god 's share reaches their associate-gods . how ill they judge !
in fact , the unbelievers have doubts because of excessive involvement in worldly affairs .
and at night . do you not exercise your reason ?
whenever our messages are conveyed to them in all their clarity , they say ,  thisis nothing but a man who wants to turn you away from what your forefathers worshipped .  and they say ,  thisis nothing but an invented falsehood .  and they who are bent on denying the truth speak thus of the truth when it comes to them ,  this is clearly nothing but plain sorcery ! 
allah has not taken any son , nor has there ever been with him any deity . , then each deity would have taken what it created , and some of them would have sought to overcome others . exalted is allah above what they describe .
say :  allah rescues you from it and from alldistresses , and yet you worship others besides allah . 
and we have made the heaven a roof , safe , and from the signs there of they are averters .
“ i do not say to you that i possess the treasures of god , nor do i know the future , nor do i say that i am an angel . nor do i say of those who are despicable in your eyes that god will never give them any good . god is aware of what lies in their souls . if i did , i would be one of the wrongdoers . ”
so whoever repented and accepted faith and did good deeds , so it is likely that he will be among the successful .
the people of the book ask you to bring down upon them a book from heaven . of moses they asked greater than that , they said to him : 'show us allah openly ' and a thunderbolt took them for their evil doing . then they took to themselves the calf , after the clear proofs had come to them , yet we forgave that and we gave moses clear authority .
this is the guidance of allah , which he may give to whomever he wills among his bondmen ; and had they ascribed partners , their deeds would have been wasted .
and those who disbelieve well-nigh cause thee to stumble with their looks when they hear the admonition , and they say : verily he is mad .
then we deliver our apostles and those who believe -- even so , it is binding on uswe deliver the believers .
david said ,  he has certainly been unjust in demanding your ewe from you . most partners transgress against each other except for the righteously striving believers who are very few .  david realized that it was a test from us so he asked forgiveness from his lord and knelt down before him in repentance .
surely there is a sign in this , but most of them would not believe .
for what you have brought upon yourselves .  god is surely not unjust to his creatures , .
it is satan who instills fearof his followers ; do not fear them . but fear me , if you are true believers .
remember our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob -- possessors of strength and vision .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
even if you are in danger , you must offer your prayers anyhow on foot or on horseback . and when you have peace again , remember allah in the manner he has taught you , which you did not know before .
does man think that we will not reassemble his bones ?
but allah beareth witness that what he hath sent unto thee he hath sent from hisknowledge , and the angels bear witness : but enough is allah for a witness .
] commands you only what is evil and fahsha , and that you should say against allah what you know not .
so serve you god , and obey you me .
and also landmarks ; and by the stars they are guided .
fight thou therefore in the way of allah thou are not tasked except for thy own soul , and persuade the believers ; belike allah will withhold the violence of those who disbelieve . and allah is stronger in violence and stronger in chastising .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were indeed an evil lot ; so we drowned them all .
those before them had denied , therefore the punishment came to them from a place they did not know .
we sent noah to his people :  i give you a clear warning .
they ask : when is the day of requital coming ?
could they find a place of refuge or caverns or a retreating hole , they would turn round thereto rushing headlong .
the day when the earth will he replaced by some other than the earth , as will be the skies , and every one will appear before god the one and omnipotent ,
then , when they have completed their term , either retain them honourably or separate from them honourably , and take the witness of two honest men from among yourselves , and bear witness for the sake of allah . whoever believes in allah and the last day is advised tothis . whoever is wary of allah , he shall make for him a way out
a fitting requital .
and left him thus to be succeeded by a groupamong later generations :
by the racers panting .
that is from the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , . you knew it not , neither you nor your people , before this . so be patient ; indeed , theoutcome is for the righteous .
and will not be absent thence .
for it is only a single scaring , then behold , they are watching
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may proclaim it over all religion , even though the pagans may detest .
and whatever good they do - never will it be removed from them . and allah is knowing of the righteous .
why do you not bring down the angels if what you say is true  .
o listener ! this is the truth from your lord , so never be of those who doubt .
indeed , , you do not guide whom you like , but allah guides whom he wills . and he is most knowing of theguided .
they shall enter the everlasting gardens , shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and with pearls , and their apparel therein shall be silk .
and before it there hath been the book of musa , a guide and a mercy . and this a book confirming it , in arabic speech , that it may warn those who have done wrong and as glad tidings unto the well-doers .
he whom god leads astray has no one except god to protect him . you should see the sinners when they face the punishment . they will say :  is n't there a way of going back ? 
but the wicked among them substituted other words for the words given to them ; so we sent down upon them a plague from the sky , because of their wrongdoing .
by your lord , we will round them up , and the devils , then we will bring them around hell , on their knees .
be patient with those who worship their lord in the mornings and evenings to seek his pleasure . do not overlook them to seek the worldly pleasures . do not obey those whom we have caused to neglect us and instead follow their own desires beyond all limits .
say thou : i say not unto you , that with me are the treasures of allah , nor i know the unseen , nor say unto you that i am an angel ; i but follow that which hath been revealed unto me . say thou : are the blind and the seeing equal ? will ye not then consider ?
when the help and victory of allah come ,
if you are visited by good fortune , it vexes them ; but if you are smitten by evil , they rejoice at it . yet if you are patient and godfearing , their guile will hurt you nothing ; god encompasses the things they do .
and the nation of abraham and the nation of lot ;
and it moved on with them amid waves like mountains ; and nuh called out to his son , and he was aloof : o my son ! embark with us and be not with the unbelievers .
permission to fight is granted to those who are attacked , because they have been wronged , god indeed has the power to help them ,
and for those whose faces will become white , they will be in allah 's mercy , therein they shall dwell forever .
whereby god guides to the ways of peace all who seek his good pleasure , bringing them from darkness to the light , by his will , and guiding them to a straight path .
 and put your hand into your bosom , it will come forth white without hurt.among the nine signsto fir'aunand his people , they are a people who are the fasiqun .
for each , there are angels in succession , before and behind him . they guard him by the command of allah . verily ! allah will not change the good condition of a people as long as they do not change their state of goodness themselves . but when allah wills a people 's punishment , there can be no turning back of it , and they will find besides him no protector .
fain would any of you that there be for him a garden of date-palms and grape-vines whereunder rivers flow end with every fruit therein for him , and that old age should befall him while he hath a progeny of weaklings , and that a whirlwind wherein is fire should then smite it , so that it is all consumed ! in this wise allah expoundeth unto you the signs that haply ye may ponder .
and those whose good deeds are lightwill be the ones who have lost themselves because they wrongfully rejected our signs .
let those who seek the life of the next world in exchange for the life of this world fight in the way of allah . we shall grant a mighty reward to whoever fights in the way of allah , whether he is slain or comes out victorious .
one who makes a mistake or commits a sin and ascribes it to an innocent person , he only burdens himself with slander and a grave sin .
they said : we are possessors of strength and possessors of mighty prowess , and the command is yours , therefore see what you will command .
and whosoever helps himself after he has been wronged -- against them there is no way .
lord , you will surely gather all the people for a day that will come in which there is no doubt ' allah will not break his promise .
and verily i have sought refuge in my lord and your lord lest ye stone me .
for those who believe and work deeds of righteousness is a reward that will never fail .
 peace  shall be the greeting from the merciful lord .
all the angels prostrated before adam
whoever is within the heavens and earth asks him ; every day he is bringing about a matter .
he has created beasts of burden and cattle for slaughter . so eat of what god has given you for food , and do not walk in the footsteps of satan who is surely your declared enemy .
on lined couches ,
striking stones with their hooves , sparking fire .
and with pharaoh , lord of stakes ?
if ye lend unto allah a goodly loan , he will multiply it unto you and will forgive you ; and allah is appreciator , forbearing .
their messengers said ,  can there be doubt about allah , creator of the heavens and earth ? he invites you that he may forgive you of your sins , and he delays your death for a specified term .  they said ,  you are not but men like us who wish to avert us from what our fathers were worshipping . so bring us a clear authority . 
,  people , do not worship anyone besides god . i , , am his messenger sent to warn you and to give you the glad news .
say : 'consider , if thisis from allah and you disbelieve in it , and a witness from the children of israel testifies to its like and believes , while you areproud ! indeed , allah does not guide the harmdoers '
so the angels prostrated - all of them entirely ,
“ and you committed the deed of yours that you committed , and you were ungrateful . ”
so , the believers will laugh at the infidels on that day ,
and a few of thosewill be from the later time .
said :  granted is thy prayer , o moses ! 
allah has prepared for them gardens with streams running in them , to remain in them . that is the great success .
but the denominations from among them differed , so woe to those who have wronged from the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled the dream .  it is thus indeed that we reward those who do good ,
‘ allah has begotten , ’ and they indeed speak a falsehood .
then proportioned and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you the senses of hearing , sight and feeling . and yet how little are the thanks you offer !
but those to whom knowledge and faith are given will say : the truth is , ye have tarried , by allah 's decree , until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but ye used not to know .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between , in six days , and is firmly established on the throne : allah most gracious : ask thou , then , about him of any acquainted .
have you not considered how your lord dealt with 'aad -
and as for him who is given his book in his left hand he shall say : o would that my book had never been given me :
indeed your lord knows best those who stray from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
do they not know that allah enlarges the provision for whom he wills , and straitens it . verily , in this are signs for the folk who believe !
they set out early in the morning , thinking they had the power to prevent .
yet they worship besides god that which can neither benefit them nor harm them . one who denies the truth is a helperagainst his lord .
and when we took covenant with you and raised the mount above you , , ‘ hold on with power to what we have given you , and do listen ! ’ they said , ‘ we hear , and disobey , ’ and their hearts had been imbued withthe calf , due to their unfaith . say , ‘ evil is that to which your faith prompts you , should you be faithful ! ’
are we not then to die
and exceeded in corruption therein .
o lord , forgive me , my parents , and any one who enters my house as a believer , and all believing men and women , and do not give the evil-doers increase save in ruin .
what is the matter with you ? how judge ye ?
naught is there , but its treasuries are with us , and we send it not down but in a known measure .
remember ye were on the hither side of the valley , and they on the farther side , and the caravan on lower ground than ye . even if ye had made a mutual appointment to meet , ye would certainly have failed in the appointment : but , that allah might accomplish a matter already enacted ; that those who died might die after a clear sign , and those who lived might live after a clear sign . and verily allah is he who heareth and knoweth .
the jews say that the christians have nothingand the christians say that the jews have nothing of it , though both read the scripture . and those who have no knowledge of the scripture also make similar claims . allah will surely give his judgement on the day of resurrection in all the matters in which they differ .
 when we inspired your mother with that which we inspired .
if the unbelievers had fought you , they would have turned their backs , and then found neither protector nor helper ;
we are best aware of what they wish to hear when they give ear to thee and when they take secret counsel , when the evil-doers say : ye follow but a man bewitched .
therefore when we have recited it , follow its recitation .
and if a slander from the devil wound thee , then seek refuge in allah . lo ! he is hearer , knower .
do they not know that allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and establish prayer and give zakah and bow with those who bow .
therefore call upon allah , being sincere to him in obedience , though the unbelievers are averse :
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with better than it , or return it . allah is the reckoner of all things .
o ye who believe ! give of the good things which ye haveearned , and of the fruits of the earth which we have produced for you , and do not even aim at getting anything which is bad , in order that out of it ye may give away something , when ye yourselves would not receive it except with closed eyes . and know that allah is free of all wants , and worthy of all praise .
those before them belied , and so the torment came on them from directions they perceived not .
and they persisted obstinately in awful sin ,
indeed , he saw him another time
or do they possess the treasuries of the mercy of your lord—the majestic , the giver ?
there hear they never vain discourse , nor lying -
they have also said ,  it , , is only ancient legends , which were written down while they were dictated to him in the mornings and the evenings  .
then we caused them to fall into a deep sleep for many years inside the cave .
and he subjected to you the sun and moon constant upon their courses , and he subjected to you the night and day ,
they will submit to allah on that day , and what they used to fabricate will forsake them .
and spread much corruption therein .
and taught him to express clearly .
o you who believe ! when you are told to make room in the assemblies , make room . allah will give youroom . and when you are told to rise up , or for any other good deed ] , rise up . allah will exalt in degree those of you who believe , and those who have been granted knowledge . and allah is well-acquainted with what you do .
for what offence was she killed ?
then when he was come thereto , he was cried unto . o musa !
if allah succoureth you , there is none that can overcome you ; if he abandon you , who is there that can succour you after him ? and in allah let the believers trust .
we shall show them our portents on the horizons and within themselves until it will be manifest unto them that it is the truth . doth not thy lord suffice , since he is witness over all things ?
it is allah who made your habitations homes of rest and quiet for you ; and made for you , out of the skins of animals , dwellings , which ye find so lightwhen ye travel and when ye stop ; and out of their wool , and their soft fibres , and their hair , rich stuff and articles of conveniencefor a time .
no indeed ! if he does not cease , we shall seize him by the forelock ,
and people are naught but a single nation , so they disagree ; and had not a word already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have certainly been decided between them in respect of that concerning which they disagree .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you should be among the truthful ? 
verily this qur'an guides to the way that is the straight most . to those who believe in it , and do righteous works , it gives the good news that a great reward awaits them ,
and leave alone those who take their religion as play and amusement , and are deceived by the life of this world . but remindwith itlest a person be given up to destruction for that which he has earned , when he will find for himself no protector or intercessor besides allah , and even if he offers every ransom , it will not be accepted from him . such are they who are given up to destruction because of that which they have earned . for them will be a drink of boiling water and a painful torment because they used to disbelieve
do not revile thosewhom they invoke instead of god , lest they , in their hostility , revile god out of ignorance . thus to every people we have caused their actions to seem fair . to their lord they shall all return , and he will declare to them all that they have done .
a chastisement that shall come upon them on the day when allah will raise them all to a new life and will inform them of their deeds . allah has recorded it all while they have forgotten it . allah is a witness over everything .
we have the power to strike them with torment before your very eyes .
wherever you are , death will overtake you , even if you shall be in the fortified , high towers ' if bounty reaches them , they say : 'this is from allah ' but when evil hits them , they say : 'this is from you ' say to them : 'all is from allah ' what is the matter with this people that they scarcely understand any statement .
do they not see that we have given them a sanctuary of safety whereas people around them are being snatched away ? so , do they believe in falsehood and ungratefully deny allah 's bounties ?
ask them ,  who is the lord of the seven heavens and the great throne ? 
o you who believe , obey god and the prophet , and do not waste your deeds .
o thou enwrapped in thy robes ,
but if they turn away . we have not sent youas a hafizover them . your duty is to convey . and verily , when we cause man to taste of mercy from us , he rejoices thereat , but when some ill befalls them because of the deeds which their hands have sent forth , then verily , maningrate !
they will be rewarded the highest position in heaven , the recompense of their patience , and they will be welcomed with honour and greetings of peace .
honest recorders .
who is it who standsover every soul for what it does ? yet they ascribe compeers to god . say :  then name them . or are you announcing to god what he does not know on the earth ? or is it only empty talk ? in fact , the unbelievers ' plots are made to look attractive to them , so that they are held back from the right path . whosoever god allows to go astray has none to show him the way .
he said :  are you averse to my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i shall have you stoned to death . so go away for a while from me . 
and when it is said to them : prostrate to the beneficent allah , they say : and what is the allah of beneficence ? shall we prostrate to what you bid us ? and it adds to their aversion .
and we wished to do a favour to those who were weakin the land , and to make them rulers and to make them the inheritors ,
 and fear allah and disgrace me not . 
therefor , bear with what they say , and celebrate the praise of thy lord ere the rising of the sun and ere the going down thereof . and glorify him some hours of the night and at the two ends of the day , that thou mayst find acceptance .
have they feet to walk with ? have they hands to punish with ? have they eyes to see with ? have they ears to hear with ? say : 'call on your partners and then try to scheme against me . give me no respite .
he said : by no means . so go ye twain with our signs ; verily we shall be with you listening .
those who believe and are aware .
and he is omnipotent over his bondmen and sends guardians over you ; to the extent that when death comes to one of you , our angels remove his soul , and they do not err .
it calls out to him who reverted and turned away .
he said , “ did you believe in him before i have given you permission ? he must be your chief , who taught you magic . you will soon know . i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , and i will crucify you all . ”
tell the believing women to lower their eyes , guard their private parts , and not display their charms except what is apparent outwardly , and cover their bosoms with their veils and not to show their finery except to their husbands or their fathers or fathers-in-law , their sons or step-sons , brothers , or their brothers ' and sisters ' sons , or their women attendants or captives , or male attendants who do not have any need , or boys not yet aware of sex . they should not walk stamping their feet lest they make known what they hide of their ornaments . o believers , turn to god , every one of you , so that you may be successful .
even though god created both you and that which you have made ? 
so it became as black , barren land .
this is the guidance of allah whereby he guideth whomsoever of his bondmen he listeth . and if they had associated , to naught would have come all that they were wont to work .
it is they that say : 'spend nothing on those who follow the messenger of allah until they disperse ' yet to allah belong the treasuries of heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
 'besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? '
or , feeding , in a day of privation ,
behold ! thy lord did declare that he would send against them , to the day of judgment , those who would afflict them with grievous penalty . thy lord is quick in retribution , but he is also oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and he does not fear its outcome .
and the day when we will raise from every nation an army that denies our signs – so the former groups will be held back for the latter to join them .
and he turned away and said : 'alas for joseph ' his eyes turned white with the grief he repressed within him .
but you shall not be recompensed except for what you were doing .
 our lord ! we have heard the call of one callingto faith , 'believe ye in the lord , ' and we have believed . our lord ! forgive us our sins , blot out from us our iniquities , and take to thyself our souls in the company of the righteous .
but when they measure or weigh to others , they cheat .
and early they went , resolved in intent .
did you imagine that we created you without any purpose , and that you will not be brought back to us ? 
by the established house ,
there are advantages for you in them , so that you may satisfy your needs through them , and may be borne upon them and on ships .
do not be like those who went out of their homes full of their own importance , ostentatiously , trying to hinder others from the way of god . but god encompasses all they do .
they say : 'we obey ' , but when they leave your presence a party of them meets by night to plan against what you have said . allah takes note of all their plots . so , let them alone , and put your trust in allah . allah is sufficient as a guardian .
and whatever spoils of war god has given unto his messenger from them , against that you pricked neither horse nor camel ; but god gives authority to his messengers over whomsoever he will . god is powerful over everything .
he said , “ did you believe in him before i have given you permission ? he must be your chief , who has taught you magic . i will cut off your hands and your feet on alternate sides , and i will crucify you on the trunks of the palm-trees . then you will know which of us is more severe in punishment , and more lasting . ”
and let not those who disbelieve think that our granting them respite is better for their souls ; we grant them respite only that they may add to their sins ; and they shall have a disgraceful chastisement .
that on that day when he will call out to them saying :  where are my associates , those whom you imagined to be so ? 
pondered they not over the word ? or came there unto them that which came not unto their fathers ancient ?
then drew near and suspended hung ,
musa said : take me not to task for that forget , and impose not in my affair hardship .
there hear they no vain speaking nor recrimination
thy lord unloosed on them a scourge of chastisement ;
verily this ! that is the supreme achievement .
thus we explain the revelations , and expose the path of the unrighteous .
say :  thatis a great news ,
then the earthquake overtook them , so they became motionless bodies in their abode .
cleaving there with a host !
he knows what is before them , and what is behind them . to god all matters are referred .
what aileth you ? how judge ye ?
said :  go down hence together , one the enemy of the other . then will guidance come to you from me ; and whoever follows my direction will neither be disgraced nor be miserable .
bestower of high ranks , owner of the throne ; it is he who instils the spirit of faith into the one he wills among his bondmen , in order that he may warn of the day of meeting . –
ponder then they not on the qur'an , or are on the hearts locks thereof ?
say , “ we believe in god , and in what was revealed to us ; and in what was revealed to abraham , and ishmael , and isaac , and jacob , and the patriarchs ; and in what was given to moses , and jesus , and the prophets from their lord . we make no distinction between any of them , and to him we submit . ”
believers , fear allah . let every soul look to what it has forwarded for the future , and fear allah , for allah is aware of the things you do .
so we perverted you , for we were perverse . ’
not alike are the blind and the seeing .
say : 'intercession belongs altogether to allah . his is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . to him you shall be returned '
and wait , we too are waiting . 
praise be to allah who hath given me , in my old age , ishmael and isaac ! lo ! my lord is indeed the hearer of prayer .
thamood cried lies in their insolence
that then is god your lord ; there is no god but he , the creator of everything . so serve him , for he is guardian over everything .
so , by dawn it was like a harvested field .
and it was divinely revealed to nooh that “ none of your people will become muslims , except those who have already accepted faith – therefore do not grieve at what they do . ”
the day every soul will find what it has done of good presentand what it has done of evil , it will wish that between itself and thatwas a great distance . and allah warns you of himself , and allah is kind toservants . 
allah ! there is no god but he . surely he shall gather you together on the day of resurrecticn , whereof there is no doubt ; and who is more truthful than allah in discourse ?
he will say : 'would that i had forwardedfor my life ! '
believers , eat the wholesome things which we have provided for you and give thanks to god , if it is him you worship .
allah causes the night and the day to succeed each other . truly , in these things is indeed a lesson for those who have insight .
have they not observed things that allah has created , their shadows incline to the right and to the left , making prostration unto allah , and they are lowly ?
and those who believe say : why has not a chapter been revealed ? but when a decisive chapter is revealed , and fighting is mentioned therein you see those in whose hearts is a disease look to you with the look of one fainting because of death . woe to them then !
remaining in it . evil is their burden on the day of resurrection
he said : do you know how you treated yusuf and his brother when you were ignorant ?
so standyoufirm and straightas you are commanded and thosewho turn in repentancewith you , and transgress not . verily , he is all-seer of what you do .
the day the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in groups ,
but they will say : 'no , it is you that has no welcome . it was you who brought it upon us , an evil place '
hameem .
or enjoins righteousness ?
and we know well that they say : only a man teacheth him . the speech of him at whom they falsely hint is outlandish , and this is clear arabic speech .
do they say : 'he has forged it ' . say : 'compose one chapter like it , and call upon whom you will , other than allah , if what you say is true '
so do you see any remaining trace of them ?
and those who no longer expect menstruation among your women - if you doubt , then their period is three months , andthose who have not menstruated . and for those who are pregnant , their term is until they give birth . and whoever fears allah - he will make for him of his matter ease .
no blame there is upon the prophet in that which allah hath decreed for him . that hath been allah 's dispensation with those who have passed away afore - and the ordinance of allah hath been a destiny destined
on the earth , and in yourselves ,
is he like unto him who resteth upon an evidence from his lord , so and there rehearseth it a witness from him and before it was the book of musa , a pattern and a mercy ; these believe therein ; and whosoever of the sects disbelieveth therein , the fire is his promised place . be then thou not in dubitation thereof , verily it is the truth from thy lord , yet most of the mankind believe not .
and most surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
for when his back is turned he goes about spreading disorder in the land , destroying fields and flocks ; but god does not love disorder .
that they would prostrate themselves before allah who brings to light all that is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows all that you conceal and all that you reveal .
but nay ! i swear by the lord of the rising-places and the setting-places of the planets that we verily are able
and for everyone is a direction for which he turns . so race in goodness . and wherever you are , allah will bring you all together . he has power over all things .
allah encompasses them all from behind .
“ from the evil of the one who instils evil thoughts in the hearts – and stays hidden . ”
some of the people of the book wish to lead you astray but they only lead themselves astray , though they do not realise it .
this is an exposition for mankind , and a guidance , and an admonition for such as are godfearing .
if any one does evil or wrongs his own soul but afterwards seeks allah 's forgiveness , he will find allah oft-forgiving , most merciful .
if you divorce them before you have touched them and have appointed the bridal money , then payment of half of what is agreed is ordained unless the women forgo some of it , or he in whose hand is the marriage tie , pays more ; and o men , your paying more is closer to piety ; and do not forget the favours to each other ; indeed allah is seeing what you do .
those whose effort is lost in worldly life , while they think that they are doing well in work . 
he is created from a water gushing forth .
their prayers at the sacred house are nothing but whistling and clapping of hands .  so taste the punishment because of your denial . 
all this as a provision for you and your cattle .
the believers are those who believe in god and his messenger , who do not change their belief into doubt and who strive hard for the cause of god with their property and persons . they are the truthful ones  .
muhammad is the prophet of god ; and those who are with him are severe with infidels but compassionate among themselves . you may see them kneeling and bowing in reverence , seeking his favour and acceptance . their mark is on their foreheads from the effect of prostrations . their likeness in the torah , and their likeness in the gospel , is like a seed that sends out a stalk , then makes it firm , and it becomes strong and rises straight upon its stem , gladdening the cultivator 's heart , in order to fill the unbelievers with dismay . god has promised those who believe and do the right forgiveness and a great reward .
who made for you the earth a bedand the sky a ceiling and sent down from the sky , rain and brought forth thereby fruits as provision for you . so do not attribute to allah equals while you know .
a day on which their scheming will not benefit them at all , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed our messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
death to those whose opinions are merely baseless conjectures .
none except allah can avert it .
so put not forward similitudes for allah . truly ! allah knows and you know not .
allah is creator of all things , and he is guardian over all things .
say to my servants who believe , that they perform the prayer , and expend of that we have provided them , secretly and in public , before a day comes wherein shall be neither bargaining nor befriending .
people , worship your lord who created you and those who lived before you , so that you may become pious .
he said , “ my lord ! the way you have bestowed favour upon me , so never will i be a supporter of the guilty . ”
he did not stay for longand said , ‘ i have alighted on something which you have not alighted on , and i have brought you from sheba a definite report .
 he is only a man who has invented a lie against allah , but we are not going to believe in him . 
it is only those who hearthat accept faith ; and allah will raise these people dead of heart , then towards him they will be herded .
such is the punishment ; but greater is the punishment in the hereafter , - if only they knew !
now we have tried them , even as we tried the owners of the garden when they swore they would pluck in the morning
yielding its fruit in every season by the permission of its lord ? and allah sets forth parables for men that they may be mindful .
believers , call to mind allah 's favour to you when enemy hosts invaded you . then we sent against them a wind and hosts that you did not see although allah was observing all that you were then doing .
believers , spend for the cause of god from the good things that you earn and from what we have made the earth yield for you . do not even think of spending for the cause of god worthless things that you yourselves would be reluctant to accept . know that god is self-sufficient and glorious .
and it is allah who isdeity in the heaven , and on the earthdeity . and he is the wise , the knowing .
it is he who has raised among the illiterate , a messenger from themselves , to recite to them his verses , to purify them , and to teach them the book and the wisdom , though before that they were in clear error ,
on the day of resurrection you will see those who attributed lies to allah with their faces blackened . is not theabode of the arrogant in hell ?
by the night when it approaches
and you did the deed which you did . you are certainly ungrateful . 
they worship besides allah that for which he has not sent down any authority , and of which they have no knowledge . the wrongdoers will have no helper .
because he is a possessor of wealth and children ,
from those , too , who call themselves christians , we did take a covenant , but they forgot a good part of the message that was sent them : so we estranged them , with enmity and hatred between the one and the other , to the day of judgment . and soon will allah show them what it is they have done .
alas the woe for you , alas !
a surahwhich we have sent down and which we have enjoined , and in it we have revealed manifest ayat , that you may remember .
nay ! if he desist not , we would certainly smite his forehead ,
we shall narrate their account to you accurately ; they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased the guidance for them .
that we may rain upon them stones of clay ,
he said , “ condemnation and wrath have befallen you from your lord . are you arguing with me over names , which you and your ancestors invented , for which god sent down no authority ? just wait ; i am waiting with you . ”
and they will cry :  o malik ! let your lord make an end of us .  he will say :  verily you shall abide forever . 
except his wife ; we ordained that she shall surely be of those who remain behind .
and also in yourselves . can you not see ?
in response , he turned away along with his army and said , “ he is a magician or a madman . ”
on an unfortunate day we sent upon them a continuous violent wind
he said : my lord ! verily have called my people night and day .
and then the promise that is given to them , does come upon them-
said :  o my lord ! expand me my breast ;
we know best what they listen to when they listen to you , and when they take counsel secretly , when the unjust say : you follow only a man deprived of reason .
or , who answers the distressed one when he calls upon him and removes the evil , and he will make you successors in the earth . is there a god with allah ? little is it that you mind !
which then blow violently in tempestuous gusts ,
a proclamation from allah and his messenger , to the people on the day of the grand pilgrimage ; 'allah rejects , and his messengerthe idolaters . so if you repent , that will be better for you ; but if you turn your backs , know that you can not frustrate allah . and give glad tidings to the unbelievers of a painful punishment ,
, say ,  god has spoken the truth . follow the upright tradition of abraham who was not an idolater . 
who created you , fashioned you perfectly , and gave you due proportion ;
and the sun and moon are conjoined ,
have they not travelled in the land and seen how was the end of those before them while they were stronger than these in power ? and allah is not such that any thing in the heavens or in the earth should escape him ; surely he is knowing , powerful .
it has been revealed to thee , and to those before thee , 'if thou associatest other gods with god , thy work shall surely fail and thou wilt be among the losers . '
whoever ignores my guidance will live a woeful life and will be brought in our presence blind on the day of judgment .
we have spread out the earth and set upon it firm mountains . everything we have caused to grow therein is justly weighed ;
 whosoever desires what hastes away , we hasten to give himas much as we please to whosoever we will ; but afterwards there is hell for him in which he will burn , disgraced and ostracised .
it is allah who sends forth winds which then set the clouds in motion , which we drive to some dead land giving a fresh life to earth after it had become dead . such will be the resurrection of the dead .
he certainly has a strong love for wealth and riches .
believers , there are enemies to you from among your spouses and your off-spring , so beware of them . but if you forgive and overlook their offences and pardon them , then surely allah is most forgiving , most compassionate .
therefor , let not him turn thee aside fromit who believeth not therein but followeth his own desire , lest thou perish .
you are not able to frustrate him in the earth ; and , apart from god , you have neither protector nor helper .
when the earth is violently shaken
how many an animal there is that does not carry its own provision . allah provides them and you , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
when my devotees enquire of you about me , i am near , and answer the call of every supplicant when he calls . it behoves them to hearken to me and believe in me that they may follow the right path .
o believers , your slaves and those of your children , who have not yet become sex conscious , must ask your permission before coming in to see you on three occasions : before the fajr prayer and at noon when you put off your clothes and after the ` isha ' prayer . these are your three times of privacy . there is no sin for you or for them if they come without permission at other times than these , for you have to visit : ne another over and over again . in this way allah makes his comm andments clear to you for he is all-knowing , all-wise .
say : ' o mankind , i am the messenger of allah to you all . his is the kingdom in the heavens and the earth . there is no god except he . he revives and causes to die . therefore , believe in allah and his messenger , the unlettered prophet , who believes in allah and his words . follow him in order that you are guided . '
on seeing the confederate tribes , the believers said ,  this is what god and his messenger had promised us . the promise of god and his messenger is true .  this only strengthens their faith and their desire of submission to the will of god .
indeed , he had thought he would never return .
satan swore before them that he was giving them good advice .
and they say , “ we have believed in it. ” but how can they attain it from a distant place ?
the building which they built will never cease to be a cause of hypocrisy and doubt in their hearts , unless their hearts are cut to pieces . . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
obey god and his messenger , and avoid dissension , lest you falter and are no longer held in awe . have patience : god is with those who are patient .
believe in my revelationsthat confirms what i revealed to you . do not be the first ones to deny it nor sell my revelations for a small price , but have fear of me .
after a time satan tempted them with that tree to disobey . our command and brought them out of the state they were in , and we decreed ,  now , go down all of you from here ; you are enemies of one another . henceforth you shall dwell and provide for yourselves on the earth for a specified period . 
, if you keep doing good -whether openly or secretly -or at least pardon the evil . allah is all-pardoning and he has all the power to chastise .
or have they taken guardians besides him ? but allah is the guardian , and he gives life to the dead , and he has power over all things .
it isa register inscribed .
at the same time those who have been given knowledge may know that this is the truth from your lord , and come to believe in it , and their hearts become submissive to him . verily god guides those who believe , to the even path .
into whatsoever form he will , he casteth thee .
:  eat of the good things we have given you for food , and do not exceed the boundsin this , or my wrath will surely fall upon you ; and he who incurs my wrath will fall into the abyss .
indeed , it is we who bring the dead to life and record what they have put forth and what they left behind , and all things we have enumerated in a clear register .
marry those among you who are single , or the virtuous ones among yourselves , male or female : if they are in poverty , allah will give them means out of his grace : for allah encompasseth all , and he knoweth all things .
whose life i have made run smoothly
: taste ! lo ! thou wast forsooth the mighty , the noble !
do they not see that , among the things which our hands have fashioned , we have created for them cattle of which they are the masters ,
and worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him , and be good to parents , and to relatives , and orphans , and the needy , and the related neighbour and the unrelated neighbour , and the close companion and the traveller ; and your bondwomen ; indeed allah does not like any boastful , proud person . –
lo ! as for my slaves , thou hast no power over any of them save such of the froward as follow thee ,
when you return to them , they will swear to you by allah that you might turn aside from them . let them alone , they are unclean . gehenna shall be their refuge , a recompense for their earnings .
or shall man have whatever he fancies ?
known to him is the treachery of the eye , and what the breasts conceal .
is not the time ripe for the hearts of those who believe to submit to allah 's reminder and to the truth which is revealed , that they become not as those who received the scripture of old but the term was prolonged for them and so their hearts were hardened , and many of them are evil-livers .
nor has he any equal . ’
there is indeed a moral for you in the cattle : we give you to drink of that which is in their bellies , and you have many uses in them , and you eat some of them ,
and he had recited it unto them , they would not have believed in it .
and his people came unto him rushing on toward him , and afore they were wont to work vices . he said . o my people ! these are my daughters : purer are they for you ; so fear allah , and humiliate me not in the face of my guests ; is there not among you any man right-minded ?
to bring thee every cunning sorcerer . '
do not use your property among yourselves in illegal ways and then deliberately bribe the rulers with your property so that you may wrongly acquire the property of others .
these are verses of the wise book .
said  get out from thisdisgraced and expelled . whoever of themwill follow you , then surely i will fill hell with you all . 
then your hearts became as hard as rock or even harder : for , there are rocks from which streams gush forth ; and , there are some that cleave asunder and water flows out from them , while others fall down for fear of god . god is not unaware of what you do .
a fitting requital ,
like pharaoh 's folk , and the people before him , who disbelieved in god 's signs ; god seized them because of their sins ; god is strong , terrible in retribution .
it is god who has made the night for you to rest and the day for you to see . god is benevolent to the human being , but most people do not give him due thanks .
the wrong-doers shall receive a portion of the chastisements as their fellows . so let them not rush me .
the wife of imran said , “ my lord , i have vowed to you what is in my womb , dedicated , so accept from me ; you are the hearer and knower . ”
how , then , will they fare when we shall gather them all together to witness the day aboutwhich there is no doubt , and when every human being shall be repaid in full for what he has done , and none shall be wronged ?
the unbelievers planned to imprison , murder or expel youfrom your city . they make evil plans but god too plans and god 's plans are the best .
surely we have revealed to you the book with the truth for the sake of men ; so whoever follows the right way , it is for his own soul and whoever errs , he errs only to its detriment ; and you are not a custodian over them .
, glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and when paradise shall be brought close to the god-fearing , and will no longer be far away ,
others waiting allah ’ s edict : either he shall punish them , or turn to them clemently , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
but nay ! i swear by the stars ,
and indeed we brought to them a book , which we have explained in detail with a great knowledge – a guidance and a mercy for people who believe .
alikeamong you is he who concealswords and he who speaks them openly , and he who hides himself by night andgoes forth by day .
thus have we sent down clear signs ; and verily allah doth guide whom he will !
so when stars are effaced .
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
those who hearken to their lord , and establish regular prayer ; whotheir affairs by mutual consultation ; who spend out of what we bestow on them for sustenance ;
and we shall leave them on that day surging one against anot her and the trumpet shall be blown , and then we shall assemble them together .
thamud and a'ad disbelieved in the judgment to come .
like those before you ; they were stronger than you in power and more abundant in wealth and children . they enjoyed their portion , and you have enjoyed your portion as those before you enjoyed their portion , and you have engagedlike that in which they engaged.those whose deeds have become worthless in this world and in the hereafter , and it is they who are the losers .
their end is , both are in the fire , there dwelling forever ; that is the recompense of the evildoers .
on the day they meet him , their greeting shall be 'peace ' a generous recompense he has prepared for them .
those who came with the slander are a band of you ; do not reckon it evil for you ; rather it is good for you . every man of them shall have the sin that he has earned charged to him ; and whosoever of them took upon himself the greater part of it , him there awaits a mighty chastisement .
it was we that made the hills declare , in unison with him , our praises , at eventide and at break of day ,
when the apostles lost hope and they thought that they had been told lies , our help came to them , and we delivered whomever we wished , and our punishment will not be averted from the guilty lot .
and they believed ; so we permitted them to enjoyfor a while .
his is the dominion of the heavens and earth . he gives life and causes death , and he is over all things competent .
thereat the angels prostrated , all of them together ,
o you who believe ! believe in allah , and his messenger , and the bookwhich he has sent down to his messenger , and the scripture which he sent down to those before , and whosoever disbelieves in allah , his angels , his books , his messengers , and the last day , then indeed he has strayed far away .
we gave moses our guidance , and made the children of israel the inheritors of the book --
 my fellow-prisoners can many different masters be considered better than one all-dominant god ?
they said : o our people ! lo ! we have heard a scripture which hath been revealed after moses , confirming that which was before it , guiding unto the truth and a right road .
we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with the truth , and for a fixed term ; and the disbelievers have turned away from what they are warned !
when the caravan left egypt , their father said * , “ indeed i sense the fragrance of yusuf , if you do not call me senile . ”
that was a nation that has passed away . theirs is what they earned , and yours what you have earned . you shall not be questioned about what they did .
so fear you god , and obey you me . '
and makes men go through trials in order that he might purge the believers and blot out those who deny the truth .
when your lord asked all the offspring of adam ,  am i not your lord ?  all of them testified and bore witness to their testimony that on the day of judgment they would not say ,  we were not aware of this , 
say :  if there had been other alihaalong with him as they assert , then they would certainly have sought out a way to the lord of the throne .
these are the real gainers ,
when moses ’ indignation abated , he picked up the tablets whose inscriptions contained guidance and mercy for those who are in awe of their lord .
sent noah to his people to warn them before the painful punishment came upon them .
when they came at you from above you and from below you , and when eyes shifted , and hearts reached the throats and you assumed about allahassumptions .
god created every living creature from water . some of them crawl on their bellies , and some walk on two feet , and others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god is capable of everything .
so do not call upon another god with allah , lest you should be one of those who are punished .
and when it is said to them ,  do not cause corruption on the earth ,  they say ,  we are but reformers . 
do they not prostrate themselves to allah who brings forth all that is concealed in the heavens and earth and he knows what they hide and what they reveal ?
say ,  it is he who has produced you and made for you hearing and vision and hearts ; little are you grateful . 
indeed i want you to obtainmy sin and your sin so you will be among the companions of the fire . and that is the recompense of wrongdoers . 
but abiding is the glory of your lord , full of majesty and beneficence .
and the heaven will split , for that day it is infirm .
lo , the agony of death has indeed come with the truth . that is what you had sought to avoid .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you up while it shakes ?
and my chest will become constricted and my tongue will not be loosed , therefore , send to aaron .
and when we make life pleasant unto man , he turneth away and is averse ; and when ill toucheth him he is in despair .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since theyhave not produced witnesses ! then with allah they are the liars .
and believe not any but him who follows your religion . ' say : 'the true guidance is god 's guidance -- that anyone should be given the like of what you have been given , or dispute with you before your lord . ' say : 'surely bounty is in the hand of god ; he gives it unto whomsoever he will ; and god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
with your lord alone will be the retreat that day .
whoso bringeth a good deed will have better than its worth ; and such are safe from fear that day .
above them will be a covering of fire , below them a cloud . with this does god warn his creatures :  o my creatures , fear me . 
so we gave him back to his mother that her eye might be refreshed , and that she might no grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true , but most of them do not know .
surely we have sent down the koran on thee , a sending down ;
do they not know that whoever acts in opposition to allah and his apostle , he shall surely have the fire of hell to abide in it ? that is the grievous abasement .
and who doth more wrong than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but turns away from them , forgetting thewhich his hands have sent forth ? verily we have set veils over their hearts lest they should understand this , and over their ears , deafness , if thou callest them to guidance , even then will they never accept guidance .
surely allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks as if they were a firm and compact wall .
remember when you fled , not caring for anyone , even though the messenger was calling you from your rear . then he repaid you with sorrow upon sorrow , so that you would not grieve over what you missed , or for what afflicted you . god is informed of what you do .
he will say ,  by allah , you almost ruined me .
or take the case of the one who passed by a township that had fallen down upon its roofs . he exclaimed ,  how shall allah bring back to life this township that has become dead ?  at this allah caused him to die and he lay dead for a hundred years . then allah brought him back to life and asked him ,  how long have you lain here ?  he answered .  i might have lain here for a day or a few hours .  allah said ,  nay , you have been lying here in this state for a hundred years : now , just have a look at your food and your drink ; they have not become spoiled in the least . then have a look at your ass , and we have done this in order to make you a sign for the people . look , how we raise up the skeleton and set the bonesand cover them with flesh and .  and when the reality became manifest to him , he said ,  i know that allah has power over everything . 
that is their sum of knowledge . indeed , your lord is most knowing of who strays from his way , and he is most knowing of who is guided .
as for those who believe and do good works , the gardens of paradise shall be there to welcome them ;
—on that day you will see the guilty bound together in chains ,
and that some of us are good and others of us are below that : we are sects following different ways :
“ therefore eat and drink and appease your eyes ; so if you meet any person then say , ‘ i have pledged a fastto the most gracious – i will therefore not speak to any person today . ’ ”
they ask thee , , what they shall spend . say : that which ye spend for goodto parents and near kindred and orphans and the needy and the wayfarer . and whatsoever good ye do , lo ! allah is aware of it .
who createth , then disposeth ;
god makes unlawful interest devoid of all blessings and causes charity to increase . god does not love sinful unbelievers .
and when you are journeying in the land , there is no fault in you that you shorten the prayer if you fear that those who disbelieve will afflict you . indeed , the unbelievers are a clear enemy for you .
and when it was said to them : “ surely allah 's promise is true , and there is no doubt regarding the hour of resurrection , ” you were wont to say : “ we do not know what the houris . we are simply making conjectures and are not at all certain . ”
that the hearts of those who disbelieve in the hereafter may incline to such , and that they may remain pleased with it , and that they may commit what they are committing .
and lo ! we had supposed that humankind and jinn would not speak a lie concerning allah -
so will he who will not have a shield except his own face against the wretched punishment on the day of resurrection , ever be equal to one who is forgiven ? and it will be said to the unjust , “ taste what you have earned ! ”
 but conveyancefrom allah and his messages , and whosoever disobeys allah and his messenger , then verily , for him is the fire of hell , he shall dwell therein forever . 
there were nine tribes in the city spreading evil without any reform in the land .
if then it be lit upon that the twain had been guilty of a sin , then two othershall take their place from among those who were sinned against , the two nearest of kin , and they shall swear by allah affirming : our testimony is worthier of credit than their testimony and we have not trespassed , for then verily we shall be of the wrong-doers .
and when he knows anything of our verses , he takes them in ridicule . those will have a humiliating punishment .
and whatupon them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah provided for them ? and allah is ever , about them , knowing .
none except the disbelievers dispute the signs of allah , therefore do not let their free movements in the land deceive you .
and will not prostrate when the quran is recited to them ?
‘ these are indeed a small band .
peace it is ; until the rise of dawn .
making it a reminder for you , for all attentive ears to retain .
then we would have let you taste the double of life and death ; and you would have found none to help you against us .
noah 's folk denied the messengers ,
nay , but that hath become clear unto them which before they used to hide . and if they were sent back they would return unto that which they are forbidden . lo ! they are liars .
they are the people who are rightly following their lord and it is they who shall be successful .
those who deliver the messages of god , and fear him , and never fear anyone except god . god is sufficient as a reckoner .
and casts out what is in it , and becomes empty .
people ask you to pronounce a ruling concerning inheritance from those who have left behind no lineal heirs . say : 'allah pronounces for you the ruling : should a man die childless but have a sister , she shall have one half of what he has left behind ; and should the sister die childless , his brother shall inherit her . and if the heirs are two sisters , they shall have two-thirds of what he has left behind . and if the heirs are sisters and brothers , then the male shall have the share of two females . allah makesclear to you lest you go astray . allah has full knowledge of everything .
the quran is a reminder to you and to your people and you will soon be questioned about it .
they portray that they are doing a great favour to youby having become muslims ; say , “ do not think that you have done me a favour by accepting islam ; in fact allah has bestowed a favour upon you , for he guided you to islam , if you are truthful . ”
and this was our argument which we vouchsafed unto ibrahim against his people . we raise in degrees whomsoever we list ; verily thy lord is wise , knowing .
dhu l-qarnayn said ,  this barrier is a blessing from my lord but when his promise comes to pass he will level it to the ground ; his promise always comes true . 
there is no one in the heavens and the earth but comes before ar-rahman in all obedience .
our fathers and we have been given such promises before . these are no more than ancient legends . 
and when , chained infetters , they are cast into some narrow space of the fire , they will call out for destruction .
o prophet , tell the captives you have taken :  if god finds some good in your hearts , he will reward you with something better than was taken away from you , and forgive your sins , for god is forgiving and kind . 
there was a group of my servants among you who always prayed : lord , forgive us and grant us mercy ; you are the best of those who show mercy .
but when he gives them a good , they ascribe partners to him concerning that which he has given them . exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
and lot , when he said to his people 'surely you commit such indecency as never any being in all the world committed before you .
and the horn will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will fall dead except whom allah wills . then it will be blown again , and at once they will be standing , looking on .
andwhen we said to the angels :  prostrate unto adam .  they prostrated except iblis . he said :  shall i prostrate to one whom you created from clay ? 
therefore give the relative his right , and to the needy , and to the traveller ; this is better for those who seek the pleasure of allah ; and it is they who are the successful .
and we showed them not a sign except that it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with affliction that perhaps they might return .
verily allah is my lord ; and your lord , wherefore worship him ; this is the straight path .
that is so . and whosoever chastiseth the like of that whereby he was injured , and thereafter he hath been ogain oppressed , surely allah will succour him : verily allah is pardoning , forgiving .
so be patient , as the messengers with resolve were patient , and do not be hasty regarding them . on the day when they witness what they are promised , it will seem as if they had lasted only for an hour of a day . a proclamation : will any be destroyed except the sinful people ?
. god is too glorious and exalted to be considered as they believe him to be . he is the most high and great .
that day , the people will depart separatedto be showntheir deeds .
we subjected to solomon the stormy wind , which blew at his behest towards the land which we had blessed . for it is we who have knowledge of all things --
now when ye meet in battle those who disbelieve , then it is smiting of the necks until , when ye have routed them , then making fast of bonds ; and afterward either grace or ransom till the war lay down its burdens . that . and if allah willed he could have punished thembutthat he may try some of you by means of others . and those who are slain in the way of allah , he rendereth not their actions vain .
indeed for those who believed and did good deeds , is a limitless reward .
it is he who made the earth a bed for you , and traced for you paths upon it , and sends down water from the sky , and brings out through it every kind of vegetation
and fear him who created you and the masses of old . ”
most surely in this is a message to a people who serve
he said ,  have you given me good tidings although old age has come upon me ? then of whatdo you inform ? 
other than allah , and guide them to the path of hell !
they make the jinn partners of allah , though he has created them , and carve out sons and daughters for him , without any knowledge . immaculate is he and exalted above what they allege !
verily , we have inspired youas we inspired nuhand the prophets after him ; weinspired ibrahim , isma'il , ishaque , ya'qub , and al-asbat ] , 'iesa , ayub , yunus , harun , and sulaiman , and to dawudwe gave the zabur .
said :  mylittle son ! relate not thy vision to thy brothers , lest they concoct a plot against thee : for satan is to man an avowed enemy !
and gave a little , and held back ?
or make you see the end that we had promised them , for we have full power over them .
and indeed , those cities areon an established road .
we know best who deserves greater suffering in hell fire .
many a face will be glittering on that day .
what ! do you come to the males and commit robbery on the highway , and you commit evil deeds in your assemblies ? but nothing was the answer of his people except that they said : bring on us allah 's punishment , if you are one of the truthful .
and be not infirm , and be not grieving , and you shall have the upper hand if you are believers .
a sign for them is the night , which we strip of daylight , and , behold , they find themselves in the dark !
those unto whom they cry beside allah created naught , but are themselves created .
indeed before that we subjected the pharaonites to the same test . a noble messenger came to them
just ask their opinion : are they the more difficult to create , or thebeings we have created ? them have we created out of a sticky clay !
it is alike to them whether you beg forgiveness for them or do not beg forgiveness for them ; allah will never forgive them ; surely allah does not guide the transgressing people .
for the rebellious ones and they will live therein for ages .
and fear the fire , which has been prepared for the disbelievers .
they desired to outwit him ; so we made them the lower ones .
to the believers , as a parable , god has told the story of the wife of the pharaoh who said ,  lord , establish for me a house in paradise in your presence . rescue me from pharaoh and his deeds and save me from the unjust people .
you will see the evil-doers full of fear of what they deserve , yet it will come to pass . but those who believe and do the right will be in gardens of paradise . they will receive what they wish from their lord ; and this will be the greatest favour .
and said , “ this is nothing but magic learnt from earlier men . ”
those who hold the life of this world dearer than that of the next , who obstruct the path of god and seek obliquity in it , have wandered far into error .
the day he will gather you together on the day of gathering , will be the day of judgement . he who believed and did the right , will have his evil deeds expunged by god and admitted to gardens with rivers flowing by , and abide there perpetually . this will be the great achievement of success .
and the judgement shall doubtlessly take place .
do not entrust your properties - which allah hasmade a means of support for you - to the weak of understanding , but maintain and clothe them out of it , and say to them a kind word of admonition .
to the thamud we sent their brother salih . he said ,  my people , worship god ! you have no god but him . it was he who brought you into being from the earth and settled you upon it and so ask his forgiveness . turn to him in repentance . my lord is near and responsive . 
ha mim !
admonished is he indeed who feareth ,
then will they be hurled therein , they and the seducers
indeed , we have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you , just as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
that ranin our sight , as a reward for him who was rejected .
say thou . ask of you no hire for this , save that whosoever will may take unto his lord a way .
as a reward from us ; this is how we reward one who gives thanks .
do on your part what you can , o people , i will do what i will . you will come to know who suffers the punishment that would put him to shame , and who is the liar . so watch ; i am watching with you . 
pharaoh pursued them with his hosts , but they were submerged by the sea , which was destined to overwhelm them .
he will pray for annihilation
andmount sinai
and that he will bring about the second creation ;
for thewho asks and him who is prevented ;
it is only those who believe not in the signs of allah who fabricate lie , and those ! they are the liars .
then they hamstrung her ; and then they became regretful .
take charity from their possessions to cleanse them and purify them thereby , and bless them . indeed your blessing is a comfort to them , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
“ this is the hell which you used to give the lie to . ”
then it shall be said to the evildoers : 'taste the punishment of eternity ! shall you be recompensed except according to what you earned '
you and whatever you worship
have fear of god and obey me .
who does greater wrong than the one who fabricates a lie against god ? such people shall be brought before their lord , and the witnesses will say ,  these are the ones who lied about their lord .  surely god 's rejection is merited by such wrongdoers .
allah doth enlarge , or grant bymeasure , the sustenanceto whomso he pleaseth.rejoice in the life of this world : but the life of this world is but little comfort in the hereafter .
the knowledge of the hour rests solely with him . not a fruit comes forth from its sheath , nor does any female conceive nor give birth to a child but it is in his knowledge . on that day he will call out to them : “ where are those associates of mine ? ” they will answer : “ we have declared to you that none of us can bear witness to that . ”
then verily ye , o ye erring , denying people .
have they taken other deities besides him ? say to them ,  bring your proofs . this is the reminder of those who are with me and the reminder of those who were before me .  but most of them do not know the truth , and so they turn away from it .
have you seen the one who turned away
they question you concerning the hour , when will it set in ? say , ‘ its knowledge is only with my lord : none except him shall manifest it at its time . it will weigh heavy on the heavens and the earth . it will not overtake you but suddenly. ’ they ask you as if you were in the know of it . say , ‘ its knowledge is only with allah , but most people do not know . ’
they replied :  it is all the same for us whether you admonish us or not .
and you devour the inheritance greedily ,
surely yes , why not ? indeed his lord is seeing him .
“ you were indeed neglectful of this , so we have removed the veil for you , and your eyesight is sharp this day . ”
and beware a day whereon we will make the mountains to pass , and thou wilt see the earth away plain , and we shall gather them , and we shall leave of them not one .
he said , “ what ! you worship , instead of allah , one that neither benefits you nor harms you ? ”
without a doubt god knows what they keep secret and what they publish ; he loves not those that wax proud .
to him is referred the knowledge of the hour . no fruit emerges from its sheath , and no female conceives or delivers , except with his knowledge . and on the day when he calls out to them , “ where are my associates ? ” they will say , “ we admit to you , none of us is a witness . ”
what has come upon you that you do not fear the majesty of god ,
he is the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the lord of the eastern regions .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah and to the prophets after him , and we revealed toabraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob and the tribes , jesus , job , jonah , aaron , and solomon , and we gave to david the psalms .
say :  he is god the one the most unique ,
be moderate in your stride and lower your voice . verily the most disgusting of all voices is the braying of the donkey . ”
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses you shall not find any helper for him .
and thy people belie it , while it is certain to befall . say thou : i am not over you a trustee .
 who has , out of his bounty , settled us in a home that will last : no toil nor sense of weariness shall touch us therein . 
he who does evil or wrongs himself and then asks forgiveness of allah will find that allah is the forgiver , the most merciful .
will you not fight against those who broke their pledges and did all they could to drive the messenger away and initiated hostilities against you ? do you fear them ? surely allah has greater right that you should fear him , if you are true believers .
say , ‘ it has been sent down by him who knows the hidden in the heavens and the earth . indeed he is all-forgiving , all-merciful . ’
they ascribe daughters to allah exaltations to him ! but they themselves would have what they desire !
there will circulate among themboysfor them , as if they were pearls well-protected .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind ; but most of man kind know not .
o you who have believed , obey allah and his messenger and do not turn from him while you hear .
indeed we see the turning of your face to heaven , so we shall surely turn you to a qiblah which you shall like ; turn then your face towards the sacred mosque , and wherever you are , turn your face towards it , and those who have been given the book most surely know that it is the truth from their lord ; and allah is not at all heedless of what they do .
or have we given them a book before the qur'an to which they are adhering ?
but those who had been endowed with knowledge and faith shall say : “ according to allah 's record you have stayed till the day of resurrection . now , this is the day of resurrection . but you did not know . ”
we said ,  adam , is an enemy to you and to your wife . let him not turn you both out of paradise and thus make you come to grief .
thus indeed it was . we had full knowledge of him .
and remember god ’ s blessings upon you , and his covenant which he covenanted with you ; when you said , “ we hear and we obey. ” and remain conscious of god , for god knows what the hearts contain .
 so eat and drink and cooleye . and if thou dost see any man , say , ' i have vowed a fast tomost gracious , and this day will i enter into not talk with any human being ' 
and that it is hewho destroyed the former 'ad ,
in which they will not hear any lewd speech .
the woman and the man guilty of illegal sexual intercourse , flog each of them with a hundred stripes . let not pity withhold you in their case , in a punishment prescribed by allah , if you believe in allah and the last day . and let a party of the believers witness their punishment . .
saying a word that is kind , and forgiving is better than charity that hurts.god is affluent and kind .
he said : verily ye are a people stranger .
and invoke thou not any other god along with allah . there is no god but he . everything is perishable save his countenance his is the judgment , and unto him ye shall be returned .
and we braced their hearts when they stood forth and said : our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; never we shall call upon a god beside him ; for then we shall be saying an abomination .
'indeed , i fear for you the chastisement of a dreadful day . '
nay ! surely , theywill be veiled from seeing their lord that day .
so on that day , none will punishas his punishment ,
‘ felicitous is he who purifies himself ,
have you not consideredyour lord , how he extends the shade ? and if he had pleased he would certainly have made it stationary ; then we have made the sun an indication of it
and penetrate deep into a host .
among the people is he who argues about god without knowledge , and follows every defiant devil .
and we are a host on our guard '
and when eisa came to them with clear signs , he said , “ i have come to you with wisdom , and to explain to you some of the matters regarding which you dispute ; therefore fear allah , and obey me . ”
leavesin , open and secret . verily , those who commit sin will get due recompense for that which they used to commit .
then he who is given his record in his right hand will exclaim ,  here is my record , read it .
plead with your lord for forgiveness , then turn to him penitently . he will provide you with a good provision for a specified term and grant his grace to every meritorious person . but if you turn your backs , indeed i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day .
and by the dawn when it brightens ,
and when the wild animals are made to go forth ,
he said , “ what do you have to say , o samarian ? ”
nor are the living and the dead . god causes whom he will to hear him , but you can not make those who are in their graves hear you .
alif , lam , ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
aaron replied ,  son of my mother , do not seize me by my beard or head . i was afraid that you might consider me responsible for causing discord among the children of israel and would not pay attention to my words . 
he said : but this , their chief hath done it . so question them , if they can speak .
say thou : naught shall ever befall us save that which allah hath ordained for us ; he is our patron , and on allah let the believers rely .
and verily before that , just before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair !
is not hewho made the earth a fixed abode , and placed rivers in the folds thereof , and placed firm hills therein , and hath set a barrier between the two seas ? is there any allah beside allah ? nay , but most of them know not !
we have given you the seven dualand the mighty holy reading .
it will be but a single saihah , so behold ! they will all be brought up before us !
and they say : our hearts are under coverings from that to which you call us , and there is a heaviness in our ears , and a veil hangs between us and you , so work , we too are working .
the all-merciful , the all-compassionate ,
had we sent down this quran on a mountain , you would certainly have seen it falling down , splitting asunder because of the fear of allah , and we set forth these parables to men that they may reflect .
he can not be questioned for his acts , but they will be questioned .
and for allah only are the hidden things of the heavens and the earth , and the matter of resurrection is not but like the batting of an eyelid – in fact closer than this ; indeed allah is able to do all things .
my lord ! bestow hukmanon me , and join me with the righteous ;
when it is said to them : 'follow what allah has sent down ' they reply : 'no , rather we will follow that which we found our fathers upon ' what ! even though satan is inviting them to the punishment of the fire !
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things . there is no god except he . how then can you turn away from him ?
we said : fear not ! verily thou ! thou shalt be the superior .
to him the angels and the spirit mount up , in a day whereof the measure is fifty thousand years .
and on the day whereon the hour arriveth , dumb-struck will be the culprits .
then after that allah will accept the repentance of whom he will . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
they mocked the messengers who were sent before you ; thus , the torment which they had ridiculed encompassed them all .
so woe to their learned people , who write the law with their own hands and then say to the people ,  this is from allah ,  so that they might gain some paltry worldly end.this writing of their hands will bring woe to them and what they gain thereby will lead to their ruin .
and will provide him sustenance from a place he had never expected ; and whoever relies on allah – then allah is sufficient for him ; indeed allah will accomplish his command ; indeed allah has set a proper measure for all things .
or have they even a share in the sovereignty ? then in that case , they would not give mankind even the speck on a date-stone .
he knows that which goes into the earth and that which comes forth from it , and that which descend from the heaven and that which ascends to it . and he is the most merciful , the oftforgiving .
he it is who hath sent his apostle with the guidance and the true religion , that he may make it triumph over all religion , even though averse may be associaters .
‘ do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens atop each other ? ’
therefore , today none of you shall have the power to either benefit or harm one another ' to the evildoers we shall say : 'taste the punishment of the fire , which you belied '
say : 'shall i seek someone other than allah as lord when he is the lord of everything ? ' everyone will bear the consequence of what he does , and no one shall bear the burden of another . thereafter , your return will be to your lord , whereupon he will let you know what you disagreed about .
so the noble messenger of allah said to them , “ stay away from the she camel of allah , and from its turn to drink . ”
o believers , if you obey a sect of those who have been given the book , they will turn you , after you have believed , into unbelievers .
and you will see every nation kneeling . every nation will be called to its record ,  today you will be recompensed for what you used to do .
quaroon belonged to the clan of moses , but he oppressed them . we had given him treasures , the keys of which would weigh down a group of strong men . his people said to him , “ do not exult ; god does not love the exultant .
o people who believe ! do not enter the houses of the prophet without permission , as when called for a meal but not to linger around waiting for it – and if you are invited then certainly present yourself and when you have eaten , disperse – not staying around delighting in conversation ; indeed that was causing harassment to the prophet , and he was having regard for you ; and allah does not shy in proclaiming the truth ; and when you ask the wives of the prophet for anything to use , ask for it from behind a curtain ; this is purer for your hearts and for their hearts ; and you have no right to trouble the noble messenger of allah , nor ever marry any of his wives after him ; indeed that is a very severe matter in the sight of allah .
it is he who keeps you alive in your sleep at night and knows all that you do during the day . he wakes you up from your sleep to complete your worldly life , after which you will all return to him . he will let you know all about what you had done in your worldly life .
all of you united hold fast to the rope of god , and recall how he favored you when your hostility to each other had torn you apart . he united your hearts in one faith and through his grace you became brothers . you were on the verge of falling headlong into the abyss of fire , but god saved you . this is how god explains to you his revelations so that you may have the right guidance .
and we have not sent before you any apostles but they most surely ate food and went about in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others ; will you bear patiently ? and your lord is ever seeing .
‘ as you have consigned me to perversity , ’ he said , ‘ i will surely lie in wait for them on your straight path .
but those who deny our signs - we will progressively lead themfrom where they do not know .
those are they for whom shall be an evil torment . and in the hereafter they shall be the greatest losers .
and do not walk haughtily on the earth ; you can never split the earth , nor be as high as the hills .
and say : ' o lord , disembark me in a welcome place ; you are the best of deliverers . '
he will forgive your sins and give you a respite for an appointed time . when the time which god has appointed arrives , none will be able to postpone it . would that you knew this ! 
and we bestowed on him isaac , and jacob as an additional gift , and made them righteous .
nay ; i swear by the twilight ;
said :  for seven years shall ye diligently sow as is your wont : and the harvests that ye reap , ye shall leave them in the ear , - except a little , of which ye shall eat .
except what allah should will . indeed , he knows what is declared and what is hidden .
by no means ! for it would be the fire of hell ! -
labouring , toilworn ,
lo ! allah disdaineth not to coin the similitude even of a gnat . those who believe know that it is the truth from their lord ; but those who disbelieve say : what doth allah wishby such a similitude ? he misleadeth many thereby , and he guideth many thereby ; and he misleadeth thereby only miscreants ;
and the dwellers in the wood , and the folk of tubb ' a : every one denied their messengers , therefor my threat took effect .
so her lord accepted her with a good acceptance and made her grow up a good growing , and gave her into the charge of zakariya ; whenever zakariya entered the sanctuary toher , he found with her food . he said : o marium ! whence comes this to you ? she said : it is from allah . surely allah gives to whom he pleases without measure .
the cleaver of daybreak and has made the night for rest and the sun and moon for calculation . that is the determination of the exalted in might , the knowing .
but , , we have provided good things for theseand their fathers until life was prolonged for them . then do they not see that we set upon the land , reducing it from its borders ? so it is they who will overcome ?
but glorify your lord with his praise , and prostrate yourself :
did he choose daughters rather than sons ?
and if you desire to exchange a wife in place of another , and you have given to one a hundredweight , take of it nothing . what , will you take it by way of calumny and manifest sin ?
an acquittal from allah and his messenger to the idolaters with whom you have made agreements ;
they have indeed rejected the message . but the truth of what they laughed to scorn will dawn upon them before long .
if any think that allah will not help himin this world and the hereafter , let him stretch out a rope to the ceiling and cutoff : then let him see whether his plan will remove that which enrages !
verily , when he intends a thing , his command is ,  be  , and it is !
save him who created me , for surely he will guide me .
wesaid :  o fire ! be you coolness and safety for ibrahim ! 
surely , in that there are signs for those who contemplate .
wherein are plain memorials ; the place where abraham stood up to pray ; and whosoever entereth it is safe . and pilgrimage to the house is a duty unto allah for mankind , for him who can find a way thither . as for him who disbelieveth , lo ! allah is independent ofcreatures .
and , o my people ! give full measure and weight with equity , and defraud not the people of their things , and commit not mischief on the earth as corrupters .
'yes indeed ! my signs did come to thee , but thou hast cried them lies , and thou hast waxed proud , and become one of the unbelievers . '
we have explained in various ways in this quran , for the benefit of mankind , all kinds of examples , but man is most contentious .
they will surely say :  allah 's .  say :  then why do you not take heed ? 
do not take deniers of the truthfor your allies in preference to believers . would you give god a clear proof against yourselves ?
your lord knows that you stay up nearly two-thirds of the night , or half of it , or one-third of it , along with a group of those with you . god designed the night and the day . he knows that you are unable to sustain it , so he has pardoned you . so read of the quran what is possible for you . he knows that some of you may be ill ; and others travelling through the land , seeking god ’ s bounty ; and others fighting in god ’ s cause . so read of it what is possible for you , and observe the prayers , and give regular charity , and lend god a generous loan . whatever good you advance for yourselves , you will find it with god , better and generously rewarded . and seek god ’ s forgiveness , for god is forgiving and merciful .
when he withdrew from them , and from what they worship besides god , we granted him isaac and jacob . and each we made a prophet .
then their return is to hell .
lo ! he who hath given thee the qur'an for a law will surely bring thee home again . say : my lord is best aware of him who bringeth guidance and him who is in error manifest .
but for the mercy of god and his grace you would certainly have been misled by a section of them ; yet they could not mislead you but themselves alone , and could do you no harm , for god has revealed to you the book and the law , and taught you what you did not know . great have been the blessings of god on you .
but whoever has done wrong , and then substituted goodness in place of evil . i am forgiving and merciful .
believers , endure , vie with each other in endurance , stand firm in your faith and fear god , so that you may succeed .
this is the book , there is no doubt in it , a guidance to the godwary ,
we took the covenant of the children of israel and sent them messengers , every time , there came to them a messenger with what they themselves desired not - somethey called impostors , and some theyslay .
whoever disobeys god and his messenger and breaks his rules will be admitted to the fire wherein they will live forever , suffering a humiliating torment .
when thou didst say unto the believers : is it not sufficient for you that your lord should support you with three thousand angels sent down ?
lo ! those who believed and left their homes and strove with their wealth and their lives for the cause of allah , and those who took them in and helped them : these are protecting friends one of another . and those who believed but did not leave their homes , ye have no duty to protect them till they leave their homes ; but if they seek help from you in the matter of religion then it is your duty to helpexcept against a folk between whom and you there is a treaty . allah is seer of what ye do .
they are men of paradise where they will abide for ever as a recompense for what they had done .
have they not traveled through the land and observed how was the end of those before them ? and they were greater than them in power . but allah is not to be caused failure by anything in the heavens or on the earth . indeed , he is ever knowing and competent .
and every time they made a pledge some of them pushed it aside , and many of them do not believe .
recall that abraham said , “ o my lord , make this land peaceful , and keep me and my sons from worshiping idols . ”
he submitted , “ they are here , just behind me – and o my lord , i hastened towards you , in order to please you . ”
when the disciples said : o isa son of marium ! will your lord consent to send down to us food from heaven ? he said : be careful ofallah if you are believers .
if then they answer you not , know then that the revelationis sent down with the knowledge of allah and that la ilaha illa huwa : ! will you then be muslims ?
we sent to thamud their brother saleh :  worship god .  but they were divided into two groups disputing with one another .
hell is before him , and he is made to drink a festering water ,
nor do you worship whom i worship .
we have sent thee not , except to mankind entire , good tidings to bear , and warning ; but most men do not know it .
and would indeed have cut his life-vein ,
they see it distant .
he is the lord of the east and the west . there is no god but he . so take him alone as your protector .
with cups from a flowing stream being passed around ,
indeed , they shall know !
those who are steadfast in seeking the favour of their lord , and pray regularly and spend secretly and openly out of what we have provided them with , and ward off evil with good . theirs shall be the final abode .
we narrate to you the most accurate history , by revealing to you this quran . although , prior to it , you were of the unaware .
thisis notification for the people that they may be warned thereby and that they may know that he is but one god and that those of understanding will be reminded .
by earth splitting with verdure ,
in the heavens and the earth are proofs for the believers .
when saul led his armies , he said :  god will test you by a stream . whoever drinks its water will not be of me ; but those who do not drink shall be on my side . the only exception will be those who scoop up a palmful of water with their hands .  and but for a few they all drank of its water . when they had crossed it , and those who believed with him , they said :  we have no strength to combat goliath and his forces today . but those who believed they have to face their lord , said :  many a time has a small band defeated a large horde by the will of god . god is with those who are patient . 
and those who enjoin that which allah hath commanded to be enjoined , and fear their lord , and dread the evil reckoning ;
and exhort your people to pray , and patiently adhere to it . we ask of you no sustenance , but it is we who sustain you . the good ending is that for righteousness .
they shall say : yea ! indeed there came to us a warner , but we rejectedand said : allah has not revealed anything , you are only in a great error .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah increaseth their disease . a painful doom is theirs because they lie .
he calls , apart from god , upon that which hurts him not , and which neither profits him anything ; that is indeed the far error .
when your lord said to the angels ,  i am appointing someone as my deputy on earth ,  they said ,  are you going to appoint one who will commit corruption and bloodshed therein , even though wecommemorate your name and glorify you ?  the lord said ,  i know that which you do not know  .
no , rather , we have been prevented '
peace : a word from a merciful lord .
it is allah who has sent down the bookin truth , and the balance . and what can make you know that perhaps the hour is close at hand ?
pharaoh said ,  have you believed in him before i permit you ? he must be your master who has taught you magic . i will cut your hands and feet off on opposite sides , and have you crucified on the trunks of palm-trees . you shall know whose punishment is more severe and more lasting . 
they said : put him and his bro ther off , and send unto the cities callers .
andembellishments of gold ; and all this is naught but provision of this world 's life , and the hereafter is with your lord only for those who guard .
of what do they question one another ?
but as to those who fear their lord , theirs shall be gardens whereunder rivers flow ; they shall be abiders therein : an entertainment from before their lord ; and that which is with allah it still better for the pious .
it is a tree that grows from the bottom of hell ;
he said : lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between , if ye seek to be convinced .
those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their offspring will avail them at all against allah , and it is they who will be the fuel of the fire
nor doth he speak ofdesire .
they said , “ o shuaib ! we do not understand most of what you say , and indeed we perceive you weak among us ; were it not for your relatives , we would have stoned you ; and in our sight , you have no respect at all . ”
most surely there is a sign in this for the believers .
they replied ,  you know we have no need of your daughters . you know very well what we are seeking . 
indeed satan is your enemy , therefore you too take him as an enemy ; he only calls his group so that they become the people of hell !
the followers of the gospelsmust judge according to what god has revealed in it . those who do not judge by the laws of god are evil doers .
and we illustrate these examples for mankind ; and none except the knowledgeable understand them .
he lifted his parents to the throne , andbowed before him . joseph said to his father : 'this is the meaning of my vision of long ago , my lord has verified it . he has been gracious to me . he brought me out of prison and brought you out of the desert after satan had corruptedbetween me and my brothers . my lord is gentle to whom he will . he alone is the knower , the wise .
say : 'my worshipers who believe , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world there is good and the earth of allah is wide surely , those who are patient will be recompensed in full without count '
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
o all you who believe , seek you help in patience and prayer ; surely god is with the patient .
then when they returned to their father , they said : our father ! the measuring hath been denied us , wherefore send thou with us our brother , and we shall get our measure ; and verily we shall be his guards .
so give them the good news of a painful chastisement ,
have you seen him who denies the recompense ?
these are two adversaries who dispute about their lord ; thenthose who disbelieve , for them are cut out garments of fire , boiling water shall be poured over their heads .
therefore , we will most certainly make those who are bent on denying the truth taste a severe punishment and we will most certainly requite them according to the worst of their deeds ,
but observe the measure strictly , nor fall short thereof .
and those who fear allah are not held accountable for the disbelievers at all , buta reminder - that perhaps they will fear him .
and before it was the scripture of moses to lead and as a mercy . and this is a confirming book in an arabic tongue to warn those who have wronged and as good tidings to the doers of good .
say :  i seek refuge withthe lord of mankind ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in peace and security ;
and allah 's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and of everything allah is ever an encompasser .
which of the bounties of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
neither does he speak of his own will .
and we raised the mount above them for the sake of their covenant , and we said to them , ‘ enter the gate prostrating ’ and we said to them , ‘ do not violate the sabbath , ’ and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and there was no host , beside allah , to help him , nor could he be of any help to himself .
every nation can only live for the time appointed for it .
he created man from a drop of fluid , yet he is an open quarreller !
believers who stay behind , having no injury , are not equal to those who fight in the way of allah with their wealth and their souls . allah has preferred those who fight with their wealth and their souls a degree above those who stay behind . yet to each , allah has promised the most excellent . and allah has preferred those who fought over those who stayed behind with a great wage .
he will have his home in hawiyah .
'yes ' he answered , 'and you will be among those near '
or do they envy menfor what allah has given them of his bounty ? then we had already given the family of ibrahimthe book and al-hikmah , and conferred upon them a great kingdom .
and the witness and the witnessed ,
o believers ! do not let your wealth or your children distract you from remembrance of god . those who do so will be the losers .
he said : cast . so when they cast , they deceived the people 's eyes and frightened them , and they produced a mighty enchantment .
it is no sin for you if ye divorce women while yet ye have not touched them , nor appointed unto them a portion . provide for them , the rich according to his means , and the straitened according to his means , a fair provision.a bounden duty for those who do good .
he said :  o my people ! see ye whether i have a clearfrom my lord , and he hath given me sustenancegood as from himself ? i wish not , in opposition to you , to do that which i forbid you to do . i only desirebetterment to the best of my power ; and my successcan only come from allah . in him i trust , and unto him i look .
it is he who made the night and the day alternate for someone who desires to take admonition , or desires to give thanks .
o ye who believe ! fight the infidels who are near unto you , and surely let them find in you sternness , and know that allah is with the god-fearing ,
it is he who shows you the lightening , causing fear and hope . and he produces the heavy clouds .
or of him , who , when passing by the ruined village that was fallen on its roofs , remarked : 'how can allah give life to this after its death ' thereupon allahcaused him to die , and after a hundred years he revived him . he asked : 'how long have you remained ' ' a day ' he replied , 'or part of a day ' allah said : 'rather , you have remained a hundred years . look at your food and drink ; they have not rotted . and look at your donkey . we will make you a sign to the people . and look at the boneshow we shall revive them and clothe them with flesh ' and when it had all become clear to him , he said : ' i know that allah has power over all things '
we surely guided moses and made the children of israel the heirs of the book
who take the unbelievers for their allies in preference to the believers . do they seek honour from them whereas honour altogether belongs to allah alone ?
those who responded to god and the messenger , despite the persecution they had suffered . for the virtuous and the pious among them is a great reward .
but they insolently defied the command of their lord , so the sa'iqah overtook them while they were looking .
and not alike are the two bodies of water . one is fresh and sweet , palatable for drinking , and one is salty and bitter . and from each you eat tender meat and extract ornaments which you wear , and you see the ships plowing throughthat you might seek of his bounty ; and perhaps you will be grateful .
he said : o my people ! why will ye hasten on the evil rather than the good ? why will ye not ask pardon of allah , that ye may receive mercy .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , fulfillingrevealed in the previous scriptures and determining what is true therein , and as a guardian over it . judge , therefore , between them by what god has revealed , and do not follow their vain desires turning away from the truth that has come to you . to every one of you we have ordained a law and a way , and had god so willed , he would have made you all a single community , but he did not so will , in order that he might try you by what he has given you . vie , then , with one another in doing good works ; to god you shall all return ; then he will make clear to you about what you have been disputing .
they ask thee regarding whatsoever they shall expend . say thou : whatsoever ye expend of wealth , let it be for the parents and kindred and orphans and the needy and the wayfarer and whatever good ye do , verily allah is the knower thereof .
it is allah who derides them , and leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
and olives and dates .
so that they might eat of its fruit and the labor of their hands . will they not give thanks ?
and we leftfor him among generationsin later times :
have they associate gods ? then let them produce their associate gods if they say sooth !
in most of their secret talks there is no good : but if one exhorts to a deed of charity or justice or conciliation between men , : to him who does this , seeking the good pleasure of allah , we shall soon give a reward of the highest .
and obey god and the messenger ; haply so you will find mercy .
except the weak from among the men and the children who have not in their power the means nor can they find a way ;
surely in that is a sign for the believers .
and the jinns did he create from a smokeless flame of fire .
those who persecute the believing men and believing women , and then do not repent , will surely suffer the punishment of hell , and the torment of burning .
we gave goodness to him in this world , and in the everlasting life he shall be amongst the righteous .
'son of my mother , ' aaron said , 'take me not by the beard , or the head ! i was fearful that thou wouldst say ,  thou hast divided the children of israel , and thou hast not observed my word . 
we could make it brackish , if we pleased ; so why do you not acknowledge thanks ?
the night of al-qadris better than a thousand months .
i shall certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides and crucify you all together . 
theever approaching draws nigh :
then , exalt the name of your lord , the great .
they say : god hath taken a son . hallowed be he-he , the selfesufficient ! his is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . no warranty is there with you for this . ascribe ye falsely unto allah that which ye know not ?
of his party was abraham .
o my people ! act according to your ability ; i too am acting . soon you will know who will be overtaken by a punishment that will disgrace him , and who is a liar . so be on the watch ; i too will be watching along with you . ’
when the souls are sorted out , ;
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal , and what they reveal .
he saith : my lord knoweth what is spoken in the heaven and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower .
by the sky , and by the nightly comer !
verily in the heavens and the earth are signs unto the believers .
 lord , my bones have weakened and my head has turned hoary with age , but never , lord , have i been disappointed in my prayer to you :
as though they are jacinth and coral .
and from it produced its water and its pasture .
we know what they want to hear when they listen to you . they whisper to each other and say ,  you are only following a bewitched person  .
then i will guide you to your lord that you may come to fear him . ' 
it is such a monstrosity that heavens might well-nigh burst forth at it , the earth might be cleaved , and the mountains fall
“ go with this letter of mine and drop it upon them – then move aside from them and see what they answer in return . ”
o you who believe ! do not take the unbelievers for friends rather than the believers ; do you desire that you should give to allah a manifest proof against yourselves ?
the weighing on that day will be the true weighing : those whose scales are heavy will prosper .
do they idolize those who create nothing , and are themselves created ?
truly ! we will suffice you against the scoffers .
do they claim that the messenger himself has fabricated it ? , tell them : “ if i have fabricated it , then you have no power to protect me from allah 's chastisement . he knows well the idle talk in which you indulge . he suffices as a witness between me and you . he is most forgiving , most merciful . ”
this is a day in which they will not be able to speak .
so if they believe in the same as you believe in , then they have beenguided ; but if they turn away , they are only in dissension , and allah will be sufficient for you against them . and he is the hearing , the knowing .
grievously odious is it in the sight of allah that ye say that which ye do not .
and indeed we created you , then designed you and then ordered the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” ; so they all prostrated , except iblis ; he did not become of those who prostrate .
he is allah , the creator , the originator , the shaper . to him belong the most beautiful names . all that is in the heavens and earth exalt him . he is thealmighty , the wise .
so fear god and obey me . 
believers , do not devour usury multiplied many times over . fear god , so that you may prosper ,
almost exploding with rage . whenever a group is thrown in it , its keepers will ask them , ‘ did not any warner come to you ? ’
that is god , your true lord . what is there , besides the truth , but error ? how then can you turn away ? 
say : 'none in the heavens or the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they are not aware when they shall be resurrected '
so fear god , and obey me ;
in both of them , there will be two kinds of every fruit .
these are the verses of the sagacious book ,
he said : 'my lord , reprieve me till the day they are raised '
and of the people is he who disputes about allah without knowledge or guidance or an enlightening book ,
but satan caused them to slip out of it and removed them from thatin which they had been . and we said ,  go down , , as enemies to one another , and you will have upon the earth a place of settlement and provision for a time . 
is then one who doth know that that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? it is those who are endued with understanding that receive admonition ; -
and nigh has drawn the true promise , and behold , the eyes of the unbelievers staring : 'alas for us ! we were heedless of this ; 'nay , we were evildoers . '
lo ! those who are with thy lord are not too proud to do him service , but they praise him and prostrate before him .
that they should invoke a son formost gracious .
and it is he who created the alternation of the night and day for one who wishes to remember or intends to give thanks .
and thou shalt see many of them hastening toward sin and transgression and their devouring of the forbidden . vile indeed is that which they have been doing !
and casts out what is within it and is emptied ,
it is he who created the night and the day , the sun and the moon , each swimming in a sky .
so lose not heart , nor fall into despair : for ye must gain mastery if ye are true in faith .
to allah belong the east and the west : whithersoever ye turn , there is the presence of allah . for allah is all-pervading , all-knowing .
then he became a clot , and then allah made it into a living body and proportioned its parts ,
alif , lam , meem
it is they who are on guidance from their lord ; and they are the successful .
he it is who created you from clay , then he decreed a term ; and there is a term named with him ; still you doubt .
the unbelievers say : “ shall we direct you to the man who tells you that when you have been utterly broken to pieces , you will be raised to life again ?
then which of the blessings of your lord will you bothdeny ?
he will guide them and set right their state .
:  depart you with my slaves by night . surely , you will be pursued .
o my servants who believe ! truly , spacious is my earth : therefore serve ye me - !
when they opened their packs , they discovered that their money had been returned to them . they said ,  our father , what more do we desire than this ? this money of ours has been returned to us , so we shallbuy food for our family and we shall guard our brother , and we shall obtain an additional camel-load of grain . thisis a small quantity . 
from changing your forms and creating youinthat ye know not .
who are true to their trusts and their covenants ,
people , an admonition has now come to you from your lord , and a healing for what is in the chests , a guide and a mercy to believers .
he said :  the love of horses is worthy of desire to me for the remembrance of my lord ;  and when they were out of sight , :
and have placed therein a guard against any satan froward .
and muhammad is no more than an apostle ; the apostles have already passed away before him ; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back upon your heels ? and whoever turns back upon his heels , he will by no means do harm to allah in the least and allah will reward the grateful .
who amassed and hoarded .
and they have already come upon the town which was showered with a rain of evil . so have they not seen it ? but they are not expecting resurrection .
believers , whenever you encounter a hostile force of unbelievers , do not turn your backs to them in flight .
he calls upon him who is likelier to hurt him , rather than to profit him -- an evil protector indeed , he , an evil friend !
he said :  o lord , i called my people night and day ,
and we rescued him and his family , except his wife – she became of those who stayed behind .
and the subverted city he also overthrew ,
so when moses completed the term and set out with his family , he descried a fire on the side of the mountain . he said to his family , ‘ wait ! indeed , i descry a fire ! maybe i will bring you some news from it , or a brand of fire so that you may warm yourselves . ’
they said : we failed not to keep thy appointment of our own authority , but we were laden with burthens of the people 's ornaments ; then we threw them , and thus samiri cast down .
and those who do not believe in the hereafter—we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
it is he who has given you life , he will make you die and will make you live again . surely the human being is ungrateful .
except for your chosen servants . 
o ye who believe ! if ye listen to a faction among the people of the book , they wouldrender you apostates after ye have believed !
he truly will receive an easy reckoning
he will forgive you your sins and bring you into gardens underneath which rivers flow , and pleasant dwellings in gardens of eden . that is the supreme triumph .
but how will they take heed ? such are they that a messenger came to them clearly expounding the truth ,
and put your trust in the almighty , the merciful .
call them after their true fathers ; that is more equitable in the sight of god . if you know not who their fathers were , then they are your brothers in religion , and your clients . there is no fault in you if you make mistakes , but only in what your hearts premeditate . god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and those who strove in our signs in order to defeat – for them is a punishment from the severe painful punishments .
but they denied him , and the dreadful earthquake took them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling place .
then we revealed to thee : 'follow thou the creed of abraham , a man of pure faith and no idolater . '
but he said ,  i have been given it only because of the knowledge i possess .  did he not know that god had destroyed before him people who were stronger than he and possessed even greater resources ? the guilty are not required to offer explanations of their sins .
hell is behind them . their worldly earnings shall not avail them , nor those whom they took as protectors instead of allah . an awesome chastisement lies in store for them .
the true kingdom on that day shall belong to the merciful a harsh day for the unbelievers .
and refuse al-ma'un .
save an old woman among those that tarried ;
we have subjected these to them , so that some may be used for riding and some for food ,
when among them the great wretch arose ,
travel freely in the land for four months , and bear in mind that you can not escape from allah , and that allah will humiliate the disbelievers .
the day when the quaker quakes
saleh turned away from them and said :  o my people , i conveyed to you the message of my lord and warned you ; but you do not like those who wish you well . 
they say :  it would in that case , be a return with loss ! 
then they threw down their cords and their staves and said : by pharaoh 's might , lo ! we verily are the winners .
when moses said to his people ,  god commands you to sacrifice a cow ,  they asked ,  are you mocking us ?   god forbid , how would i be so ignorant ,  said moses .
he said , “ this is what we were seeking. ” and so they turned back retracing their steps .
their reward with their lord is gardens of perpetuity beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein for ever ; allah is well pleased with them and they are well pleased with him ; that is for him who fears his lord .
o descendants of israel , indeed we rescued you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of mount tur , and sent down manna and salwa upon you .
which sailed right under our eyes : a recompense for him who had been denied .
your lord knows all that their hearts conceal and all that they reveal .
they will say , ‘ all praise belongs to allah , who has removed all grief from us . indeed our lord is all-forgiving , all-appreciative ,
and because the hour is coming—there is no doubt about it—and because god will resurrect those in the graves .
indeed it is transcribed in the original book with us ; sublime and full of wisdom .
, what we recite to you are revelations and words of wisdom .
in high empyrean
and judge among them in accordance to that which allah has sent down and do not be led by their desires . take heed lest they should turn you away from a part of that which allah has sent to you . if they reject your judgment , know that allah wants to scourge them for some of their sins . many of the people are wrongdoers .
but you can not will , unless allah wills . verily , allah is ever all-knowing , all-wise .
surely we revealed the taurat in which was guidance and light ; with it the prophets who submitted themselvesjudgedfor those who were jews , and the masters of divine knowledge and the doctors , because they were required to guardof the book of allah , and they were witnesses thereof ; therefore fear not the people and fear me , and do not take a small price for my communications ; and whoever did not judge by what allah revealed , those are they that are the unbelievers .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and when the hour sets in , the falsifiers will be losers on that day .
by the angels who drag forth vehemently .
god does not punish you but for what you swear in earnest . the expiationis feeding ten persons who are poor , with food that you give your own families , or clothing them , or freeing a slave . but he who can not do so should fast for three days . this is the expiation for an oath when you have sworn it . so abide by your oaths . thus god makes his commandments clear to you : you may perhaps be grateful .
it was then of the mercy of allah that thou hast been gentle with them ; and wert thou rough , hardhearted , they had surely dispersed from around thee . so pardon them thou , and ask thou forgiveness for them and take thou counsel with them in the affair , and when thou hast resolved , put thy trust in allah . verily allah loveth the trustful .
say ,  lord , if you will afflict them with punishment ,
on the day when we gather them all together , then we say unto those who ascribed partners : stand back , ye and yourpartners ! and we separate them , the one from the other , and theirpartners say : it was not us ye worshipped .
and we have placed within the heaven great stars and have beautified it for the observers .
and there were gathered before sulaimanhis hosts of jinns and men , and birds , and they all were set in battle order .
what aileth them , therefore , that they are from the admonition turning away ?
and assuredly they have gone by the township whereon was rained the evil rain . are they not wont to see it ? aye ! they expect not resurrection .
and when our signs were being recited to them , they said , 'we have already heard ; if we wished , we could say the like of this ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
they will never taste death therein except the first death , and he will save them from the torment of the blazing fire ,
their sides draw away frombeds , they call upon their lord in fear and in hope , and they spendout of what we have given them .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and sent down water from the sky , therefore producing some fruits for you to eat ; and subjected the ships for you , that they may sail upon the sea by his command ; and subjected the rivers for you .
so when our command came , we made the highest partits lowest and rained upon them stones of layered hard clay ,
and gave him abundant wealth
no ! indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
 of no profit will be my counsel to you , much as i desire to give youcounsel , if it be that allah willeth to leave you astray : he is your lord ! and to him will ye return ! 
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said ,  will you allow moses and his people to spread corruption in the land , and to forsake you and your gods ?  he replied ,  we shall kill their male children and spare only the females . we have complete power over them . 
and those who disbelieve say : this is nothing but a lie which he has forged , and other people have helped him at it ; so indeed they have done injustice anda falsehood .
it will be said “ do not pray this day for one death – and pray for many deaths . ”
they said , 'shuaib , does thy prayer command thee that we should leave that our fathers served , or to do as we will with our goods ? thou art the clement one , the right-minded . '
o man , what seduced you from your munificent lord
 enter therein in peace and security !  --
say , ‘ if you love allah , then follow me ; allah will love you and forgive you your sins , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful . ’
,  enter it in peace , safe . 
who break the covenant of allah after accepting it and sever what allah has bidden to be joined and corrupt in the land . these are the losers .
if any do wish for the transitory things , we readily grant them - such things as we will , to such person as we will : in the end have we provided hell for them : they will burn therein , disgraced and rejected .
o you who believe ! you are forbidden to inherit women against their will , and you should not treat them with harshness , that you may take away part of the mahr you have given them , unless they commit open illegal sexual intercourse . and live with them honourably . if you dislike them , it may be that you dislike a thing and allah brings through it a great deal of good .
then he desires that i should add more .
and on the day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the fire : is not this real ? they will say : yea , by our lord . he will say : then taste the doom for that ye disbelieved .
and verily , we have sent among every ummaha messenger :  worship allah , and avoidtaghut .  then of them were some whom allah guided and of them were some upon whom the straying was justified . so travel through the land and see what was the end of those who denied .
the day when you willturn your backs and flee , having none to defend you against god : for he whom god lets go astray can never find any guide .
is he who answers the call of the distressedwhen he invokes him and removes his distress , and makes you successors on the earth ... ? what ! is there a god besides allah ? little is the admonition that you take .
and as for a'ad , they were destroyed by a fierce roaring wind ,
those who believe in allah and the last day would not ask permission of you to be excused from striving with their wealth and their lives . and allah is knowing of those who fear him .
and when it is said to them ,  come to what allah has revealed and to the messenger ,  you see the hypocrites turning away from you in aversion .
it is allah who has given you the earth as a fixed place , and the heaven for a canopy . he has shaped you and made you fine images , and provided you with goodness . such is allah , your lord . blessed be allah , lord of all the worlds .
so consume what you have gained , legitimate and wholesome ; and remain conscious of god . god is forgiving and merciful .
and as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would overburden them by transgression and disbelief .
the messengers said ,  this ill omen lies within yourselves . will you then take heed ? in fact , you are a transgressing people . 
if you are to wonder , then wonderful is their remark , ‘ when we have become dust , shall we beinto a new creation ? ’ they are the ones who defy their lord ; they shall have iron collars around their necks , they shall be the inhabitants of the fire , and they shall remain in it .
behold ! the disciples , said :  o jesus the son of mary ! can thy lord send down to us a table setfrom heaven ?  said jesus :  fear allah , if ye have faith . 
kind and honourable , - writing down :
between them is a barrier which they can not pass .
when the ledgers are laid open ,
when he will inflict punishment , those very leaders and guides whom they followed in the world will disown them . but punishment they shall get and all their bonds shall be cut off .
they replied : 'surely , you are one of those bewitched .
they said :  by allah ! wilt thou cease to remember joseph until thou reach the last extremity of illness , or until thou die ! 
the greatest fear will not aggrieve them , and the angels will welcome them ; saying “ this is your day , which you were promised . ”
and carry out the hajj and the umrah for god . but if you are prevented , then whatever is feasible of offerings . and do not shave your heads until the offering has reached its destination . whoever of you is sick , or has an injury of the head , then redemption of fasting , or charity , or worship . when you are secure : whoever continues the umrah until the hajj , then whatever is feasible of offering . but if he lacks the means , then fasting for three days during the hajj and seven when you have returned , making ten in all . this is for he whose household is not present at the sacred mosque . and remain conscious of god , and know that god is stern in retribution .
never have we destroyed a habitation till we had sent admonishers to them
and we have made the night a covering .
and the faithful ones whose hearts are comforted by the remembrance of god . remembrance of god certainly brings comfort to all hearts .
say to the infidels .  act as best you can , we are acting too ;
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to allah are all matters referred for decision .
they are the ones allah has set a seal on their hearts , their hearing and their sight , and it is they who are the heedless .
when we sent to them two , they rejected both of them , then we strengthenedwith a third , so they said : surely we are apostles to you .
we bestowed aforetime on abraham his rectitude of conduct , and well were we acquainted with him .
it is allah who sends the winds raising the clouds – therefore spreads them in the sky as he wills and shatters them – so you see the rain dropping from inside it ; so when he delivers it upon whomever he wills among his bondmen , thereupon they rejoice .
further , that he may warn thosewho say ,  allah hath begotten a son  :
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubling and quadrupling . observe your duty to allah , that ye may be successful .
 and indeed , we shall make you dwell in the land after them . this is for him who fears standing before meand also fears my threat . 
nay ! but they fear not the hereafter .
and warn mankind of the day when the punishment will come upon them , and the wicked will say , “ our lord , defer us for a little while , and we will answer your call and follow the messengers. ” did you not swear before that there will be no passing away for you ?
and you will not cause failureupon the earth . and you have not besides allah any protector or helper .
say thou : flight shall not profit you if ye flee from death or slaughter , and lo ! ye will not enjoy life except for a little .
and whenever our verses are rehearsed to him , he says : “ these are fairy- tales of times gone by . ”
o believers , be you securers of justice , witnesses for god . let not detestation for a people move you not to be equitable ; be equitable -- that is nearer to godfearing . and fear god ; surely god is aware of the things you do .
and lest—if an affliction were to befall them because of what their hands have sent ahead —they should say , ‘ our lord ! why did you not send us an apostle so that we might have followed your signs and been among the faithful ? ’
because of the wrongdoings of the jews , we forbade them certain good things that had been allowed to them before ; for having frequently debarred others from god 's path ;
then did the sorcerers fall down , prostrate in adoration ,
all that is in the heavens and earth exalt allah . he is the almighty , the wise .
, consider when abraham prayed ,  lord , make thisa peaceful territory and save me and my offspring from worshipping idols .
and the middle path rightly leads to allah – any other path is wayward ; and had he willed he would have brought all of you upon guidance .
verily god 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he alone is the giver of life and death ; and none do you have besides god as friend and helper .
the fire will scorch their faces , and therein they shall be grinning .
he did not have any authority over them except to the extent that would allow us to know who had faith in the life to come and who had doubts about it . your lord is a guard over all things .
have they not travelled in the land and seen how was the end of those before them who were far more numerous than they and more strong , and have left behind them traces on the earth . and yet nothing of what they did profited them .
and that you shall not be thirsty therein nor shall you feel the heat of the sun .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not loose against you a squall of pebbles then you shall know how was my warning .
and he shall roast at a blaze .
but the man of belief said :  o my people , what i fear for you is the like of what befell the communities .
and allah increaseth in guidance those who let themselves be guided , and the righteous works that last are excellent with thy lord in respect of reward and excellent in respect of return . * chapter : 19
so when he reached it , it was proclaimed , “ blessed is he who is in the location of the fireand those who are close to it ; and purity is to allah , the lord of the creation . ”
thus we have sent down the book to you ; those to whom we have given the book believe in it , and of these there are some who believe in it , and none contests our signs except the faithless .
can not misleadabout him ,
we sent noah forth to his people , saying ,  warn your people before there comes upon them a grievous punishment . 
will he , whose night hours pass in obedience while prostrating and standing , fearing the hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his lord , ever be equal to the disobedient ? proclaim , “ are the knowledgeable and the ignorant equal ? ” it is only the men of intellect who heed advice .
and indeed we gave musathe scripture ] . so be not you in doubt of meeting himduring the night of al-isra ' and al-mi'raj over the heavens ] . and we made it ] a guide to the children of israel .
and we have set none but angels as guardians of the fire ; and we have fixed their number only as a trial for unbelievers , - in order that the people of the book may arrive at certainty , and the believers may increase in faith , - and that no doubts may be left for the people of the book and the believers , and that those in whose hearts is a disease and the unbelievers may say ,  what symbol doth allah intend by this ?  thus doth allah leave to stray whom he pleaseth , and guide whom he pleaseth : and none can know the forces of thy lord , except he and this is no other than a warning to mankind .
when we let people tastemercy , they boast about it ; but should an ill visit them because of what their hands have sent ahead , behold , they become despondent !
do they not perceive that we are reducing their dwellings from all directions ? and allah gives the command – there is none that can postpone his command ; and he spends no time in taking account .
of what avail would their past enjoyment be to them ?
do you build over each high place a sign to amuse yourselves !
and he has a place near to us , and a fine return .
he created man from a clot of blood .
the day that the sky will be like the boiling filth of oil , .
and the 'ad , they were destroyed by a furious wind , exceedingly violent ;
then the believers will say ,  are these the men who swore their strongest oaths by god , that they were with you ?  their works will come to nothing and they will lose all .
hath then your lord distinguished you with sons and taken for himself females from among the angels ? verily ye say a saying mighty ?
if they find an opportunity to turn against you , they will become your enemies and will stretch out their hands and tongues at you with evil intent . they would love to see you turn away from your faith .
so remind , for you are not , by the favor of your lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
god has created the heavens and the earth for a true purpose , so that every soul may be rewarded for whatever it has earned , and no one will be wronged .
from whatsoever place thou issuest , turn thy face towards the holy mosque ; and wherever you may be , turn your faces towards it , that the people may not have any argument against you , excepting the evildoers of them ; and fear you them not , but fear you me ; and that i may perfect my blessing upon you , and that haply so you may be guided ;
and they indeed wished to scare thee from the land that they might drive thee forth from thence , and then they would have stayedbut a little after thee .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a remote place .
no affliction visits the land or yourselves but it is in a book before we bring it about—that is indeed easy for allah—
 this is the fire which you denied .
it is he who confers blessing upon you , and his angelsthat he may bring you out from darknesses into the light . and ever is he , to the believers , merciful .
the blind one and the seer are not equal ,
exalt him at dawn and in the evening .
when the yokes are around their necks , and they will be dragged by the chains .
they will surely perish who kill their offspring in ignorance foolhardily , and forbid the food that god has given them by fabricating lies against god . misguided are they surely , and will never come to guidance .
we have made this quran easy to understand , in your own language , so that they may take heed .
 and i have followed the religion of my fathers , - ibrahim , ishaqueand ya'qub ] , and never could we attribute any partners whatsoever to allah . this is from the grace of allah to us and to mankind , but most men thank not .
believers , do not let people mock other people who may be better than themselves . do not let women mock women , who may be better than themselves . do not find fault with one another , nor abuse one another with nicknames . an evil name is disobedience after belief . those who do not repent are the harmdoers .
can it be that he alone has received the quran ?  in fact , they have doubts about my quran and this is because they have not yet facedtorment .
the true religion with allah is islam . the people of the book adopted many different ways rather than follow the true way of islam even after the knowledge of truth had reached them , and this merely to commit excesses against one another . let him who refuses to follow the ordinances and directives of allah know that allah is swift in his reckoning .
ye who believe ! if an evil-doer came unto you with a report , then inquire strictly , lest ye hurt a people in ignorance and repent thereafter of that which ye have done .
worship god , have fear of him and obey me .
indeed , we subjected the mountainswith him , exaltingin theafternoon andsunrise .
my people , today you have the kingdom and the power on earth but who will help us against the wrath of god if it will befall us ?  the pharaoh said ,  i show you only what i think is proper and guide you only to the right direction  .
were it not for his lord ’ s favor that reached him , he would have been thrown into the wilderness , fully despised .
and thou wilt see the sinners that day bound together in fetters ; -
so the eminent among those who disbelieved from his people said ,  we do not see you but as a man like ourselves , and we do not see you followed except by those who are the lowest of us at first suggestion . and we do not see in you over us any merit ; rather , we think you are liars . 
and gold ornament . but all that is not but the enjoyment of worldly life . and the hereafter with your lord is for the righteous .
not unto the weak nor unto the sick nor unto those who can find naught to spend is any faultif they are true to allah and his messenger . not unto the good is there any road . allah is forgiving , merciful .
the gardens which have been promised to the pious have flowing streams , everlasting fruits , and perpetual shade . such is the blissful end of the pious , but hell fire is the terrible end for the unbelievers .
o you who have faith ! retribution is prescribed for you regarding the slain : freeman for freeman , slave for slave , and female for female . but if one is granted any extenuation by his brother , let the follow upbe honourable , and let the payment to him be with kindness . that is a remission from your lord and a mercy ; and should anyone transgress after that , there shall be a painful punishment for him .
so when their noble messengers came to them with clear signs , they remained happy over the worldly knowledge they possessed , and upon them only reverted what they used to mock at !
is he who guides you in the darkness of land and sea and who sends the winds as harbingers of his mercy ... ? what ! is there a god besides allah ? exalted is allah aboveany partners that they ascribe .
remaining in it as long as the heavens and the earth remain , except as much as your lord willed * ; indeed your lord may do whatever , whenever , he wills .
they say , 'alas for us ! who roused us out of our sleeping place ? this is what the all-merciful promised , and the envoys spoke truly . '
abraham asked ,  messengers , what is your task ? 
we have prepared chains , shackles , and flaming fire .
allah doth command you to render back your trusts to those to whom they are due ; and when ye judge between man and man , that ye judge with justice : verily how excellent is the teaching which he giveth you ! for allah is he who heareth and seeth all things .
the prayer that man should make for good , he maketh for evil ; for man is given to hasty .
so be not like those who became disunited and differed among themselves after clear proofs had come to them . for them is great suffering .
remember your lord in your soul with humility and fear , and not with a loud voice , morning and evening , and do not be among the inattentive .
that allah may requite each soul according to its deserts ; and verily allah is swift in calling to account .
said : what ! even though i bring you better guidance than that ye found your fathers following ? they answered : lo ! in what ye bring we are disbelievers .
allah forbiddeth you not those who warred not against you on account of religion and drove you not out from your homes , that ye should show them kindness and deal justly with them . lo ! allah loveth the just dealers .
why did the slanderers not bring four witnesses ? now that they have not brought witnesses , they themselves are liars in the sight of allah .
a brief enjoyment in the world ; then unto us is their return ; then we will make them taste a severe torment , in that they have been disbelieving .
 preserve me , o lord ,  said ,  from asking you that of which i have no knowledge . if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me i shall be among those who perish . 
do you approach males among the worlds
go to the shadow with three ramifications ,
say , ,  indeed , the former and the later peoples
, when allah showed them to you in your dream as few ; and if he had shown them to you as many , youwould have lost courage and would have disputed in the matter , but allah saved . indeed , he is knowing of that within the breasts .
do you not see that to allah prostrates whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth and the sun , the moon , the stars , the mountains , the trees , the moving creatures and many of the people ? but upon many the punishment has been justified . and he whom allah humiliates - for him there is no bestower of honor . indeed , allah does what he wills .
so adjudge between me and them conclusively , and save me and the believers who are with me . 
he shall go before his people on the day of resurrection , and will have led them down to the fire-evil the watering-place to be led down to !
as for those who believe and do good we shall not cause their reward to be lost .
those of them with whom thou hast made compact then they break their compact every time , not being godfearing .
and verily of that we have left a clear sign for people who have sense .
thus , do we reward the righteous ones .
and it is he who caused the two joint seas to flow- one is palatable , very sweet , and the other is salty , very bitter ; and kept a veil between them and a preventing barrier .
he said :  this is my stick , whereon i lean , and wherewith i beat down branches for my sheep , and wherein i find other uses . 
verily i am your lord ! take off your shoes . you are in the sacred valley , tuwa !
and verily unto usthe end and the beginning .
so when the lights of the stars are put out .
on the dayfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces turn black , ,  did you disbelieve after your belief ? then taste the punishment for what you used to reject . 
o people , it is you who stand in need of allah ; as for allah , he is self-sufficient , immensely praiseworthy .
not one of you but will pass over it : this is , with thy lord , a decree which must be accomplished .
and recall what time we vouchsafed unto musa the book and the distinction that haply ye may be guided .
he was created of a gushing fluid ,
who were expelled from their habitations without right , except that they say 'our lord is god . ' had god not driven back the people , some by the means of others , there had been destroyed cloisters and churches , oratories and mosques , wherein god 's name is much mentioned . assuredly god will help him who helps him -- surely god is all-strong , all-mighty
except the way of hell , to dwell therein forever , and this is ever easy for allah .
they were surprised that one of them had come to them as warner ; and the unbelievers said :  he is a deceiving sorcerer .
the actions of those who denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter will come to nothing -- they shall be requited only , according to their deeds . 
you carried with your tongues and uttered with your mouths what you did not know . you have thought it a trifle , but before allah it was a mighty thing .
when it is said to them ,  follow the commands that allah has sent down ,  they reply ,  we will follow only what we found our forefathers practising. , well , will they go on following their forefathers even though they did not use common sense and did not find the right way ?
whom neither a man or jinn had ever touched before them .
except the bondmen of allah sincere .
pray regularly , and give regular charity , and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
said he , ‘ in a little while they will become regretful . ’
and seek the abode of the hereafter with that which god hath vouchsafed thee , and forget not thy portion in the world , and be thou bounteous even as god hath been bounteous unto thee , and seek not corruption in the earth ; verily allah loveth not corrupters .
they will have their share of the reward for their deeds . god 's reckoning is swift .
then , the first will say to the last : 'you were no better than us ' so taste the punishment for what you have earned .
whatever you have been given is a provision for the life of this world and its glitter . but that which is with allah is better and more enduring . do you not use your intellect ?
and there were in the city nine family heads causing corruption in the land and not amending .
and when you are greeted with some words , greet back with words better than it or with the same ; indeed allah will take account of everything .
we had made unlawful for the jews all that we told you before . we did not do any wrong to them but they wronged themselves .
no caring friend .
 lord ,  said zachariah ,  how shall i have a son when i am now overtaken by old age and my wife is barren ?   such is the will of god ,  replied ,  he does what he pleases . 
and they say : when will this threat come to pass , if you are truthful ?
then when the bearer of glad tidings came , he laid the shirt on his face , he therefore immediately regained his eyesight * ; he said , “ was i not telling you ? i know the great traits of allah which you do not know ! ”
indeed the hypocrites will be in the lowest reach of the fire , and you will never find any helper for them ,
it was not fitting for the people of medina and the bedouin arabs of the neighbourhood , to refuse to follow allah 's messenger , nor to prefer their own lives to his : because nothing could they suffer or do , but was reckoned to their credit as a deed of righteousness , - whether they suffered thirst , or fatigue , or hunger , in the cause of allah , or trod paths to raise the ire of the unbelievers , or received any injury whatever from an enemy : for allah suffereth not the reward to be lost of those who do good ; -
and between them is a veil , and on the ramparts there shall stand men who will know each by their marks . to the companions of paradise they shall call : 'peace be upon you ' yet they did not enter it on account of their eagerness .
let them produce a discourse like it if they are true in their claim .
have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of the consequence for those who were before them ? they were stronger than these in power , and they dug the earth and built upon it more than these have built . messengers of their own came unto them with clear proofs . surely allah wronged them not , but they did wrong themselves .
and we gave him as his helper , out of our mercy , his brother aaron , having made him a prophet .
it is he who gives life and makes to die , and when he decrees a thing , he says to it : 'be ' and it is !
and before it was the book of moses , a model and a mercy . and this is a confirming book , in the arabic language , to warn those who do wrong—and good news for the doers of good .
he who created me , and guides me .
god 's promise . never does god fail to fulfil his promise -- but most people do not know this ;
nor did we send before theeany but men , whom we did inspire , -living in human habitations . do they not travel through the earth , and see what was the end of those before them ? but the home of the hereafter is best , for those who do right . will ye not then understand ?
when youwere seeking the help of your lord , so he answered your prayers that , “ i will help you with a row of thousands of angels . ”
recall what time he said unto his people : fear ye not ?
i found a woman reigning over them , and she has been favoured with everything ; and she has a throne that is magnificent .
they said : and what shall be the penalty for it , if ye prove liars ?
your wealth and children are but a trial , and with allah is a mighty wage .
so he smashed them up to pieces with the exception of the biggest , so that they may turn to it .
and mary the daughter of 'imran , who guarded her chastity ; and we breathed intoof our spirit ; and she testified to the truth of the words of her lord and of his revelations , and was one of the devout .
the postponing ofis but one more instance ofrefusal to acknowledge the truth -- by which those who are bent on denying the truth are led astray . they declare this to be permissible in one year and forbidden in another year , so that they may adjust the months which god has sanctified , thus making lawful what god has forbidden . their evil deed seems fair to them : god does not guide those who deny the truth .
and watch ; they will come to know soon .
said ,  we will strengthen your arm through your brother and grant you both supremacy so they will not reach you.through our signs ; you and those who follow you will be the predominant . 
we deliver those who believe and take heed for themselves .
moses said ,  god willing , you will find me patient , and i will not disobey you in any thing . 
they shall not fight against you , not even together , except in fenced townships or from behind walls . their violence among themselves is strong ; thou deemest them enjoined , whereas their hearts are diverse . that is because they are a people who reflect not .
indeed , we sent forth among every nation a messenger , ; saying : 'serve you god , and eschew idols . ' then some . of them god guided , and some were justly disposed to error . so journey in the land , and behold how was the end of them that cried lies .
then , after that , will come a year when the people will have plenteous crops and when they will press .
and they went forth early , determined upon their purpose .
and most certainly we will settle you in the land after them ; this is for him who fears standing in my presence and who fears my threat .
and as for the boy , his parents were believers and we feared lest he should make disobedience and ingratitude to come upon them :
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is sickness said , “ god and his messenger promised us nothing but illusion . ”
noble , writers
they may understand my word ;
then because of their breaking their covenant , their defiance of allah ’ s signs , their killing of the prophets unjustly and for their saying , ‘ our hearts are uncircumcised ’ … indeed , allah has set a seal on them for their unfaith , so they do not have faith except a few .
then we destroyedthe rest ,
in them ye have benefits for a term appointed : in the end their place of sacrifice is near the ancient house .
thereafter adam received certain words from his lord , and he turned towards him ; truly he turns , and is all-compassionate .
say : i am forbidden to worship those unto whom ye cry beside allah since there have come unto me clear proofs from my lord , and i am commanded to surrender to the lord of the worlds .
loving and of equal age .
say :  who is the lord and sustainer of the heavens and the earth ?  say :  allah .  say :  do ye then takeprotectors other than him , such as have no power either for good or for harm to themselves ?  say :  are the blind equal with those who see ? or the depths of darkness equal with light ?  or do they assign to allah partners who have createdas he has created , so that the creation seemed to them similar ? say :  allah is the creator of all things : he is the one , the supreme and irresistible . 
by the sky which returns
and whilst returning to their homes , they used to return rejoicing .
and to the 'aadtheir brother hud . he said ,  o my people , worship allah ; you have no deity other than him . then will you not fear him ? 
musa said : what was thy object , o samiri ?
he will never enjoin you to take the angels or prophets for your lords . will he enjoin upon you unbelief when you have submitted yourselves to allah ?
do not hold the apostle 's callingamong you to be like your calling one to the other ; allah indeed knows those who steal away from among you , concealing themselves ; therefore let those beware who go against his order lest a trial afflict them or there befall them a painful chastisement .
do you now see any trace of them ?
have you not seen that allah has created the heavens and the earth with true purpose ? if he wills , he can remove you all and bring a new creation .
and he it is who created the two kinds , the male and the female ,
o you who believe ! take care of your ownselves , and love allah much ] . if you follow the right guidance and enjoin what is rightand forbid what is wrongno hurt can come to you from those who are in error . the return of you all is to allah , then he will inform you aboutthat which you used to do .
and obey god and his messenger , and do not dispute , lest you falter and lose your courage . and be steadfast . god is with the steadfast .
whatever good reaches you , o listeners , is from allah , and whatever ill reaches you is from yourselves ; and we have sent youas a noble messenger towards all mankind ; and allah is sufficient , as a witness .
 that we may show youof our greater signs .
he says :  i have wasted a great deal of wealth . 
who doth greater wrong than one who invents falsehood against allah , even as he is being invited to islam ? and allah guides not those who do wrong .
and among them are the illiterate who know nothing of the book except hearsay , and they only make conjectures .
the lord will say ,  do not argue in my presence ; i had certainly sent you a warning .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are overburdened by a debt ?
there the authority isfor allah , the truth . he is best in reward and best in outcome .
and the people of abraham , lot ,
the chieftains of his people , who were scornful , said unto those whom they despised , unto such of them as believed : know ye that salih is one sent from his lord ? they said : lo ! in that wherewith he hath been sent we are believers .
nay ! verily , he will be thrown into the crushing fire .
and they say , “ tales of the ancients ; he wrote them down ; they are dictated to him morning and evening . ”
and found you deeply engrossed in his love , so directed you ?
by the night as it conceals it ;
every soul will know what it had prepared .
and assuredly it hath been revealed unto thee and unto those before thee : if thou associatest surely of non-effect shall be made thy work , and thou shalt surely be of the losers .
they said ,  thus has said your lord ; indeed , he is the wise , the knowing . 
he brings the night in a part of the day and he brings the day in a part of the night ; and he has subjected the sun and moon ; each one runs to its fixed term ; such is allah , your lord – only his is the kingship ; and those whom you worship instead of him do not own even the husk of a date-seed .
it is allah who beginscreation ; then repeats it ; then shall ye be brought back to him .
surely god does not wrong anyone ; they wrong themselves .
those who seek merely the present world and its adornment . we fully recompense them for their work in this world , and they are made to suffer no diminution in it concerning what is their due .
it is he who gives life and death , and to himthe alternation of night and day : will ye not then understand ?
and assuredly we delivered the children of isra'il from an ignominous torment
but they denied him , and they hamstrung her , so allah doomed them for their sin and rased .
say :  this is a momentous message ,
then whoever disputes with you concerning him ] afterknowledge that has come to you , ] being a slave of allah , and having no share in divinity ) say :  come , let us call our sons and your sons , our women and your women , ourselves and yourselves - then we pray and invokethe curse of allah upon those who lie . 
who created death and life in order to try you to see who of you are best of deed . he is all-mighty and forgiving ,
and lo ! it is a revelation of the lord of the worlds ,
believers , spend out of what we have given you , before the day comes when there will be neither trading , friendship nor intercession . truly , it is those who deny the truth who are the wrongdoers .
and when the angels said , “ o maryam ! indeed allah has chosen you and purified you , and has this day , chosen you among all the women of the world . ”
thus do we try men through one another so that they may ask :  are these the ones of all of us who have been favoured by god ?  does god not know who are the grateful ?
just as thy lord ordered thee out of thy house in truth , even though a party among the believers disliked it ,
we have created them with a special creation ,
then , when they sensed our might , they started running away from it .
and they said ,  o thou sorcerer ! invoke thy lord for us according to his covenant with thee ; for we shall truly accept guidance . 
“ o our lord ! do not put us into the trial of the disbelievers , and forgive us , o our lord ! indeed you only are the most honourable , the wise . ”
why should you not eat such flesh when god has told you in detail what is unlawful to eat under normal conditions . most people , out of ignorance , are led astray by their desires . your lord knows best those who transgress .
that they do not make obeisance to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows what you hide and what you make manifest :
and they say : we have more wealth and children , and we shall not be punished .
when we told your mother what we relate :
they recognize god ’ s blessing , but then deny it , as most of them are ungrateful .
they have taken their scholars and monks as lords besides allah , andthe messiah , the son of mary . and they were not commanded except to worship one god ; there is no deity except him . exalted is he above whatever they associate with him .
and so for him who believeth not in allah and his messenger - lo ! we have prepared a flame for disbelievers .
and certainly we sent musa with our communications and clear authority ,
god also forgave the three people who lagged behind . grief made them feel as though there was no place in the whole vast earth to hide them or in their souls to conceal their sorrow . they began to believe that no one could save them fromexcept he himself . god pardoned them so that they would also repent for their sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
—those who are humble in their prayers ,
recite in the name of your lord who created -
he entered the city unnoticed by its people , and there he encountered two men fighting with one another -- one of his own people and the other one of his enemies . the one who belonged to his own people cried out to him for help against his foe -- whereupon moses struck him down with his fist , thereby causing his death . moses said ,  this is satan 's doing ; he is an open foe , leading man astray . 
too glorious and high is he , too exalted for what they say !
but should a bounty from allah come to you , he will say—as if there were noaffection between you and him— ‘ i wish i were with them so that i had achieved a great success ! ’
and the disbelievers say :  why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ?  you are only a warner , and to every people there is a guide .
dead , lifeless : nor do they know when they will be raised up .
and he possessed much wealth ; so he said to his companion , while he disputed with him : i have greater wealth than you , and am mightier in followers .
so is this welcome better , or the tree of zaqqum ?
these are the signs of the manifest book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command to whomever he wishes of his servants : ‘ warnthat there is no god except me ; so be wary of me . ’
have no doubt about what they worship . for they worship what their fathers worshipped before . andwe shall grant them their due portion in full , diminishing of it nothing .
every soul will taste death . then to us will you be returned .
yet most people will not have faith , however eager you should be .
god has forbidden you to eat that which has not been properly slaughtered , blood , pork , and the flesh of any animal which has not been consecrated with a mention of the name of god . however , in an emergency , without the intention of transgression or repeating transgression , one will not be considered to have committed a sin . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he whom allah lets go astray , none after him can be his protector . you will see that when the wrong-doers observe the chastisement , they will exclaim : “ is there any way to go back ? ”
say : lo ! none can protect me from allah , nor can i find any refuge beside him
and what is the matter with you , that you should not accept faith in allah ? whereas this noble messenger is calling you to believe in your lord , and allah has indeed already taken a covenant from you , if you believe .
the retribution of a harmful deed is the harm equal to it ; so whoever forgives and makes amends , so his reward is upon allah ; indeed he does not befriend the unjust .
andwhen we took your covenant and we raised above you the mount ,  hold firmly to what we have given you and hear . they said ,  we have heard and disobeyed .  and their hearts absorbedthe calf because of their disbelief . say :  worst indeed is that which your faith enjoins on you if you are believers . 
and his spouse and his brother ,
and likewise we showed ibrahim the entire kingdom of the heavens and the earth and so that he be of those who believe as eyewitnesses .
such is the knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the merciful .
or do they say ,  he has forged it  ? say :  had i forged it , then can ye obtain no singlefor me from allah . he knows best of that whereof ye talk ! enough is he for a witness between me and you ! and he is oft-forgiving , most merciful . 
and those who have believed and done righteous deeds - we will surely assign to them of paradisechambers beneath which rivers flow , wherein they abide eternally . excellent is the reward of theworkers
we punished the people of pharaoh with yearsand shortness of crops ; that they might receive admonition .
and to madyantheir brother shu'ayb , and he said ,  o my people , worship allah and expect the last day and do not commit abuse on the earth , spreading corruption . 
now we have no intercessors
except those who repent afterwards , and reform ; for god is forgiving and merciful .
this is of the tidings of things hidden which we reveal unto thee and thou wast not with them when they cast their reeds as to which of them should take care of maryam , nor wast thou with them when they disputed .
we shall brand him on the nose .
and whosoever of you has not ampleness of means that he may wed free believing women , let him wed such of the believing bondswomen as the right hands of you people own . and allah noweth well your belief , ye are one from the other . o ye may wed them then , with the leave of their owners , and give them their dowers reputably as properly wedded women , not as fornicateresses , nor as those taking to themselves secret paramours . and when they have been wedded , if they commit an indecency , on them the punishment shall be a moiety of that for free wedded women . this is for him among you , who dreameth perdition ; and that ye should abstain is better for you , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we called him from the right side of the mount and we drew him nearfor confidential discourse .
he responds to those who believe and do good deeds , and gives them more of his bounty ; agonizing torment awaits the deniers of the truth .
to 'ad we sent their brother hud . he said ,  o my people , worship god alone ; you have no god but him . you do nothing but fabricate lies .
such is the paradise which the righteous have been promised : it is watered by running streams : eternal is its fruit , and eternal is its shade . that is the recompense of those who are righteous , but the recompense of those who deny the truth is the fire .
then we made him a drop offluidin a secure abode .
and banana trees ,
have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for those before them ? they were more numerous than these , and mightier in power andtracesin the earth . but all that they used to earn availed them not .
they said , ‘ o you , to whom the reminder has been sent down , you are indeed crazy .
that is the book , wherein is no doubt , a guidance to the godfearing
and we shall bestow on them , of fruit and meat , anything they shall desire .
and abraham charged his sons with this and jacob likewise : 'my sons , god has chosen for you the religion ; see that you die not save in surrender . '
say ,  i call only upon my lord and do not associate anyone else with him . 
ask the children of israel how many clearwe have sent them . but if any one , after allah 's favour has come to him , substitutes , allah is strict in punishment .
and those who guard their private parts
and when harm touches men , they cry sincerely only to their lord , turning to him in repentance , but when he gives them a taste of his mercy , behold ! a party of them associate partners in worship with their lord .
then we revealed to moses , :  strike the sea with your rod .  thereupon the sea split up , and then each became like the mass of a huge mount .
as abiders therein . and vile will load ! them on the day of judgment as a load !
each of the gardens gave its fruit and withheld naught thereof . and we caused a river to gush forth therein .
and do not call , apart from god , on what neither benefits you nor harms you . if you do , you are then one of the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted and levelled with a single levelling ,
after him , we said to the children of israel , “ inhabit the land , and when the promise of the hereafter arrives , we will bring you all together . ”
let them then finish with their self-neglect and let them fulfil their vows , and go about the ancient house . '
they said :  o shu'aib ! we do not understand much of what you say , and we see you a weakamong us . were it not for your family , we should certainly have stoned you and you are not powerful against us . 
they neither have any respect for kinship nor for agreement in respect of the believers . such are indeed transgressors .
surely if they are driven forth , they shall not ; go forth with them , and surely if they are attacked , they shall succour them , not , and even ifs they succoured them they would turn their backs ; and then they shall not be succoured .
they desire to deceive allah and those who believe , and they deceive only themselves and they do not perceive .
 'it is allah who is my lord and your lord ; then worship him . this is a way that is straight . ' 
we taught him the craft of making garments that fortify you against your own violence . are you thankful ?
are you afraid to offer a freewill offering before your consultation ? but if you do not , allah will turn to you again , then establish the prayer and pay theobligatory charity , and be obedient to allah and his messenger . allah is aware of what you do .
then inquire of them , ,  are they a strongercreation or thosewe have created ?  indeed , we created men from sticky clay .
they will say ,  all this belongs to god .  say to them ,  how are you then deluded ? 
to you has come an apostle from among you . any sorrow that befalls you weighs upon him ; he is eager for your happiness , full of concern for the faithful , compassionate and kind .
o ye who believe ! make not unlawful the good things which allah hath made lawful for you , but commit no excess : for allah loveth not those given to excess .
the parable of those who spend their wealth in god ’ s way is that of a grain that produces seven spikes ; in each spike is a hundred grains . god multiplies for whom he wills . god is bounteous and knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby grain and vegetation
it is a trivial enjoyment ; then their refuge is hell , and it is an evil resting place .
and they would say :  our lord ! we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones , and they misled us as to thepath .
he who commits sin does so against his own soul . god is all knowing and wise .
it is he who mistreats the orphan .
how many a prophet did we send among the men of old !
when the seas are made to burst forth ,
say : 'those who forge falsehoods against allah shall not prosper '
turned aside therefrom is who is turned aside .
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not be remiss in remembering me .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned .
and the sun and the moon are brought together ,
we and our fathers of old ?
allah propounds a parable : there is a man whose ownership is shared by several quarrelsome masters , each pulling him to himself ; and there is another who is exclusively owned by one man . can the two be alike ? all praise and thanks be to allah . but most of them are unaware .
thus :  taste ye then of the : for those who resist allah , is the penalty of the fire . 
return you all to your father , and say ,  father , thy son stole ; we do not testify except that we know ; we were no guardians of the unseen .
whose eyes had been under a veil from remembrance of me , and who had been unable even to hear .
the gardens of eden , which they will enter . they will be adorned therein with gold bracelets and pearls , and their garments therein will be of silk .
so each we seized for his sin ; and among them were those upon whom we sent a storm of stones , and among them were those who were seized by the blast , and among them were those whom we caused the earth to swallow , and among them were those whom we drowned . and allah would not have wronged them , but it was they who were wronging themselves .
the bedouin arabs surpass all in unbelief and hypocrisy and are most likely to be unaware of the limits prescribed by allah in what he has revealed to his messenger . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
unto allah belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth . allah is able to do all things .
rather , their knowledge is arrested concerning the hereafter . rather , they are in doubt about it . rather , they are , concerning it , blind .
densely covered with foliage , appearing dark .
that we might follow the magicians if they are the predominant ? 
o prophet , fear allah and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . verily allah is all-knowing , most wise .
so when they had gone beyond that place , moosa said to his assistant , “ bring our breakfast – we have indeed faced great exertion in this journey of ours . ”
it is never the wish of those without faith among the people of the book , nor of the pagans , that anything good should come down to you from your lord . but allah will choose for his special mercy whom he will - for allah is lord of grace abounding .
one who accuses his wife and has no witnesses except himself shall swear four times by god that his charge is true ,
indeed , as-safa and al-marwah are among the symbols of allah . so whoever makes hajj to the house or performs 'umrah - there is no blame upon him for walking between them . and whoever volunteers good - then indeed , allah is appreciative and knowing .
said ,  because you have put me in error , i will surely sit in wait for them on your straight path .
the comets ,
 this is the day of sorting out , whose truth yedenied ! 
a fountain there , called salsabil .
we shall fix the scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that none will be wronged in the least ; and even if it were equal to a mustard seed in weight we shall take it . we are sufficient for computation .
o you who believe ! do not devour your property among yourselves falsely , except that it be trading by your mutual consent ; and do not kill your people ; surely allah is merciful to you .
those who in wading sport themselves .
you did not expect that the book would be delivered to you ; but it was a mercy from your lord . so do not be ever an advocate of the faithless .
we shall question the people to whom we had sent our apostles , , and will question the apostles .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth in truth ? were he to will , he could take you away and bring a new creation .
gardens of eden underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the reward of him who groweth .
are you then so eager that they should believe you , seeing there is a party of them that heard god 's word , and then tampered with it , and that after they had comprehended it , wittingly ?
‘ and among us some are virtuous and some are the other type ; we are split into several branches . ’
and they say : there is nothing but our life in this world ; we live and die and nothing destroys us but time , and they have no knowledge of that ; they only conjecture .
invite to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and debate with them in the most dignified manner . your lord is aware of those who stray from his path , and he is aware of those who are guided .
their followers will say ,  in fact , it is you who deserve condemnation . it was you who led us to hell , a terrible dwelling  .
whosoever seeketh the tillage of the hereafter unto him we shall give increase in his tillage ; and whosoever seeketh the tillage of the world we shall give him somewhat thereof , and in the hereafter his shall be no portion .
and the hosts of the shaitan , all .
they will say , ‘ three ; their dog is the fourth of them , ’ and say , ‘ five , their dog is the sixth of them , ’ taking a shot at the invisible . they will say , ‘ seven , their dog is the eighth of them. ’ say , ‘ my lord knows best their number , and none knows them except a few. ’ so do not dispute concerning them , except for a seeming dispute , and do not question about them any of them .
the believers fight for the cause of god . the unbelievers fight for the cause of the satan . so fight against the friends of satan for the evil plans of satan are certainly weak .
,  this is the result of what your hands have wrought . god is certainly not unjust to his servants . 
but the rest we destroyed utterly .
lord of the east and the west ; there is no god but he ; so take him for a guardian .
they it is who say : spend not on behalf of thosewith allah 's messenger that they may disperse ; when allah 's are the treasures of the heavens and the earth ; but the hypocrites comprehend not .
and indeed the sinners are in hell .
and brightening morning ,
though we did not give them any scriptures that they might have studied , nor did we send them any warner before you .
so those who believeand do righteous good deeds , for them is forgiveness and rizqun karim .
the person endowed with faith said : “ my people , follow me ; i shall direct you to the path of rectitude .
for the unbelievers , we have kept ready chains and fetters and a blazing fire .
 and they are raging furiously against us ;
god knows well what every female conceives . he knows what the wombs spoil and dispose of . in his plans everything has been designed proportionately .
it is he who created for you everything on earth , then turned to the heaven , and made them seven heavens . and he is aware of all things .
so do they not ponder the qur ’ an deeply , or are there locks on some of their hearts ?
that god may recompense the truthful ones for their truthfulness , and chastise the hypocrites , if he will , or turn again unto them . surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
say , ‘ invoke those whom you claimbesides allah ! they do not controlan atom ’ s weight in the heavens or the earth , nor do they have any share inthem , nor is any of them his helper . ’
your lord is best aware of what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he will indeed forgive those who relent and revert .
then , after sorrow he sent down peaceupon you in the shape of drowsiness that overcame some of you , but there were others who were anxious only about themselves . they entertained false notions about god , like the notions of the days of ignorance .  have we any say in the matter ?  they asked . say to them ,  all is in the hands of god .  they conceal in their hearts what they would not reveal to you . they say ,  had we had any say in the matter , none of us would have been killed here .  say to them ,  had you stayed in your homes , those whose death had been decreed would nevertheless have gone forth to the places where they were destined to die .  and all this befell you so that god might test what is in your minds . and in order to purify what was in your hearts . for god is aware of your innermost thoughts .
o prophet , tell your wives , your daughters and the believing women to draw their veils close to them , so it is likelier they will be known , and not hurt . allah is the forgiver , the most merciful .
certainly we have given youthe seven oft-repeated verses and the great quran .
the unbelievers say :  when we become dust , we and our forefathers , shall we really be brought out ?
and he ordered his people to pray and to give charity and his lord was pleased with him .
did i not enjoin upon you , o children of adam , that you not worship satan -indeed , he is to you a clear enemy -
it is a guidance and grace for those who believe .
owner of the throne , the glorious
that god may forgive thee thy former and thy latter sins , and complete his blessing upon thee , and guide thee on a straight path ,
out of them come pearls and coral :
and surely , we shall try you till we test those who strive hardand the patient ones , and we shall test your facts .
and because of their breaking their covenant , we have cursed them and made hard their hearts . they change words from their context and forget a part of that whereof they were admonished . thou wilt not cease to discover treachery from all save a few of them . but bear with them and pardon them . lo ! allah loveth the kindly .
 and behold ! ye come to us bare and alone as we created you for the first time : ye have left behind you allwhich we bestowed on you : we see not with you your intercessors whom ye thought to be partners in your affairs : so now all relations between you have been cut off , and yourfancies have left you in the lurch ! 
you worship not besides him exceptnames you have named them , you and your fathers , for which allah has sent down no authority . legislation is not but for allah . he has commanded that you worship not except him . that is the correct religion , but most of the people do not know .
say , “ o my people ! keep on with your works * in your positions , i am doing mine ; soon you will come to know for whom is the abode of the hereafter ; undoubtedly the unjust are never successful . ”
yet it will be only a single shout ,
and have they not observed that the shadows of the things allah has created incline to the right and to the left , in prostration to allah , and that they are servile ?
that is your punishment . so taste this punishment , and know that for the unbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
and the king said , “ bring him to me ” ; so when the bearer came to him , yusuf said , “ return to your lord and ask him what is the status of the women who had cut their hands ; indeed my lord knows their deception . ”
and as to those who believe and do good deeds , he will pay them fully their rewards ; and allah does not love the unjust .
do not disregard those who pray to their lord in the mornings and evenings , seeking their lord 's pleasure . you will not be held responsible for them nor will they be held responsible for you . do not disregard them lest you become unjust .
except him who repents and believes and does a good deed ; so these are they of whom allah changes the evil deeds to good ones ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we divinely inspired moosa that , “ journey with my bondmen in a part of the night and strike a dry path in the sea for them , you shall have no fear of firaun getting to you , nor any danger . ”
he said : my lord ! help me because they deny me .
when it is said to them : 'bow yourselves ' they do not bow .
but when he saw their hands not reaching for it , he distrusted them and felt from them apprehension . they said ,  fear not . we have been sent to the people of lot . 
those who reject , among the people of the book and among the polytheists , will be in hell-fire , to dwell therein . they are the worst of creatures .
divorce is allowed twice . then , either honorable retention , or setting free kindly . it is not lawful for you to take back anything you have given them , unless they fear that they can not maintain god 's limits . if you fear that they can not maintain god ’ s limits , then there is no blame on them if she sacrifices something for her release . these are god ’ s limits , so do not transgress them . those who transgress god ’ s limits are the unjust .
had muhammad invented some words against us , .
allah has prepared for them a severe torment . evil indeed is that which they used to do .
will pray for death ,
when they appeared to goliath and his soldiers , they said : 'lord , pour upon us patience . make us firm of foot and give us victory against the nation of unbelievers '
so also did we show abraham the power and the laws of the heavens and the earth , that he mighthave certitude .
how could i fear what you ascribeaspartners , when you do not fear ascribing to allah partners for which he has not sent down any authority to you ? sowhich of the two sides has a greater right to safety , if you know ?
 if ye obey a man like yourselves , behold , it is certain ye will be lost .
surely , by his judgement , your lord will decide between them . he is the mighty , the knower .
who had denied and turned away .
and the people were told :  will you join the assembly ?
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
that they may bear their burthens in full on the judgment- day and also some of the burthens of those whom they have led astray without knowledge . lo ! vile is that which they shall bear !
coin for them a similitude : the people of the city when those sentcame unto them ;
they are the ones who disbelieved and obstructed you from al-masjid al-haram while the offering was prevented from reaching its place of sacrifice . and if not for believing men and believing women whom you did not know - that you might trample them and there would befall you because of them dishonor withoutknowledge - .that allah might admit to his mercy whom he willed . if they had been apart , we would have punished those who disbelieved among them with painful punishment
lo ! allahwho splitteth the grain of corn and the date-stone . he bringeth forth the living from the dead , and is the bringer-forth of the dead from the living . such is allah . how then are ye perverted ?
most surely he is able to return him .
who listen to the wordand follow the bestof it . they are the ones whom allah has guided , and it is they who possess intellect .
but if they repent , and perform the prayers , and give the obligatory charity , then they are your brethren in faith . we detail the revelations for a people who know .
,  o my servants , no fear will there be concerning you this day , nor will you grieve ,
and keep laughing and do not weep ,
some of them listen to you . but can you make the deaf hear you , even though they can not understand ?
but if ye seek allah and his messenger , and the home of the hereafter , verily allah has prepared for the well-doers amongst you a great reward .
the people of noah impugned the apostles
how disbelieve ye in allah when ye were dead and he gave life to you ! then he will give you death , then life again , and then unto him ye will return .
andcame toward him , hastening .
and those who keep a guard on their prayer ,
surely this qur'an explains to the children of israel most of the matters concerning which they have disagreements
after we are dead and have become all dust and bones shall we still be requited ? '
but if it is discovered that both of them have been subject to sinning , then two others shall stand in their place , these being the nearest of those most concerned , and they shall swear by allah : 'our testimony is truer than their testimony , and we have not transgressed , because then we would surely be among the harmdoers '
have we not made the earthto draw together .
to fir'aunand his chiefs , but they followed the command of fir'aun , and the command of fir'aunwas no right guide .
therefor the orphan oppress not ,
i will not drive away the believers .
their apostles said unto them : we are naught but human beings like but allah bestoweth favour on you , of his bond whomsoever he willeth and it is not for us to bring you a men command of warrantv except by the allah . on allah then let the believers rely .
certainly we have created man to be in distress .
and believe in what i have sent down confirming what is with you , and do not be the first to disbelieve it . do not sell my verses for a little price and fear me .
and when our commandment came to pass we saved shu'eyb and those who believed with him by a mercy from us ; and thecry seized those who did injustice , and morning found them prostrate in their dwellings ,
make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss
and we said : o adam ! dwell you and your wife in the garden and eat from it a plenteouswherever you wish and do not approach this tree , for then you will be of the unjust .
he said , ' o my son , relate not thy vision to thy brothers , lest they devise against thee some guile . surely satan is to man a manifest enemy .
we have fastened every man 's omen to his neck . on the day of resurrection we shall produce for him his scroll in the shape of a wide open book , :
if , then , they turn away , say thou : sufficing unto me is allah , there is no god but he , on him i rely and he is the lord of mighty throne .
surely upon us rests the guidance ,
and keep the prayer established and pay the obligatory charity and obey the noble messenger , in the hope of attaining mercy .
then we shall know very well those most deserving to burn there .
would ye really approach men in your lusts rather than women ? nay , ye are a peopleignorant !
but if you avoid the major sins which you have been forbidden , we shall remit youroffences , and cause you to enter an honourable abode .
so he shall be in a pleasing life
god will reply to the soul ,  my revelations had certainly come to you but you rejected them . you were puffed-up with pride and you became an unbeliever  .
said ,  o my people ! what do you think ? if i have clear evidence from my lord , and he has sustained me with fair sustenance from himself . i have no desire to do , out of opposition to you , what i am asking you not to do . i only want to reform you as far as i can . nor can i succeed without god 's help . in him i have put my trust and to him i turn .
 for ye practise your lusts on men in preference to women : ye are indeed a people transgressing beyond bounds . 
indeed , the creation of heavens and earth is greater than the creation of mankind , yet most people do not know .
they will be seeing them ; the guilty will wish if only he could redeem himself from the punishment of that day , by offering his sons .
so they went off , whispering to one another ,
so that he may ascertain that they have communicated the messages of their lord , and he encompasses all that is with them , and he keeps an count of all things .
had the people of the book believed and been godwary , we would surely have absolved them of their misdeeds and admitted them into gardens of bliss .
we assuredly had taken him by the right hand
god will punish the hypocrites and the pagans , but he will accept the repentance of the believers . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
everyone on that day will have affairs to keep him occupied .
and we saved him from the people who denied our signs . indeed , they were a people of evil , so we drowned them , all together .
turn away from them and wait . they are , also , waiting .
aaron my brother
“ and mislead those whom you can among them with your voice , and raise an army against them with your cavalry and infantry , and be their partner in wealth and children , and give them promises ” ; and satan does not promise them except with deception .
that , because they have preferred the present life over the world to come , and that god guides not the people of the unbelievers .
there will only be a single jerk , and they will gape ,
and then , when he averts the misfortune from you , a group among you starts ascribing partners to their lord !
and we have destined for them intimate companions , who made alluring to them what was before them and behind them ; and the sentence among the previous generations of jinns and men , who have passed away , is proved against them ; for they are utterly lost .
we have revealed the quran with the truth , and with the truth it has come down . we have sent you forth only to give good news and to give warning --
it does not befit the most compassionate lord that he should take a son .
man says , 'what , when i am dead shall i then be brought forth alive ? '
and when luqman said to his son while he admonished him : o my son ! do not associate aught with allah ; most surely polytheism is a grievous iniquity --
his is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , he is the giver of life and death , and he has power over everything .
they said , “ by allah , you will keep remembering yusuf till your health fails you or you lose your life . ”
and whosoever seeketh beyond that , then it is these who are the transgressors
and certainly the reward of the hereafter is much better for those who believe and guard .
the day when the chastisement will overwhelm them from above and from under their feet , and he will say to them : “ taste now the consequence of the deeds that you used to commit . ”
then , when he brought them the truth from us , they said :  kill the sons of those who believe with him and let their women live  , but the plots of disbelievers are nothing but errors !
buttheir brotherstheyplunge them deeper into error , and they never stop short .
and he never urged the feeding of the needy ;
and he hath cast into the earth firm hills that it quake not with you , and streams and roads that ye may find a way .
the gardens of perpetual abode which they will enter along with those who do good from among their parents and their spouses and their offspring ; and the angels will enter in upon them from every gate :
allah alternates the night and the day . there is indeed a lesson in that for those who have insight .
there shall be sighing for them therein , and naught they shall hear .
to warn the living * , and to prove the word against disbelievers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approacheth one of you , if he leave wealth , that he bequeath unto parents and near relatives in kindness.a duty for all those who ward off .
when the magicians came , they asked the pharaoh ,  will there be any reward for us if we win ? 
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth a lie against allah or belieth his signs ? verily the wrong-doers shall not fare well .
said ,  do you reject my deities , abraham ? if you do not desist , i shall surely stone you to death . keep out of my way ! 
'there are among us some that are righteous , and some the contrary : we follow divergent paths .
those who disbelieve will suffer a harsh punishment , but those who believe and do righteous deeds will have forgiveness and a great reward .
said his fellow , as he was conversing with him , 'what , disbelievest thou in him who created thee of dust , then of a sperm-drop , then shaped thee as a man ?
and allah will never give respite to any soul when its promise arrives ; and allah is aware of your deeds .
surely we have warned you of a chastisement near at hand : the day when man shall see what his two hands have sent before , and the unbeliever shall say : o ! would that i were dust !
and fight them until there is no more fitnahandworship is for allah . but if they cease , let there be no transgression except against az-zalimun
verily this is an admonition ; then whosoever will , may choose a way unto his lord .
and made of him two mates , the male and the female .
they question thee about strong drink and games of chance . say : in both is great sin , andutility for men ; but the sin of them is greater than their usefulness . and they ask thee what they ought to spend . say : that which is superfluous . thus allah maketh plain to yourevelations , that haply ye may reflect .
indeed they will not avail you in any way against allah . indeed the wrongdoers are allies of one another , but allah is the ally of the godwary .
and if their turning away has grieved you , then if you can , seek a tunnel into the earth or a ladder into the sky to bring a sign for them ; and if allah willed , he could have brought them all together upon guidance , so o listenerdo not ever be of the ignorant .
ha . mim .
yet i claim not that my soul was innocent -- surely the soul of man incites to evil -- except inasmuch as my lord had mercy ; truly my lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
this is the paradise which you have received as your inheritance by virtue of what you have done .
and remember thou the name of thy lord in the morning and in the evening .
and he shows you his signs : which then of allah 's signs will you deny ?
say :  what thing is the most great in witness ?  say :  allahis witness between me and you ; this quran has been revealed to me that i may therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach . can you verily bear witness that besides allah there are other aliha ?  say  i bear nowitness !  say :  but in truth heis the only one ilah . and truly i am innocent of what you join in worship with him . 
not onebut rejected the messengers , but my punishment came justly and inevitably .
it is he who has sent his messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth , that he may uplift it above every religion , though the unbelievers be averse .
all praise is to allah – to him only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth – and his is the praise in the hereafter ; and he is the wise , the all aware .
so , do not be hasty with them . we are counting their number .
as you reside in this town ;
that is the reward of the enemies of allah -- the fire ; for them therein shall be the house of long abiding ; a reward for their denying our communications .
and hell will be displayed to whoever sees .
and if an entrance had been forced against them from its quarters , and then they had been asked to incite , they would have done so , and remained in itbut a little .
“ but you can worship whatever you wish besides him. ” say , “ the losers are those who lose their souls and their people on the day of resurrection. ” that is indeed the obvious loss .
and who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , or cries lies to his signs ? those - their portion of the book shall reach them ; till , when our messengers come to them , to take them away , they say , 'where is that you were calling on , beside god ? ' they will say , 'they have gone astray from us , and they will bear witness against themselves that they were unbelievers .
the pious will live in bountiful paradise ,
say : o followers of the book ! you follow no good till you keep up the taurat and the injeel and that which is revealed to you from your lord ; and surely that which has been revealed to you from your lord shall make many of them increase in inordinacy and unbelief ; grieve not therefore for the unbelieving people .
and when the girl-child buried alive shall be asked :
and endure them patiently ; and thy patience is not but from allah ; and grieve not over them , and be not thou in straitness because of that which they plot .
we had decreed that the infant must not be breast-fed by any nurse besides his mother . his sister said to the people of the pharaoh ,  may i show you a family who can nurse him for you with kindness ? 
and they found a servant from among our servants to whom we had given mercy from us and had taught him from us aknowledge .
those are they that have bought error at the price of guidance , and their commerce has not profited them , and they are not right-guided .
allah ! there is no allah save him . he gathereth you all unto a day of resurrection whereof there is no doubt . who is more true in statement than allah ?
and who guard their prayers .
'thulkarnain ' they said , 'look , gog and magog are corrupting the earth . build for us a barrier between us and them , and we will pay you a tribute '
certainly allah has turnedto the prophet and those who fledand the helpers who followed him in the hour of straitness after the hearts of a part of them were about to deviate , then he turned to them ; surely to them he is compassionate , merciful .
surely we destroyed many a town around you . we sent our messages to them repeatedly and in diverse forms that they may eschewand return .
nay , but whosoever surrendereth his purpose to allah while doing good , his reward is with his lord ; and there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
we shall call the guards of hell .
and whoever strives , strives only for himself , god is independent of all his creation ,
a spring at which those drawn close to god will drink .
by god , assuredly we sent messengers to nations before thee , but satan decked out fair to them their deeds ; he is their protector today , and there yet awaits them a painful chastisement .
they ever dwell therein . the doom will not be lightened for them , neither will they be reprieved .
they say :  we are obedient ,  but when they leave you , a section of them spend all night in planning other than what you say . but allah records their nightly . so turn aside from them , and put your trust in allah . and allah is ever all-sufficient as a disposer of affairs .
the creation of you all and the resurrection of you all are only asa single person . verily , allah is all-hearer , all-seer .
mothers may breastfeed their children two complete years for whoever wishes to complete the nursing . upon the father is the mothers ' provision and their clothing according to what is acceptable . no person is charged with more than his capacity . no mother should be harmed through her child , and no father through his child . and upon theheir islike that . and if they both desire weaning through mutual consent from both of them and consultation , there is no blame upon either of them . and if you wish to have your children nursed by a substitute , there is no blame upon you as long as you give payment according to what is acceptable . and fear allah and know that allah is seeing of what you do .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor yet postpone it .
it is not worthy of the prophet and those who believe to seek forgiveness for those who are idolaters , even though they may be their relatives , after they have come to know that they are destined for hell .
the gardens of eden whose gates shall be open to them ,
again nearer unto thee and nearer .
and wedded women , save what your right hands own . so god prescribes for you . lawful for you , beyond all that , is that you may seek , using your wealth , in wedlock and not in licence . such wives as you enjoy thereby , give them their wages apportionate ; it is no fault in you in your agreeing together , after the due apportionate . god is all-knowing , all-wise .
in six days he created the earth and the heavens and all that is between them ; then he established himself on the  throne  .the merciful : as to his glory , ask the one who knows .
the heavens may well nigh rend asunder from above while the angels proclaim the praise of their lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth . lo , it is allah , and he alone , who is most forgiving , most merciful .
and if you divorce them before you touch them , and you have already settled a dowry for them , thenhalf of what you have settled , unless they forgo it , or someone in whose hand is the marriage tie forgoes it . and to forgo is nearer to godwariness ; so do not forget graciousness among yourselves . indeed allah watches what you do .
they say :  o thou to whom the message is being revealed ! truly thou art mad !
he it is who is god in the heavens and the earth . he is the most wise , the all-knowing .
he answered :  whatever my lord has granted me is good enough . but help me with your labour and i will erect a rampart between you and them .
say , “ our god , initiator of the heavens and the earth , knower of all secrets and declarations . you will judge between your servants regarding what they had differed about . ”
i am none but a plain warner . 
but satan made them slip therefrom and caused them to depart from that in which they had been . 'go down , ' we said , 'be enemies to each other . the earth will provide your dwelling place an enjoyment for a while '
yet you pay attention
he said : o my people ! bethink you , if i rely on a clear proof from my lord and there hath come unto me a mercy from his presence , and it hath been made obscure to you , can we compel you to accept it when ye are averse thereto ?
and we helped them , so they were victorious .
so they were covered with whatever covered them ?
they will say : be thou glorified . thouart our guardian , not them ! nay , but they worshipped the jinn ; most of them were believers in them .
we will surely ease him toward hardship .
it may be thou frettest thy soul with grief , that they do not become believers .
how excellent it would be , if they were pleased with what allah and his noble messenger had given them and said , “ allah suffices us ; allah will now give us by his munificence , andallah ’ s noble messenger – and towards allah only are we inclined . ”
their backs do not rest on their beds , and they pray to their lord in fear and hope , and spend of what we have given them .
and proclaim among men the pilgrimage : they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , coming from every remote path ,
now , ask them , has your lord daughters , and they sons ?
about what they used to do .
and they say :  why does this messengereat food , and walk about in the markets . why is not an angel sent down to him to be a warner with him ?
for this i ask of you no wage , for my wage falls only on the lord of the worlds .
but if any reject the faith , let not his rejection grieve you : for to us they shall return , and we shall tell them the truth about their deeds : for god knows well all that is in the human hearts --
do you feel secure that he , who is over the heaven , will not cause the earth to sink with you , then behold it shakes ?
say to the unbelievers , if they give over he will forgive them what is past ; but if they return , the wont of the ancients is already gone !
“ the routes of the heavens , in order to glance at the god of moosa – and indeed i think he is a liar ” ; this is how the evil deeds of firaun were made seeming good to him , and he was stopped from the path ; and the evil scheme of firaun was destined to be ruined .
say : 'if the merciful had a son , i would be the first of the worshipers .
surely , those who disbelieve and die while they are unbelievers , the earth full of gold shall not be accepted from one of them , though he should offer to ransom himself with it , these it is who shall have a painful chastisement , and they shall have no helpers .
and those who do not implore besides god any other god , and do not kill the soul which god has made sacred—except in the pursuit of justice—and do not commit adultery . whoever does that will face penalties .
satan wants to provoke strife and hatred among you through intoxicants and gambling , and to prevent you from the remembrance of god , and from prayer . will you not desist ?
yet over you there are watchers ,
 that you should worship allah , be dutiful to him , and obey me ,
and those who respond to their lord and keep up prayer , and their rule is to take counsel among themselves , and who spend out of what we have given them .
and when the sky is torn away ,
call thembytheir fathers , that is more just with allah . but if you know not their father'syour brothers in faith and mawalikum . and there is no sin on you if you make a mistake therein , except in regard to what your hearts deliberately intend . and allah is ever oftforgiving , most merciful .
and we have made the heaven a roof , safe and well guarded . yet they turn away from its signs .
everyone will have a position proportionate to the degree of his deeds . finally , god will recompense them for their deeds and they will not be wronged .
aof immunity from allah and his messenger , to those of the pagans with whom ye have contracted mutual alliances : -
 and remember when he made you successors after 'adand gave you habitations in the land , you build for yourselves palaces in plains , and carve out homes in the mountains . so remember the gracesfrom allah , and do not go about making mischief on the earth . 
whensaw the moon rise all aglow , he said :  this is my lord .  but even as the moon set , said :  if my lord had not shown me the way i would surely have gone astray . 
 but this thought of yours which ye did entertain concerning your lord , hath brought you to destruction , andhave ye become of those utterly lost ! 
the jews say : 'the hand of allah is chained ' their own hands are chained ! and they are cursed for what they said ! rather , his hands are both outstretched , he spends as he will . that which allah has sent down to you will surely increase the tyranny and disbelief of many of them . we have stirred among them enmity and hatred up until the day of resurrection . whenever they kindle the fire of war , allah extinguishes it . they spread corruption in the land , and allah does not love those who corrupt .
if youfear from a people betrayal , throwback to them , on equal terms . indeed , allah does not like traitors .
and those who have no knowledge say : why does not allah speak to us or a sign come to us ? even thus said those before them , the like of what they say ; their hearts are all alike . indeed we have made the communications clear for a people who are sure .
say :  tell me ! ifyour water were to be sunk away , who then can supply you with flowingwater ? 
there is none of you but will come to it : adecided certainty with your lord .
indeed those who swear allegiance to you , swear allegiance only to allah : the hand of allah is above their hands . then whosoever breaks his oath , breaks it only to his own detriment , and whoever fulfills the covenant he has made with allah , he will give him a great reward .
and pharaoh , and those before him , and the cities overthrown , committed habitual sin .
and when we cause mankind to taste of mercy they exult thereat ; then if an evil befalleth them because of that which their hands have sent forth , lo ! they despair .
but he was not long in coming , and he said : i have found outthat thou apprehendest not , and i come unto thee from sheba with sure tidings .
he said , ‘ indeed i am a servant of allah ! he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
on that night is made distinct every precise matter -
but in the gardens the righteous shall live in bliss ,
alif , lam , mim ,
allah loveth not the utterance of harsh speech save by one who hath been wronged . allah is ever hearer , knower .
a chastisement from allah , the lord of the ascending steps ,
by the afternoon !
of molten pitch shall be their garments , their faces covered with flames ,
do not the unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were joined together , before we clove them asunder ? we made from water every living thing . will they not then believe ?
a spring from which those brought near drink .
verily the houris about to come . i keep it secret that every soul may be rewarded for its endeavour .
i deliver to you the messages of my lord and i am a faithful adviser to you :
‘ indeed i have turned my face toward him who originated the heavens and the earth , as a hanif , and i am not one of the polytheists . ’
neither shady nor protecting against the blazing fire .
and i will guide you to your lord , and you will turn reverent . ”
and to the three who were left behind , until , when the earth became strait for them , for all its breadth , and their souls became strait for them , and they thought that there was no shelter from god except in him , then he turned towards them , that they might also turn ; surely god turns , and is all-compassionate .
and his comrade shall say , 'this is what i have , made ready . '
'peace be upon elias ! '
i had no knowledge of the high council when they disputed .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and of whatever lies between the two , the lord of the easts .
 allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection about that wherein you used to differ . 
 my power has perished from me !  ...
save those that pray
do not approach the orphan ’ s property except in the best manner , until he comes of age . fulfill the covenants ; indeed all covenants are accountable .
leave them then till they meet that day of theirs wherein they shall be made to swoon :
nay ! he shall most certainly be hurled into the crushing disaster ,
the disbelievers alleged that they will surely not be raised again ; proclaim , “ surely yes , why not ? by oath of lord , you will surely be raised again and you will then be informed of your misdeeds ; and this is easy for allah . ”
they assert kinship between him and the angels . but the angels know that theywill be arraigned .
nigh unto men has drawn their reckoning , while they in heedlessness are yet turning away ;
if other near of kin orphans and needy are pre sent at the time of division of inheritance give them some thing of it and speak to them kindly .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
for a certain number of days ; but whoever among you is sick or on a journey , thenanumber of other days ; and those who are not able to do it may effect a redemption by feeding a poor man ; so whoever does good spontaneously it is better for him ; and that you fast is better for you if you know .
they shall say , 'glory be to thee ' ! thou art our protector , apart from them ; nay rather , they were serving the jinn ; most of them believed in them . '
and some of us have surrendered , and some of us have deviated . those who have surrendered sought rectitude ;
 that shall be their recompense , hell ; because they disbelieved and took my ayatand my messengers by way of jest and mockery .
the people of al-hijr denied our apostles ;
behold ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth ; in the alternation of the night and the day ; in the sailing of the ships through the ocean for the profit of mankind ; in the rain which allah sends down from the skies , and the life which he gives therewith to an earth that is dead ; in the beasts of all kinds that he scatters through the earth ; in the change of the winds , and the clouds which they trail like their slaves between the sky and the earth ; -indeed are signs for a people that are wise .
and certainly we gave to ibrahim his rectitude before , and we knew him fully well .
and when the two groups saw each other , moses ' companions said ,  we are sure to be overtaken . 
verily we have sent thee in truth , as a bearer of glad tidings , and as a warner : and there never was a people , without a warner having lived among them .
and when they went in before joseph , he took his brother unto him , saying : lo ! i , even i , am thy brother , therefore sorrow not for what they did .
for the righteous are gardens of delight with their lord .
and when the stars fall , dispersing ,
then , when they beheld it as a dense cloud coming toward their valleys , they said : here is a cloud bringing us rain . nay , but it is that which ye did seek to hasten , a wind wherein is painful torment ,
he hears the revelations of god which are recited to him , then persists in his arrogance as if he had not even heard them . tell him that he will suffer a painful torment .
indeed , if they come to know of you , they will stone you or return you to their religion . and never would you succeed , then - ever . 
andthe man of the fish , when he went off in anger and thought that we would not decreeupon him . and he called out within the darknesses ,  there is no deity except you ; exalted are you . indeed , i have been of the wrongdoers . 
even then we did forgive you ; there was a chance for you to be grateful .
allah is the protector of those who have faith : from the depths of darkness he will lead them forth into light . of those who reject faith the patrons are the evil ones : from light they will lead them forth into the depths of darkness . they will be companions of the fire , to dwell therein .
is there someone who will lend an excellent loan to allah , so that he may increase it for him several times over ? and allah restricts and eases– and it is to him that you will return .
and it is not your wealth , nor your children that bring you nearer to us , but only hewho believes , and does righteous deeds ; as for such , there will be twofold reward for what they did , and they will reside in the high dwellingsin peace and security .
it is he who made two bodies of water flow side by side , one freshsweet , the other brinebitter , and has placed an interstice , a barrier between them .
the sorcerers fell to the ground in homage ,
those whom we have given the book recognize him just as they recognize their sons , but a part of them indeed conceal the truth while they know .
and he it is who sends down water from the cloud , then we bring forth with it buds of all , then we bring forth from it greenfrom which we produce grain piled up ; and of the palm-tree , of the sheaths of it , come forth clusterswithin reach , and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates , alike and unlike ; behold the fruit of it when it yields the fruit and the ripening of it ; most surely there are signs in this for a people who believe .
say : obey allah and the apostle ; but if they turn back , then surely allah does not love the unbelievers .
o man ! what has deceived you about your generous lord
so we let loose upon them the flood , and the locusts , and the lice , and the frogs , and blood—all explicit signs—but they were too arrogant . they were a sinful people .
and we destroyed those like you , is there any that will remember !
indeed , the record of the pious is in illeeyun .
they ask your legal instruction concerning women , say : allah instructs you about them , and about what is recited unto you in the book concerning the orphan girls whom you give not the prescribed portionsand yet whom you desire to marry , andthe children who are weak and oppressed , and that you stand firm for justice to orphans . and whatever good you do , allah is ever all-aware of it .
and we gave him the glad tidings of is-haq , a prophet , and of the righteous .
and indeed that township is upon a road still in use .
there they have fruits , and they have whatever they want .
, ask them ,  can any of your idols create something , and then bring it back to life again ?  say ,  only god can originate the creation and bring it to life again . where have you strayed ? 
so fear allah as much as ye can ; listen and obey and spend in charity for the benefit of your own soul and those saved from the covetousness of their own souls , - they are the ones that achieve prosperity .
surely , your lord will be forgiving and merciful towards those who migrated after persecution and strove hard for the cause of god and remained steadfast .
which will neither nourish nor avail against hunger .
or were you witnesses when death approached jacob , and he said to his sons , “ what will you worship after me ? ” they said , “ we will worship your god , and the god of your fathers , abraham , ishmael , and isaac ; one god ; and to him we submit . ”
roast in it today , because you persistently disbelieved .
praise be to allah , the cherisher and sustainer of the worlds ;
so be steadfast , just as you have been commanded— and whoever has turnedwith you—and do not overstep the bounds . indeed , he watches what you do .
undoubtedly allah heard them who said , “ allah is needy , and we are the wealthy ” ; we shall keep recorded their saying and their wrongfully martyring of the prophets ; and we shall say , “ taste the punishment of the fire ! ”
and not equal are the living and the dead ! indeed allah causes them to listen * , whomever he wills ; and you can not make those who are in the graves * * listen .
verily , those who believe ) including all obligations ordered by islam ] and do righteous good deeds , they are the best of creatures .
lo ! ye come with lust unto men instead of women . nay , but ye are wanton folk .
god brought down those among the people of the book who had supported the confederate tribes from their castles and struck their hearts with terror . you did away with some of them and captured the others .
is he then unaware that allah seeth ?
and he called to his lord , saying , 'these are a sinful people . '
except those who believeand do righteous good deeds , and recommend one another to the truthwhich allah has ordained , and abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deedswhich allah has forbidden ) , and recommend one another to patience .
allah does not take you to task for oaths which are made unintentionally but he does take you to task for oaths which you ratify ; so the redemption of such oaths is to provide food to ten needy persons equal to the average of what you feed your family , or to clothe them , or to free one slave ; and for one who has no means , is the fasting for three days ; this is the redemption of your oaths when you have sworn ; and fulfil your oaths ; this is how allah explains his verses to you , so that you may be thankful .
thereafter we sent our apostles , successively . so oft as there came unto a community their apostle , they belied him , so we made them follow one anot her , and we made them bywords : so away with a people who believe not !
so let the people of the gospel judge according to what god has sent down therein . whosoever judges not according to what god has sent down -- they are the ungodly .
which we laid up in a safe abode
o believers , when you are journeying in the path of god , be discriminating , and do not say to him who offers you a greeting , 'thou art not a believer , ' seeking the chance goods of the present life . with god are spoils abundant . so you were aforetime ; but god has been gracious to you . so be discriminating ; surely god is aware of the things you do .
allah , your lord and lord of your forefathers ? , ’
as for those who divided their religion and became sects—you have nothing to do with them . their case rests with god ; then he will inform them of what they used to do .
and they supposed there should be no trial ; but blind they were , and deaf . then god turned towards them ; then again blind they were , many of them , and deaf ; and god sees the things they do .
if you fear that you might not treat the orphans justly , then marry the women that seem good to you : two , or three , or four . if you fear that you will not be able to treat them justly , then marryone , or marry from among those whom your right hands possess . this will make it more likely that you will avoid injustice .
and those who believe and work righteous works -- we shall surely cause them enter among the righteous .
and whoever desires a religion other than islam , it shall not be accepted from him , and in the hereafter he shall be one of the losers .
and on that day , hell is brought forward . on that day , man will remember , but how will remembrance avail him ?
and you committed that deed you committed , and you were ungrateful . ”
those whose souls the angels remove in a state of purity , saying , “ peace be upon you – enter paradise , the reward of your deeds . ”
thus will they confess their sins . damned are these inmates of the blazing fire .
indeed in this is a sign for one who fears the punishment of the hereafter ; this is the day on which everyone will be gathered , and this is the day of attendance .
besides god , and lead them to the way to hell .
they assign daughters to god , glory be to him ! , but for themselvesthat they desire to have .
as guidance and good tidings for the believers
he said : these are my daughters , if you will do .
and for all , there will be degrees according to that which they did , that hemay recompense them in full for their deeds . and they will not be wronged .
o prophet , sufficient for you is allah and for whoever follows you of the believers .
only those believe in our revelations who , when they are reminded of them , fall down prostrate and hymn the praise of their lord , and they are not scornful ,
therefore shun those who turn away from our message and desire nothing but the life of this world .
.  advise me , o nobles ,  she said  in this matter . i do not decide any thing until you concur . 
say :  i do not ask any compensation of you for it , nor am i a specious pretender .
in this case is protection only from allah , the true , he is best for reward , and best for consequence .
it will be said to them ,  this day we shall forget you , as you yourselves forgot that you would meet this day . your abode shall be the fire , and you shall have no helpers .
such a promise will never come true .
say , ‘ who can guard you , day and night , againstthe all-beneficent ? ’ indeed , they are disregardful of their lord ’ s remembrance .
and they will say , “ all praise is to allah , who has made his promise to us come true , and has bequeathed us this land , to stay in paradise wherever we wish ! ” so what an excellent reward for the performers !
and they say : when cometh this torment if ye are truth- tellers !
they will question thee concerning the spoils . say : 'the spoils belong to god and the messenger ; so fear you god , and set things right between you , and obey you god and his messenger , if you are believers . '
these transgressed beyond bounds in the lands ,
we have created for gehenna many jinn and men : they have hearts , but understand not with them ; they have eyes , but perceive not with them ; they have ears , but they hear not with them . they are like cattle ; nay , rather they are further astray . those -- they are the heedless .
verily allah hath bought of the believers their lives and their riches for the price that theirs shall be the garden : they fight in the way of allah and slay and are slain : a promise due thereon in the taurat , in the injil - and the qur'an-and who is more faithful unto his covenant than allah ? rejoice wherefore in your bargain which ye have made . and that it is the mighty achievement .
is he who was dead , then we gave him life , and made for him a light by which he walks among the people , like he who is in total darkness , and can not get out of it ? thus the doings of disbelievers are made to appear good to them .
say ,  all praise be to god , and peace be upon those servants of his whom he has chosen . is god better , or what they associate with him ?
say :  that is a message supreme , -
surely those who disbelieve in the reminder when it comes to them , and most surely it is a mighty book :
andthose who disbelieve in and reject my communications , they are the inmates of the fire , in it they shall abide .
do they think that by what we aid them with of wealth and children ,
if you could only see when they are terrified , and there is no escape , and they are seized from a nearby place .
this is so that he may make clear to them what they have differed about and so that those who are bent on denying the truth may realize that they were lying .
but those who were given knowledge said , “ woe to you ! the reward of god is better for those who believe and do righteous deeds. ” yet none attains it except the steadfast .
every soul will be recompensed for its deeds on this day . there will be no injustice . certainly god 's reckoning is swift .
of evil-doers :
the people of the book ask you to bring down for them a book from heaven . of moses they demanded a greater thing than that . they said to him :  show us god face to face .  a thunderbolt struck them for their wickedness . after that , they took to worshipping thecalf , after all evidence of the truth had come to them ! yet we pardoned even that and bestowed on moses clear authority .
god condemned satan when he said ,  i will certainly take my revenge from your servants .
and do not keep your hand tied to your neck , nor spread it out fully , lest you end up liable and regretful .
well know we that thy bosom is oppressed by what they say ,
giving its fruit at all times , by the leave of its lord and allah sets forth parables for mankind in order that they may remember .
on that day when they shall be pitched into the fire of gehenna ,
we are about to reveal to you a mighty word .
he holds the keys to the unseen ; none knows them but he . he has knowledge of all that land and sea contain . no leaf falls without his knowledge , nor is there a single grain in the darkness of the earth , or anything , wet or dry , but is recorded in a clear record .
say thou :  yea , and ye shall then be humiliated . 
—those who avoid major sins and indecencies , and forgive when angered ;
they will say , “ but it is you ! there is no welcome for you ! it is you who brought it upon us ! what a miserable end ! ”
those who disbelieved and avertedfrom the way of allah - we will increase them in punishment overpunishment for what corruption they were causing .
verily i am unto you an apostle trusted .
observedevotional obligations and fear , for it is he before whom you will be gathered . 
 behold ! thy sister goeth forth and saith , 'shall i show you one who will nurse and rear the ? ' so we brought thee back to thy mother , that her eye might be cooled and she should not grieve . then thou didst slay a man , but we saved thee from trouble , and we tried thee in various ways . then didst thou tarry a number of years with the people of midian . then didst thou come hither as ordained , o moses !
perfected are the laws of your lord in truth and justice , and there is no changing his laws . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
but if they break their pledges after making them and attack your faith , make war on the leaders of unbelief that they may desist , for they have no regard for their pledged words .
and it is not amusement .
when the disciples said ,  jesus , son of mary , can your lord send us a table full of food from heaven ?  and you replied ,  have fear of god if you are true believers  .
we placed firm mountains on earth lest it would shake them away . we made wide roads for them so that they might have the right guidance .
shall i take gods besides him ? if the all-beneficent desired to cause me any distress , their intercession will not avail me in any way , nor will they rescue me .
so eat and drink and be contented . and if you see from among humanity anyone , say , 'indeed , i have vowed to the most merciful abstention , so i will not speak today toman . ' 
he said to his servants , “ put their goods in their saddlebags ; perhaps they will recognize them when they return to their families , and maybe they will come back . ”
do you think you will get away before god knows who among you fought and did not take anyone but god , his apostle and the faithful , as their friends ? god is cognisant of all that you do .
to reside therein for ages ,
lo ! we revealed it on the night of predestination .
do you engage in carnal relations with men , rob the travellers , and commit evil in your gatherings ? his people had no answer but to say ,  bring upon us the torment of god if you are truthful  .
they shall have fruits therein , and all that they ask for .
but he who comes to him as a believer , having done good deeds , shall be exalted to the highest ranks ,
'groan not today ; surely you shall not be helped from us .
as though they had not dwelt there . lo ! thamud disbelieved in their lord . a far removal for thamud !
then a man came running from the furthest part of the city , 'moses ' he said , 'the assembly are plotting to kill you . leave , for i am one of your sincere advisers '
such people are on the right way from their lord and such are truly successful .
say : 'you will not be questioned concerning our sins , neither shall we be questioned as to what you do . '
woe to me ! i wish i had not taken so and so as a friend !
that tells you to do whatever you want ?
he shall say : i have wasted much wealth .
or , like the darknesses in a sea deep ; there covereth it a wave from above it , a wave from above it , above which is a cloud : darknesses one above anot her : when he putteth out his hand well-nigh he seeth it not . and upto whomsoever allah shall not appoint a light , his shall be no light .
those whom they call upon , other than him , have no power to intercede , except those that have knowingly borne witness to the truth .
when he said unto his father : o my father ! why worshippest thou that which heareth not nor seeth , nor can in aught avail thee ?
wherein are fruit and sheathed palm-trees ,
we did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them two save with truth andan appointed term ; and those who disbelieve turn aside from what they are warned of .
joseph said ,  it was she who tried to seduce me .  someone from the household in confirmation of joseph 's statement said ,  if his shirt it torn from the front , she has spoken the truth and he is lying ,
when they came in to him , and said ,  salam , !  he answered ;  salam , ,  and said :  you are a people unknown to me , 
i swear by the time ,
there are many living creatures which do not carry their sustenance , but god provides them and you with sustenance . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
do they not perceive that god , who created the heavens and the earth , has the power to create the like of them ? there is no doubt that . he has fixed a term for them . even then the wicked disdain everything but unbelief .
allah does not forbid that you be kind and just to those who did not fight against you on account of religion , nor drove you out of your homes . surely allah loves those who are equitable .
they consider it a favor to you that they have accepted islam . say ,  do not consider your islam a favor to me . rather , allah has conferred favor upon you that he has guided you to the faith , if you should be truthful . 
and , remember the name of your lord at the dawn and in the evening ;
whoever allah sends astray - there is no guide for him . and he leaves them in their transgression , wandering blindly .
allah already knows those among you who keep backfrom fighting in allah 's cause , and those who say to their brethren  come here towards us ,  while theycome not to the battle except a little .
until he was as close to him as the distance of two bows , or even less .
god has certainly heard the words of the woman who disputed with you about her husband and whocomplained to god . god was listening to your argument . he is all-hearing and all-aware .
they do not wait aught but that the angels should come to them or that the commandment of your lord should come to pass . thus did those before them ; and allah was not unjust to them , but they were unjust to themselves .
verily those who hope not for meeting with us , and , well- pleased with the life of the world , and are satisfied therewith , and those who are neglectful of our signs .
'be obedient to me o worshipers of allah . i am your honest messenger .
they can not listen to the speech of those on higher elevations and they are targeted from every side .
and they misled many . so do not give the evil-doers increase but in error .
it is he who made the sun radiate a brilliant light and the moon shed its lustre , and ordained for it stages so that you may learn to count out the years andreckoning of time . god has not created all these without a purpose . he makes plain his revelations to men of understanding .
they shall have all that they wish for , in the presence of their lord : such is the reward of those who do good :
and what you do not see
it is he who has sent down to you the book . some of its verses are precise in meaning they are the foundation of the book and others obscure . those whose hearts are swerving with disbelief , follow the obscure desiring sedition and desiring its interpretation , but no one knows its interpretation except allah . those who are wellgrounded in knowledge say : 'we believe in it , it is all from our lord . and none remember except those who are possessed of minds .
indeed you will come to know soon .
thus we have sent among you a messenger of your own to recite our revelations to you , purify you and teach you the book and wisdom , and to teach you what you did not know .
when the savage beasts are gathered
how many habitations that had come to boast of their resources have we destroyed ? these their dwellings were never inhabited except rarely after them ; and they came back to us .
or , have you a book from which you study
 whoever is an enemy to allah , his angels , his messengers , jibraeland mikael , then verily , allah is an enemy to the disbelievers . 
their eyes humbled , they will emerge from the graves as if they were locusts spreading ,
his people argued with him . he said ,  are you arguing with me about god , while he has guided me ? i have no fear of any partner you ascribe to him , unless my lord should wish otherwise . my lord encompasses all things in his knowledge , so will you not pay heed ?
a messenger from among them had come to them , but they denounced him , so the punishment seized them in the midst of their wrongdoing .
looking towards their lord ;
o believers , take precautions , and advance in detachments , or go all together in a body .
hereplied : ' i am better than he . you created me from fire , and you created him from clay '
when it is said unto them : beware of that which is before you and that which is behind you , that haply ye may find mercy .
so serve , apart from him , whomsoever you please. ” say : “ behold , the real losers shall be those who will have lost their own selves and their kith and kin on the day of resurrection . behold , that is the obvious loss .
degradingand exalting ;
when you have divorced women and they have reached the end of their waiting period , either keep them in kindness or let them go with kindness . but you shall not keep them , being harmful , in order to transgress . whoever does this wrongs himself . do not take the verses of allah in mockery . remember the favor of allah upon you , and what he sent down to you from the book and wisdom to exhort you . fear allah and know that he has knowledge of everything .
 all will certainly be gathered together for the meeting appointed for a day well-known .
and thisis the blessed book which we have sent down ; so follow it and be pious , so there may be mercy upon you .
we did not make them bodies that did not eat food , nor were they immortal .
then let man look at his food ,
but how will it be when the angels cause them to die smiting their backs .
surely those who believe , and those who leave their homes and fight in the way of god , may hope for his benevolence , for god is forgiving and kind .
so how dreodful have been my torment and my warning .
say to the people of the book ,  do not wrongly exceed the proper limit of devotion to your religion or follow the desires of the people who have erred . they have misled many others and have themselves stayed far away from the right path .
but seek the forgiveness of allah ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
 this is what we rehearse unto thee of the signs and the message of wisdom . 
but they called their comrade and he tookand killed .
and they fall down upon their faces , weeping , and their humility increases whenis recited to them .
'they are upon my tracks , ' moses said . ' i have hastened , lord , only that i may please thee . '
but they were froward , so we sent on them the flood of 'iram , and in exchange for their two gardens gave them two gardens bearing bitter fruit , the tamarisk and here and there a lote-tree .
 we would have indeed been the chosen slaves of allah ! 
they said , ‘ invoke your lord for us that he may clarify for us what she may be. ’ he said , ‘ he says , she is a cow , neither old nor young , of a middle age . now do what you are commanded . ’
but as for him who has faith and acts righteously , he shall have the best reward , and we will assign him easy tasks under our command . ’
they say ,  why has no sign been given to him by his lord ?  say ,  the signs are in the hands of god . i am but a plain warner . 
and fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but transgress not the limits . truly , allah likes not the transgressors . ] .
except an old womanamongst those who tarried .
'do not call out today for one destruction ; call out for many destructions '
there shall be calmness and ease , a garden of delight .
so he has no friend here today .
and say to him ,  would you like to reform yourself ?
and of men and beasts and cattle are various species of it likewise ; those of his servants only who are possessed of knowledge fear allah ; surely allah is mighty , forgiving .
yet how will they make thee their judge seeing they have the torah , wherein is god 's judgment , then thereafter turn their backs ? they are not believers .
when thou dost recite the qur'an , we put , between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter , a veil invisible :
and we have not made the keepers of the fire except angels . and we have not made their number except as a trial for those who disbelieve - that those who were given the scripture will be convinced and those who have believed will increase in faith and those who were given the scripture and the believers will not doubt and that those in whose hearts is hypocrisy and the disbelievers will say ,  what does allah intend by this as an example ?  thus does allah leave astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and none knows the soldiers of your lord except him . and mention of the fire is not but a reminder to humanity .
it is he who has spread out the earth and set in it firm mountains and streams , and of every fruit in it he has made two kinds . he draws the night ’ s cover over the day . there are indeed signs in that for a people who reflect .
 go to pharaoh . indeed , he has transgressed .
indeed allah conferred a great favour on the believers when he sent among them a messengerfrom among themselves , reciting unto them his verses , and purifying them , and instructing themthe bookand al-hikmah ] , while before that they had been in manifest error .
we gave the suppressed people the blessed eastern and western regions as their inheritance . thus , the promises of your lord to the children of israel all came true because of the patience which they exercised . he destroyed all the establishments of the pharaoh and his people .
he said : so surely we have tried your people after you , and the samiri has led them astray .
he begets not , nor is he begotten .
and follow what the devils recited over the kingdom of solomon . solomon did not disbelieve , it is the devils who disbelieved , teaching people magic and that which was sent down upon the angels harut and marut in babylon . they did not teach anyone , until both had said : 'we have been sent as a trial ; do not disbelieve ' from them they learned how they might separate a husband and his wife . however , they did not harm anyone with it , except by the permission of allah . indeed , they learned what harms them and does not profit them , yet they knew that anyone who buys it would have no share in the everlasting life . evil is that for which they have sold their souls , if they but knew !
thesending down of the book , there is no doubt in it , is from the lord of all the worlds .
and they will say , “ is there any one – any magician ? ”
and how they say what they do not do ?
then there comes to them what they have been promised ,
and the mountains : how they were fixed ?
and they bar them from the way , and they think they are guided ,
they swear by allah with solemn oaths that allah will not resurrect those who die . yes indeed , it is a promise binding upon him , but most people do not know ,
my people , today the kingdom is yours , and you are supreme in the land . but if allah 's chastisement were to come upon you , who will come to our help ? ” pharaoh said : “ i only counsel what i consider right ; i only direct you to the path of rectitude . ”
alif . lam . ra . this is a book which we have sent down unto thee , that thou mayest bring the mankind forth from the darknesses unto the light , by the command of their lord : unto the path of the mighty , the praiseworthy .
and it is he who produced you from one soul anda place of dwelling and of storage . we have detailed the signs for a people who understand .
they will say ,  nor you ! no welcome for you . you , , brought this upon us , and wretched is the settlement . 
will you not remember ? i do not say to you ,  i possess the treasuries of god  ; i know not the unseen ; and i do not say ,  i am an angel .  nor do i say to those your eyes despise ,  god will not give them any good  ; god knows best what is in their hearts . 'surely in that case i should be among the evildoers . '
and if we had willed , surely ! we would have given every person his guidance , but the word from me took effect , that i will fill hell with jinn and mankind together .
the day the convulsiveshatters convulsively
or did you suppose you would be left in peace , and god knows not as yet those of you who have struggled , and taken not -- apart from god and his messenger and the believers -- any intimate ? god is aware of what you do .
and the replenishing earth ,
on the day when their tongues , hands and feet shall testify against them concerning what they were doing .
we have decreed among you death ; we shall not be outstripped ;
his heart did not lie of what he saw .
arrogant towards it—talked nonsense about it—disregarded it .
not for you , , is the decision whether he shouldor forgive them or punish them , for indeed , they are wrongdoers .
and verily this religion of yours is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
we will surely reduce all that is on it to barren dust .
such will be the kafarah , etc . ) , the fajarah .
having thus harmed his own soul , he entered his garden saying ,  i do not think this will ever perish ,
so they impugned him , and then they were overtaken by the punishment of the day of the overshadowing cloud . it was indeed the punishment of a terrible day .
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth is exalting allah . to him belongs dominion , and to him belongspraise , and he is over all things competent .
has not the account reached you of those before you , of the people of nuh and ad and samood , and those after them ? none knows them but allah . their apostles come to them with clear arguments , but they thrust their hands into their mouths and said : surely we deny that with which you are sent , and most surely we are in serious doubt as to that to which you invite us .
but those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer - indeed , we will not allow to be lost the reward of the reformers .
and we made known to him this decree that the wrongdoers were to be utterly cut off in the morning .
we will call on the angels of punishment !
they will say , “ to god. ” say , “ then are you bewitched ? ”
when he came of age and became fully matured , we gave him judgement and knowledge , and thus do we reward the virtuous .
and when the messengers are brought unto their time appointed -
it is god who sends the breezes that raise clouds , then spreads them over the sky as he please , fold on fold , then you see the drops of rain issue from between them . when he sends it down to those of his creatures as he will , they are filled with joy ,
they said , “ o noah , you have argued with us , and argued a great deal . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
it is just a reminder for all the nations ,
but how many generations before them did we destroy , - stronger in power than they ? then did they wander through the land : was there any place of escape ?
if those had been gods , they would never have gone down to it , but in it they shall live for ever .
neither be given leave , and excuse themselves .
they will say : “ yes , a warner came to us , but we gave the lie to him and said : 'allah has revealed nothing . you are surely in huge error . '
allah hath prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow , to dwell therein : that is the supreme felicity .
, say : “ traverse in the earth and see what was the end of those who went before you : most of them associated others with allah in his divinity . ”
maybe allah will excuse them , for allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
“ and wait ; we too are waiting . ”
then he turned back and was big with pride ,
have you not seen that all those who are in the heavens and all those who are in the earth prostrate themselves before allah ; and so do the sun and the moon , and the stars and the mountains , and the trees , and the beasts , and so do many human beings , and even many of those who are condemned to chastisement ? and he whom allah humiliates , none can give him honour . allah does whatever he wills .
and they say ,  there is not but our worldly life ; we die and live , and nothing destroys us except time .  and they have of that no knowledge ; they are only assuming .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
his son replied ,  i shall climb up a mountain and this will save me from the flood .  noah said ,  no one can escape on this day from god 's command except those on whom he has mercy .  the waves separated noah from his son who was then drowned with the rest .
then bring ye your bookif ye be truthful !
in a well-protected book .
except in regard to their spouses and those whom their right hands possess , for in regard to them they are not reproachable ,
joseph said ,  o my lord ! i would prefer prison to what these women are inviting me to do . and if you do not avert their guile from me , i may yield to them and so become one of the ignorant . 
and we had thought that mankind and the jinn would never speak about allah a lie .
children of israel , remember my favour which i have bestowed upon you , and how i preferred you above all other people ;
the righteous will be amidst shades and fountains .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy unto you in this world and in the hereafter , a great torment would have touched you for that whereof you had spoken .
 peace be upon you . you merit this reward for your steadfastness .  how excellent is the ultimate abode !
verily , allah is not ashamed to set forth a parable even of a mosquito or so much more when it is biggerthan it . and as for those who believe , they know that it is the truth from their lord , but as for those who disbelieve , they say :  what did allah intend by this parable ?  by it he misleads many , and many he guides thereby . and he misleads thereby only those who are al-fasiqun .
and verily , they were about to frighten you so much as to drive you out from the land . but in that case they would not have stayedafter you , except for a little while .
believers , whichever of you turns away from his faith should know that god will soon raise a people whom he loves and who love him , who are humble towards the believers , dignified to the unbelievers , who strive hard for the cause of god , and who have no fear of anyone 's accusations . this is a favor from god . he bestows his favors upon whomever he wants . god is munificent and all-knowing .
then his companionwill say , ‘ this is what is ready with me . ’
indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
and we set in the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with them , and we set in it ravines to serve as ways , that haply so they may be guided ;
and proclaimed ,  i am your supreme lord , 
, give the glad news to those of our servants who listen to the words and only follow the best ones . tell them that they are those whom god has guided . they are the people of understanding .
‘ this indeed is my straight path , so follow it , and do not followways , for they will separate you from his way . this is what he enjoins upon you so that you may be godwary . ’
so he beganwith their baggage , beforethe baggage of his brother : at length he brought it out of his brother 's baggage . thus did we plan for joseph . he could not take his brother by the law of the king except that allah willed it . we raise to degreeswhom we please : but over all endued with knowledge is one , the all-knowing .
and these satans hinder them from the right path , while he still reckons himself to be rightly-guided .
“ till death overcame us . ”
but when it came to them , they rejected it . they shall soon come to know .
but allah reprieveth no soul when its term cometh , and allah is informed of what ye do .
‘ and that when we heard the guidance , we accepted faith in it ; so whoever accepts faith in his lord , has no fear – neither of any loss nor of any injustice . ’
we bestowed isaac and then jacob on him as an additional boon and we made all of them righteous .
and countenances on that day shall be scowling .
woe to the disbelievers when the day with which they have been threatened comes !
o you who have faith ! do not take my enemy and your enemy for friends , offering them affection , if you have set out for jihad in my way and to seek my pleasure , for they have certainly denied whatever has come to you of the truth , expelling the apostle and you , because you have faith in allah , your lord . you secretly nourish affection for them , while i know well whatever you hide and whatever you disclose , and whoever among you does that has certainly strayed from the right way .
or till thou makest heaven to fall , as thou assertest , on us in fragments , or thou bringest god and the angels as a surety ,
does every man of them long to enter the garden of bliss ?
your lord inspired the bee , saying :  set up hives in the mountains and in the trees and in the trellises that people put up ,
but if you turn away from them to seek the mercy of your lord , hoping to attain it , then speak to them with gentle words .
they shall say , 'we have tarried a day , or part of a day ; ask the numberers ! '
the day the hour sets in , they will be divided on that day :
surely therein you shall have whatever you choose !
and when allah promised you one of the two bandsthat it should be yours , and ye longed that other than the armed one might be yours . and allah willed that he should cause the truth to triumph by his words , and cut the root of the disbelievers ;
it may be that allah will grant lovebetween you and those whom yehold as enemies . for allah has power ; and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
but when he gave them out of his grace , they became niggardly of it and they turned back and they withdrew .
he created the heavens without any supports visible to you , and cast mountains as anchors into the earth so that it may not shake with you , and spread all kinds of beasts in it ; and we sent down water from the sky so thereby grew all kinds of refined pairs in it .
those who remained behind will say when you set out toward the war booty to take it ,  let us follow you .  they wish to change the words of allah . say ,  never will you follow us . thus did allah say before .  so they will say ,  rather , you envy us .  butthey were not understanding except a little .
but they went away from him , turning their backs .
who know what you do .
yet every time a sign comes to them from their lord , they turn away from it .
today he has been left here friendless ;
when heaven is rent asunder
and not a sign cometh unto them of the signs of their lord , but they are ever backsliders therefrom .
thus did his lord choose him and make him of the company of the righteous .
god instructs you to give back things entrusted to you to their owners . and when you judge between people , judge with justice . god ’ s instructions to you are excellent . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and nothing prevents men from believing when the guidance comes to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that what happened to the ancients should overtake them , or that the chastisement should come face to face with them .
indeed we created man from a chosen soil .
and when our manifest revelations are rehearsed unto them those who disbelieve say of the truth when it hath come to them : this is magic manifest .
then we brought forth for you therewith gardens of date-palms and grapes , wherein is much fruit for you , and whereof you eat .
by the winds sent forth in swift succession ,
they said ,  you are always remembering joseph . by god , it will either make you sick or you will die  .
and who is better in religion than he who submits his face to allah , being a gooddoer , and follows the creed of abraham , pure in faith ? allah took abraham for a close friend .
for them are ranks , forgiveness , and favours from him . allah is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
those who say : our lord ! lo ! we believe . so forgive us our sins and guard us from the punishment of fire ;
 o my lord ,  he said ,  since you have led me into error i 'll beguile them with the pleasures of the world and lead them astray ,
some of them listen to you , but no sooner do they leave you they ask those to whom knowledge has been given : 'what did he say just now ' such are those whom allah has set a seal upon their hearts and who follow their own desires .
you will never come to piety unless you spend of things you love ; and whatever you spend is known to god .
o ye people ! adore your guardian-lord , who created you and those who came before you , that ye may have the chance to learn righteousness ;
did we fail to accomplish the first creation ? of course , we did not ; we have all power over all things . yet they are confused about a new creation .
and lut was most surely of the apostles .
for they said :  what ! a man ! a solitary one from among ourselves ! shall we follow such a one ? truly should we then be straying in mind , and mad !
so tastefor your having forgotten the encounter of this day of yours . wehave forgotten you . taste the everlasting punishment because of what you used to do .
who taughtwith the pen
he used to bid his family tothe prayer and tothe zakat , and was pleasing to his lord .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . had there not been an appointed time for it , the punishment would already have come to them . indeed it will come down upon them suddenly and catch them unawares .
they proclaim obedience to you but as soon as they leave at night , a group of them make secret plans to do the contrary of what you have told them to do . god keeps the record of their nocturnal plans . therefore , leave them alone and put your trust in god ; he is sufficient for you as your guardian .
assuredly it is thy lord who will gather them together : for he is perfect in wisdom and knowledge .
surely allah does not forgive that anything should be associated with him , and he forgives what is besides this to whom he pleases ; and whoever associates anything with allah , he indeed strays off into a remote error .
he said , “ i complain of my worry and grief only to allah , and i know the great traits of allah which you do not know . ”
each of them who rejected the messenger become subject to our punishment .
hast thou not regarded those who were given a portion of the book , being called to the book of god , that it might decide between them , and then a party of them turned away , swerving aside ?
they do not outstrip him in speech and only act as he commands .
truly , he was one of our faithful servants .
who pray regularly and give in alms out of what we have provided for them .
so they shall be thrown down into it , they and the erring ones ,
who had set up another god with god . cast him into severe torment . 
and rejected the day of judgment
allah said :  grasp it , and fear not , we shall return it to its former state ,
allah has kept ready for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding in it forever ; this is the greatest success .
their solidarity during winter and summer journeys ,
they will suffer the worst kind of torment and will be lost in the life to come .
he it is who created for you all that is on the earth , thereafter he turned to the heaven , and formed them seven heavens . and he is of everything the knower .
and hell is brought near to the perverse '
certainly we had enjoined adam earlier ; but he forgot , and we did not find any resoluteness in him .
and every nation has its appointed term ; when their term is reached , neither can they delay it nor can they advance it an hour .
over my worshipers you have no authority , except the perverse that follow you .
he continued : 'you shall live there , and there shall you die , and from it you shall be raised to life . '
and when it is said to them , “ prostrate to the most gracious ” – they say , “ and what is the most gracious ? shall we prostrate to whatever you command us ? ” and this command only increases the hatred in them .
and mention ibrahim in the book ; surely he was a truthful man , a prophet .
for a known period ?
say ,  travel through the land ; then observe how was the end of the deniers . 
and we will surely cause you to dwell in the land after them . that is for he who fears my position and fears my threat . 
it is not the word of a poet : little it is ye believe !
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the faithful to draw closely over themselves their chadors . that makes it likely for them to be recognized and not be troubled , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and those with excuses among the bedouins came to be permitted , and they who had lied to allah and his messenger sat . there will strike those who disbelieved among them a painful punishment .
and to thamood , their brother saleh . he said , “ o my people ! worship god ; you have no god other than him . clarification has come to you from your lord . this she-camel of god is a sign for you . so leave her to graze on god ’ s earth , and do her no harm , lest a painful penalty seizes you . ”
and only he is the god of the heavenly creation and the god of the earthly creation ; and he only is the wise , the all knowing .
indeed , those who have believed and emigrated and fought with their wealth and lives in the cause of allah and those who gave shelter and aided - they are allies of one another . but those who believed and did not emigrate - for you there is no guardianship of them until they emigrate . and if they seek help of you for the religion , then you must help , except against a people between yourselves and whom is a treaty . and allah is seeing of what you do .
so all praise belongs to allah , the lord of the heavens and the lord of the earth , the lord of all the worlds .
and he will ask : 'how many years did you live on earth '
he said , ‘ it is my staff . i lean on it , and with it i beat down leaves for my sheep ; and i have other uses for it . ’
say : serve ye in place of allah that which possesseth for you neither hurt nor use ? allah it is who is the hearer , the knower .
those who were conceited will say to those who were subdued , “ did we stop you from the guidance after it came to you ? in fact you yourselves were guilty ! ”
and you becomethree kinds :
and drive the wicked into hell like cattle driven to water ,
is it you that send it down from the clouds or we ?
there are great signs in this story ; and surely we do put people to test .
they said ,  o woe to us ; indeed we were transgressors .
he said : then lo ! thou art of those reprieved
we also favoured moses and aaron ,
“ my lord , bestow me the command and join me with those who deserve your proximity . ”
and they say : hallowed be our lord ! the promise of our lord was ever to have been fulfilled .
and they disbelieved in it before , and they utter conjectures with regard to the unseen from a distant place .
he who appointed the earth to be a cradle for you , and appointed ways for you therein , that haply you may be guided ;
but those who deny our signs and disdain them , shall belong to hell , where they will abide for ever .
we destroyed the strongest among them in power . the stories of the ancient people have already been mentioned .
he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth : no son has he begotten , nor has he a partner in his dominion : it is he who created all things , and ordered them in due proportions .
“ you are just a human like us , and indeed we consider you a liar . ”
and the wretched shunneth it- .
thereafter theycame to him in haste .
we did not send a prophet to any town without visiting its people with stress and distress so that they might entreat .
but verily thou callest them to the straight way ;
and leave them so smoothly levelled
then they were unable to rise up , nor could they help themselves .
and he said ,  this is a mercy from my lord . but when the promise of my lord comes to pass , he will level it to dust . my lord 's promise is ever true ! 
grapes , and fresh fodder ,
go with this shirt of mine and cast it upon my father 's face . he will recover his sight ; thereupon cometo me with all your family . 
do you feel secure that we will not drive you back to the sea , send a fierce gale to you , and cause you to drown because of your disbelief when you would not be able to find anyone who would intercede for you with us ?
and when you divorce women and they reach their prescribed time , then either retain them in good fellowship or set them free with liberality , and do not retain them for injury , so that you exceed the limits , and whoever does this , he indeed is unjust to his own soul ; and do not take allah 's communications for a mockery , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and that which he has revealed to you of the book and the wisdom , admonishing you thereby ; and be carefulallah , and know that allah is the knower of all things .
he said :  o my people ! is then my family of more weight with you than allah ? and you have cast him away behind your backs . verily , my lord is surrounding all that you do .
o mankind ! if you have any doubt concerning resurrection , then know that it is surely we who created you from dust , then from a drop of sperm , then from a clot of blood , then from a little lump of flesh , some of it shapely and other shapeless.that we may make the reality clear to you . we causethat we please to remain in the wombs till an appointed time . we bring you forth as infantsthat you may come of age . among you is he that diesand he who is kept back to the most abject age so that after once having known , he reaches a stage when he knows nothing . you see the earth dry and barren and then no sooner than we send down water upon it , it begins to quiver and swell and brings forth every kind of beauteous vegetation .
say , ‘ whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it , and he knows whatever there is in the heavens and whatever there is in the earth ; and allah has power over all things . ’
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , whereas he hath preferred you above the worlds ?
when moses said to his people ,  o my people , you have indeed wronged yourselves by worshipping the calf ; turn in repentance to your creator and slayamong you . that course is best for you in the sight of your maker .  he relented towards you . he is the forgiving one , the merciful .
it is only a reminder for him who fears allah ;
chastely amorous ,
ask :  of all things what is most vital as evidence ?  say :  godis witness between you and me that this qur'an has been revealed to me that i may warn you on its strength , and those whom it reaches . do you really bear witness there are other gods with god ?  tell them :  i bear no such witness .  say :  verily he is the only god , and i am clear of what you associate . 
those who avoid gross sins and indecencies—except for minor lapses—your lord is of vast forgiveness . he knows you well , ever since he created you from the earth , and ever since you were embryos in your mothers ’ wombs . so do not acclaim your own virtue ; he is fully aware of the righteous .
if he should be in hardship , then a postponement until ease ; while if you give charity it is better for you if you know .
noah prayed ,  lord , help me ; i am defeated  .
your lord has not forsaken you nor does he dislike you !
but the pious are amidst gardens and springs .
therein two fountains of gushing water --
your lord will decide between them by his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
but whoever will turn away ,
and the word shall be fulfilled concerning them , because they did wrong , and they shall not be able to speak .
but when the sacred months expire slay those who associate others with allah in his divinity wherever you find them ; seize them , and besiege them , and lie in wait for them . but if they repent and establish the prayer and pay zakah , leave them alone . surely allah is all-forgiving , ever-merciful .
are they not aware that hell fire awaits whosoever opposes allah and his messenger , and in it he shall abide ? that surely is the great humiliation .
allah tasketh not a soul beyond its scope . for itthat which it hath earned , and against itthat which it hath deserved . our lord ! condemn us not if we forget , or miss the mark ! our lord ! lay not on us such a burden as thou didst lay on those before us ! our lord ! impose not on us that which we have not the strength to bear ! pardon us , absolve us and have mercy on us , thou , our protector , and give us victory over the disbelieving folk .
say , “ is there any among your partners that shows the right path ? ” say , “ allah shows the right path ; so who should be obeyed – the one who shows the right path , or one who does not even find the right path unless he is guided ? so what has happened to you ? what sort of a judgement you impose ! ”
 and press yourhand to yourside , it will come forth white , without any disease as another sign ,
“ to god is your return , and he is capable of all things . ”
those who were left behind were glad on account of their sitting behind allah 's apostle and they were averse from striving in allah 's way with their property and their persons , and said : do not go forth in the heat . say : the fire of hell is much severe in heat . would that they understood .
thou shalt never stand therein . surely a mosque founded from the first day on piety is wortheir that thou shouldst stand therein . in it are men who love to cleanse themselves : and allah approveth the clean .
and the foremost of them will say to the last of them : so you have no preference over us ; therefore taste the chastisement for what you earned .
or , lest they should say :  it were our fathers who had ascribed compeers to god ; we are only their offspring . will you destroy us for the deeds of those who dealt in vanities ? 
 'nor call on any , other than allah ; - such will neither profit thee nor hurt thee : if thou dost , behold ! thou shalt certainly be of those who do wrong . ' 
so man will neither have any strength nor any aide .
we have sent it down with the truth , and with the truth it has come down . we have not sent you except a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ,
he said , “ this is the parting between you and me . i will tell you the interpretation of what you were unable to endure .
as a bounty from your lord ! that will be the supreme success !
save the companions of the right ;
and suck from all fruits and flit about the unrestricted paths of their lord . a drink of various hues comes out of their bellies which contains medicine for men . in this is a sign for those who reflect .
o you who believe ! the polytheists are polluted , so let them not approach the sacred mosque after this year of theirs . and if you fear poverty , god will enrich you from his grace , if he wills . god is aware and wise .
andwhen your lord said to the angels :  verily , i am going to placegenerations after generations on earth .  they said :  will you place therein those who will make mischief therein and shed blood , - while we glorify you with praises and thanksand sanctify you .  hesaid :  i know that which you do not know . 
but allah loves only those who fulfil their covenant and fear allah . truly allah loves the god-fearing .
they ask : 'when will this promise come , if you speak truthfully '
the day the trumpet is blown , and you shall come in troops ,
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord : there is no deity but him ; and ignore the polytheists .
and if they are asked : 'what has your lord revealed ' they say : 'tales of the ancients , fairytales '
the wrong-doers will then be told : 'suffer now the abiding chastisement . how else can you be rewarded except according to your deeds ? '
he created the heavens without pillars that you see and cast on the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with you . upon it he dispersed all manner of crawling thing , and he sent down water from the sky with which he caused to grow in it every generous kind .
each one is a hostage to one 's deeds ,
such is god , your lord , the creator of all things . there is no god but he . how then are you being turned away ?
eat of the good things we have given you for sustenance , and be not inordinate with respect to them , lest my wrath should be due to you , and to whomsoever my wrath is due be shall perish indeed .
so we seized him , and his troops , and we threw them into the sea . observe , therefore , what was the end of the oppressors .
to moses and aaron we granted the criteria of discerning right from wrong , and we gave them the light and a reminder to the pious ones
and they shall be screaming in it ; “ our lord ! extricate us , so that we may do good deeds , the opposite of what we used to do ” ; “ and did we not give you an age long enough , in which anyone who wants to understand would have understood ? and the herald of warning did come to you ; therefore now taste it – for the unjust do not have any supporter . ”
the people of lut denied the noble messengers .
and it is said , ‘ who will take him up ? ’
only those who are destined to revert , are reverted from it .
the day when they will be tormented at the fire ,
and expend in the way of allah , and cast not yourselves with your hands into perdition , and do well . verily allah loveth the well- doers ,
and those who disbelieve and deny our signs – it is they who are the people of hell .
surely the day of decision shall be their appointed time , all together ,
put your trust in allah : allah is sufficient as guardian .
if thou art anxious for their guidance , yet allah guideth not such as he leaves to stray , and there is none to help them .
and what is that in your right hand , o moses ? 
and they said : 'we have been given an abundance of wealth and children we shall never be punished '
truly allah loves those who fight in his cause in battle array , as if they were a solid cemented structure .
say : if the sea were ink for the words of my lord , the sea would surely be consumed before the words of my lord are exhausted , though we were to bring the like of thatto add
no soul knows what comfort is laid up for them secretly , as a recompense for that they were doing .
when you come back they will offer excuses to you . tell them :  make no excuses ; we do not believe you . god has informed us about you ; and god and his apostle shall watch your conduct . then you will be brought to him who knows what is hidden and what is manifest . he will tell you of what you did . 
the unbelievers have said ,  should we tell you about a man who says that you will be brought back to life again after your having been completely disintegrated ?
you have indeed brought an extremely grave speech !
ye verily will eat of a tree called zaqqum
when before it there was the scripture of moses , an example and a mercy ; and this is a confirming scripture in the arabic language , that it may warn those who do wrong and bring good tidings for the righteous .
when the worshiper of allah stood supplicating to him , they swarmed around him .
indeed you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs ,
whosoever does a good deed shall have better than it . but whosoever does evil deeds , they shall be recompensed for what they were doing .
we set firm mountains in the earth lest it should shake with them , and we made broad ways in them so that they may be guided .
it is made lawful to you to go into your wives on the night of the fast ; they are an apparel for you and you are an apparel for them ; allah knew that you acted unfaithfully to yourselves , so he has turned to youand removed from you ; so now be in contact with them and seek what allah has ordained for you , and eat and drink until the whiteness of the day becomes distinct from the blackness of the night at dawn , then complete the fast till night , and have not contact with them while you keep to the mosques ; these are the limits of allah , so do not go near them . thus does allah make clear his communications for men that they may guard .
: “ enter paradise. ” the man exclaimed : “ would that my people knew
when they sawthey said :  surely we have lost the way .
we made a covenant with the israelites and sent messengers to them . whenever a messenger came to them with a message which did not suit their desires , they would reject some of the messengers and kill others .
verily , the dwellers of the paradise , that day , will be busy in joyful things .
have you considered the fire that you kindle ?
o you who have believed , fear allah . and let every soul look to what it has put forth for tomorrow - and fear allah . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
we did indeed aforetime give the book to moses : be not then in doubt of its reaching : and we made it a guide to the children of israel .
cried lies before them the people of noah and the men of er-rass , and thamood ,
they will say : unto allah . say : will ye not then remember ?
and those whose scalesare light , they are those who lose their ownselves , in hell will they abide .
to the righteously striving believers god will grant love .
joseph , turn away from this ; and thou , woman , ask forgiveness of thy crime ; surely thou art one of the sinners . '
which they will enjoy for ever . indeed god has greater rewards with him .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the knower . forgiver of sin , and accepter of repentance , severe in chastisement , lord of power . there is no god but he ; unto him is the journeying .
and get ready against them whatsoever ye can of force and wellfed horses whereby ye may overawe the enemy of allah and your enemy and others besides them whom ye know not allah knoweth them . and whatsoever ye expend in the way of allah shall be repaid to you in full ; and ye shall not be wronged .
and they ask you to hasten on the evil before the good , and indeed there have been exemplary punishments before them ; and most surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness to people , notwithstanding their injustice ; and most surely your lord is severe in requiting .
concerning your children , god enjoins you that a male shall receive a share equivalent to that of two females . but if there are more than two females , then their share is two thirds of the inheritance . if there is only one , she will receive the half . each of your parents receives a sixth of what you leave if you have children . if you are childless and your heirs are your parents , your mother receives a third . if you have brothersyour mother receives a sixth , afterany bequest you make or the repayment of any debts with regard to your father and your sons . you do not know which of them is going to benefit you more : but this fixing of portions is by god and he is all knowing and all wise .
it is indeed the speech of a noble apostle
or he who initiates the creation , then will create it again , and he who provides you sustenance from the skies and the earth ? is there a god along with allah ? ! proclaim , “ bring your proof , if you are truthful ! ”
he reflected , and then determined
and those who are taken in death among you and leave wives behind - they , wait four months and ten . and when they have fulfilled their term , then there is no blame upon you for what they do with themselves in an acceptable manner . and allah isacquainted with what you do .
and to allah only prostrate all those who are in the heavens and in the earth , willingly or helplessly – and their shadows – every morning and evening . .
does he not know when the contents of the graves are laid bare
but ye shall not will except as allah wills , - the cherisher of the worlds .
this is what you were promised , for every one who turns frequently , keeps ;
and when our clear communications are recited to them , their argument is no other than that they say : bring our fathersif you are truthful .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of the evil which men 's hands have done : and so he will make them taste the fruit of some of their doings , so that they may turn back from evil .
say : my lord would not care for you were it not for your prayer ; but you have indeed rejected , so that which shall cleave shall come .
he replied ,  certainly , in that case you will join my inner circle . 
so he made them fall , through deception . and when they tasted of the tree , their private parts became apparent to them , and they began to fasten together over themselves from the leaves of paradise . and their lord called to them ,  did i not forbid you from that tree and tell you that satan is to you a clear enemy ? 
his people argued , and he said :  do you argue with me about god ? he has guided me already , and i fear not what you associate with him , unless my lord wills , for held within the knowledge of my lord is everything . will you not reflect ?
 god forbid !  .  you are our protector not they . in fact , they worshipped the devils . most of them believed in them . 
o ye who believe ! take your precautions , and either go forth in parties or go forth all together .
let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends rather than believers ; and whoever does this , he shall have nothing ofallah , but you should guard yourselves against them , guarding carefully ; and allah makes you cautious ofhimself ; and to allah is the eventual coming .
there has certainly been for you in them an excellent pattern for anyone whose hope is in allah and the last day . and whoever turns away - then indeed , allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and my calling hath only increased them in fleeing .
the unbelievers say : 'we will not believe in this koran , nor inthat were before it ' if you could only see the harmdoers when they are brought before their lord ! they will argue against each other . those who had been abased will say to those who were proud : 'but for you , we would have been believers '
then he frowned and he looked in a bad tempered way ;
when those who disbelieve see you , they treat you only with ridicule : “ is this the one who mentions your gods ? ” and they reject the mention of the merciful .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
they say ,  why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ?  have they not been given sufficient proof in previous scriptures ?
,  o soul at peace ,
when the sun is wound up ,
then when the sacred months have passed , slay the polytheists wherever you find them , and catch them and make them captive , and wait in ambush for them at every place ; then if they repent and keep the prayer established and pay the charity , leave their way free ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and time is set for the apostles
i am your lord ! take off your sandals , for you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
the fire ! they are exposed thereto morning and evening . and on the day whereon the hour will uprise , it will be said : cause the family of fir'awn to enter the most grievous torment .
the unbelievers , the which there is none to ward off , -
then raise sparks of fire ,
then he turned back and was arrogant
o prophet , fear god , and obey not the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing , all-wise .
those who do not believe in the world to come name the angels with the names of females .
the wives of those of you who die have to wait for a period of four months and ten days . after this appointed time , it is no sin for the relatives of the deceased to let the widows do what is reasonable . god knows well what you do .
some of them listen to you . but we have cast veils over their hearts lest they understand it and in their ears heaviness ; and if they see every sign they do not believe in it . when they come to you they argue , the unbelievers say : 'this is nothing but the tales of the ancient ones '
except “ if allah wills ” ; and remember your lord when you forget , and say , “ it is likely that my lord will guide me to a more accurate way of virtue than this . ”
they sally forth unto god , all together ; then say the weak to those who waxed proud , 'we were your followers ; will you avail us against the chastisement of god anything ? ' they say , 'if god had guided us , we would have guided you . alike it is for us whether we can not endure , or whether we are patient ; we have no asylum . '
muhammad is no more than a messenger , and messengers have passed away before him . if , then , he were to die or be slain will you turn about on your heels ? whoever turns about on his heels can in no way harm allah . as for the grateful ones , allah will soon reward them .
at that time the disbelievers who disobeyed the messenger will wish that they could be turned into dust and they will be able to hide nothing from god .
a rope made from palm fibre around her neck !
your lord knows best what is in your hearts ; if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who constantly turn to him .
and the word of your lord is complete in truth and justice ; there is none to change his words ; he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
they said , ‘ swear by allah that we will attack him and his family by night . then we will tell his heir that we were not present at the murder of his family and that we speak the truth . ’
do not be like her who would undo her yarn , breaking it up afterstrength , by making your oaths a means ofdeceit among yourselves , so that one community may become more affluent than another community . indeed allah tests you thereby , and he will surely clarify for you on the day of resurrection what you used to differ about .
the righteously striving believers will receive abundant blessings and the best eternal dwelling .
when he drew near , a voice called out to him from the tree on the blessed spot on the right side of the valley :  o moses , i am verily god , the lord of all the worlds .
they will offer you excuses when you return to them . say , ‘ do not make excuses ; we will never believe you . allah has informed us of your state of affairs . allah and his apostle will observe your conduct , then you will be returned to the knower of the sensible and the unseen , and he will inform you concerning what you used to do . ’
] said :  my lord ! appoint for me a sign .  he said :  your sign is that you shall not speak unto mankind for three nights , though having no bodily defect . 
tell the believers to forgive those who do not look for the days of allah , so that he recompenses the people for what they have earned .
as for yourselves , worship anything you please besides him !  say ,  the real losers will be those who lose themselves and all their kith and kin on the day of resurrection . that is theobvious loss .
therein is fruit and palm trees having sheaths
or have you received from us an agreement confirmed by an oath extending to the day of resurrection that you shall surely have what you demand ?
do they not think deeplyabout themselves ? allah has created not the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , except with truth and for an appointed term . and indeed many of mankind deny the meeting with their lord . .
and those that bring down the reminder
they shall have no food but of thorns ,
no nation will precede its time , nor will they remain .
how we ordained the moon to pass through certain phases until it seems eventually to be like a bent twig ;
and the most wretched will shun it
, say ,  lord , make me enter through a path that will lead to the truth and come out of an exit that will take me to the truth . give me helpful authority .
and the hell on that day shall be brought nigh . on that day man shall remember , but how will remembrance avail him ?
o my people , i do not ask you for it any reward . my reward is only from the one who created me . then will you not reason ?
do not make the calling of the messenger among yourselves like your calling to one another . allah knows those of you who slip away surreptitiously , so let those who disobey his command beware , lest they are struck by sedition , or , they are stricken with a painful punishment .
if not for the favor of my lord , i would have been of those brought in .
and when the sky is rent asunder
say , “ no one will ever save me from allah , and other than him , i will not find any refuge . ”
and fight them until no mischief remains and the entire religion is only for allah ; then if they desist , allah sees all what they do .
and then we would surely have given them from our own , a great wage ,
god is the lord of those who believe ; he brings them out of darkness and into light . as for those who disbelieve , their lords are the evil ones ; they bring them out of light and into darkness—these are the inmates of the fire , in which they will abide forever .
my wealth has been of no use to me .
and if you should ask them , who created the heavens and the earth ? they would most certainly say : the mighty , the knowing one , has created them ;
some faces will be fresh on that day ,
thy raiment purify ,
it is they who say , “ do not spend upon those who are with allah ’ s noble messenger until they get distraught ” ; whereas to allah only belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not have sense .
the unbelievers assert that they will never be raised up . say : 'yes indeed , by my lord ! you shall be raised up , then you shall be told the things you did . that is easy for god . '
when your lord brings forth from their loins the offspring of the children of adam , he makes them witnesses over themselves , :  am i not your lord ?  'indeed , ' they reply . 'we bear witness , ' -- lest you should say on the day of resurrection :  we were not aware of this ; 
god will judge between you on the day of resurrection regarding what you disagree about .
he is the one who sends to his servant manifest signs , that he may lead you from the depths of darkness into the light and verily allah is to you most kind and merciful .
when some affliction visits mankind , they call unto their lord , turning to him ; then , when he lets them taste mercy from him , lo , a party of them assign associates to their lord ,
andthe man who steals and the woman who steals , cut off their hands as a punishment for what they have earned , an exemplary punishment from allah ; and allah is mighty , wise .
they say :  we obey you ,  but as soon as they leave you , a group of them plan together by night against what you say . god records whatever they scheme . so ignore them , and put your trust in god . god is sufficient as a trustee .
are you afraid of spending in charity before your private consultation ? if then you do it not , and allah has forgiven you , thenperform as-salatand give zakat and obey allah . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
so turnfrom them for a while ,
and when they are cast , bound together into a constricted place therein , they will plead for destruction there and then !
indeed , those who have believed and done righteous deeds - indeed , we will not allow to be lost the reward of any who did well in deeds .
on the day when thatwill be heated in the fire of hell and with it will be branded their foreheads , their flanks , and their backs , : -  this is the treasure which you hoarded for yourselves . now taste of what you used to hoard . 
verily we ! anon we shall cast upon thee a weighty word .
and they have no knowledge of it ; they do not follow anything but conjecture , and surely conjecture does not avail against the truth at all .
and they ask you about the mountains . say : my lord will carry them away from the roots .
and we divided them throughout the earth into nations . of them some were righteous , and of them some were otherwise . and we tested them with goodand bad that perhaps they would return .
so that is just a single jolt , thereupon they will begin staring .
god has promised forgiveness and a great reward to the righteously striving believers .
father , i fear that some chastisement from the all-merciful will smite thee , so that thou becomest a friend to satan .
god has written , ' i shall assuredly be the victor , i and my messengers . ' surely god is all-strong , all-mighty .
indeed , those who took the calfwill obtain anger from their lord and humiliation in the life of this world , and thus do we recompense the inventors .
and rely thou upon the mighty , the merciful .
and we have sent you with the truth to give glad tidings and to warn . you will not be questioned about those and who are inmates of hell .
ha mim
then we will surely recount to them with knowledge , for we had not been absent .
when they see some merchandise or some sport , they rush towards it and leave you alone standing . say ,  are better than merriment or merchandise ; god is the best sustainer  .
a reward for what they used to do .
the jews have said , 'god 's hand is fettered . ' fettered are their hands , and they are cursed for what they have said . nay , but his hands are outspread ; he expends how he will . and what has been sent down to thee from thy lord will surely increase many of them in insolence and unbelief ; and we have cast between them enmity and hatred , till the day of resurrection . as often as they light a fire for war , god will extinguish it . they hasten about the earth , to do corruption there ; and god loves not the workers of corruption .
and serve allah . ascribe no thing as partner unto him.kindness unto parents , and unto near kindred , and orphans , and the needy , and unto the neighbour who is of kinand the neighbour who is not of kin , and the fellow-traveller and the wayfarer andwhom your right hands possess . lo ! allah loveth not such as are proud and boastful ,
do not choose other gods besides him . i have been sent from him to plainly warn you  .
corruption has appeared on land and sea with what the hands of the people earned . therefore , they taste some of what they did in order that they return .
certainly aaron had said to them even before :  my people , you were fallen into error because of the calf . surely your lord is most compassionate ; so follow me and obey my command . 
we requited them in that way because of their ingratitude . we requite no one in that way but the ungrateful .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the river , and i wished to mar it , for there was a king behind them who is taking every ship by force .
say : 'death 's angel , who has been charged with you , shall gather you , then to your lord you shall be returned . '
by the receding night
and they say , 'be jews or christians and you shall be guided . ' say thou : 'nay , rather the creed of abraham , a man of pure faith ; he was no idolater . '
and let not satan turn you aside . lo ! he is an open enemy for you .
 so no friend hath he here this day .
and the heavens will be rent asunder ,
who are heedless in a stupor !
and similarly , we awakened them that they might question one another . said a speaker from among them ,  how long have you remained ?  they said ,  we have remained a day or part of a day .  they said ,  your lord is most knowing of how long you remained . so send one of you with this silver coin of yours to the city and let him look to which is the best of food and bring you provision from it and let him be cautious . and let no one be aware of you .
nor shade and torrid heat ;
these who fear their lord unseen , and who are of the hour fearful .
o muhammad , , all the messengers whom we sent before you also ate food and moved about in the streets . in fact , we have made you all a means of test for one another . will you show patience ? for your lord sees everything .
so all the angels prostrated themselves
were it not for the favors and mercy of god upon you , in this world and in the life to come , a great torment would strike you for your involvement in this false report .
who is it that will give allah a beautiful loan ? a loan that allah will repay after increasing it many times and grant him a generous reward .
your ilahis only allah , the one . he has full knowledge of all things .
say thou ; my lord hath enjoined equity , and that ye shall set your faces aright at every prostration , and call on him , making religion pure for him . even as he began you ; ye shall be brought back .
god ! there is no god except he , the living , the everlasting . neither slumber overtakes him , nor sleep . to him belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth . who is he that can intercede with him except with his permission ? he knows what is before them , and what is behind them ; and they can not grasp any of his knowledge , except as he wills . his throne extends over the heavens and the earth , and their preservation does not burden him . he is the most high , the great .
he said , “ my lord , put my heart at peace for me .
so that allah may remit their worst deeds and reward them according to the best of their deeds .
what ! has he knowledge of the unseen so that he can see ?
we cried unto him : o ibrahim
and we bestowed on david , solomon . how excellent a slave ! lo ! he was ever turning in repentance .
or do they say ,  he has invented it himself  ? indeed , they are not willing to believe .
o prophet ! strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and be unyielding to them ; and their abode is hell , and evil is the destination .
aye ! every one of them desireth that : he should be vouchsafed scrolls expanded .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he will . he gives females to whom he will and males to whom he will .
by the spreaders spreading .
the originator of the heavens and the earth ! when he decreeth a thing , he saith unto it only : be ! and it is .
we sent him to a hundred thousand or more people .
they said , “ by allah , you know very well that we did not come here to cause turmoil in the land , and nor are we thieves ! ”
those messengers we endowed with gifts , some above others : to one of them allah spoke ; others he raised to degrees ; to jesus the son of mary we gave clear , and strengthened him with the holy spirit . if allah had so willed , succeeding generations would not have fought among each other , after clearhad come to them , but theyto wrangle , some believing and others rejecting . if allah had so willed , they would not have fought each other ; but allah fulfilleth his plan .
then eat of all manner of fruit , and follow the ways of your lord easy to go upon . ' then comes there forth out of their bellies a drink of diverse hues wherein is healing for men . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
indeed , i am to you a trustworthy messenger .
rather the unjust followed their own desires , without knowledge ; so who can guide one whom allah has sent astray ? and they do not have supporters .
and we made a gourd tree grow over him .
the reality !
go both of you to the pharaoh ; he has become a rebel .
 judge thou , then , between me and them openly , and deliver me and those of the believers who are with me . 
therefore we responded to him and took off what harm he had , and we gave him his family and the like of them with them : a mercy from us and a reminder to the worshippers .
return to your lord , pleased and pleasing !
this is god 's guidance : he gives among his creatures whom he will . if they had associated others with him , surely vain would have been all they did .
the messenger 's duty is but to proclaim . but allah knoweth all that ye reveal and ye conceal .
one who will be saved from the torment on the day of judgment will certainly have received god 's mercy and this will be a manifest triumph .
they therefore denied it , so they will soon come to know .
indeed allah likes those who fight in his cause , positioned in rows , as if they were an edifice fortified .
those who rejected the book and the message which was given to our messenger will soon know .
he created man out of a mere drop of fluid , and lo ! he turned into an open wrangler .
the day when god ’ s enemies are herded into the fire , forcibly .
when we have died and become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected ?
perhaps your lord will have mercy on you . but if you revert , we will revert . we have made hell a prison for the disbelievers .
and do not kill your children for fear of poverty ; we give them sustenance and yourselves ; surely to kill them is a great wrong .
by those that outstrip them suddenly ,
announce thou to the hypocrites that theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
and thus we have inspired in thee a lecture in arabic , that thou mayst warn the mother-town and those around it , and mayst warn of a day of assembling whereof there is no doubt . a host will be in the garden , and a host of them in the flame .
allah thus commands you concerning your children : the share of the male is like that of two females . ifmore than two daughters , they shall have two-thirds of the inheritance ; and if there is only one daughter , then she shall have half the inheritance . if the deceased has any offspring , each of his parents shall have a sixth of the inheritance ; and if the deceased has no child and his parents alone inherit him , then one-third shall go to his mother ; and if the deceased has brothers and sisters , then one-sixth shall go to his mother . all these shares are to be given after payment of the bequest he might have made or any debts outstanding against him . you do not know which of them , your parents or your children , are more beneficial to you . but these portions have been determined by allah , for he indeed knows all , is cognizant of all beneficent considerations .
every soul must taste of death , then to us you shall be brought back .
shall we thentake away the reminderfrom you , because you are a people musrifun
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and allah is ever encompassing all things .
is it not a guidance for them , how many generations we have destroyed before them in whose dwellings they do walk about ? verily , therein indeed are signs . would they not then listen ?
but they who believe and do righteous deeds - those are the companions of paradise ; they will abide therein eternally .
and who have broken the scripture into fragments --
those who disbelieve should not assume that we respite them for their own good . in fact , we only respite them so that they may increase in sinfulness . a humiliating torment awaits them .
god makes a comparison between an owned slave possessing no power over anything , and someone to whom we have given plentiful provision , who gives out from it privately and openly . are they equal ? praise be to god ! but most people do not know it .
the disbelievers say , “ you are not amessenger ” ; proclaim , “ allah is a sufficient witness between me and you , andhe who has knowledge of the book . ”
we recite to you from the news of moses and pharaoh in truth for a people who believe .
allah has indeed heard the speech of the woman who is arguing with youconcerning her husband , and is complaining to allah ; and allah hears the conversation of you both ; indeed allah is all hearing , all knowing .
and no food except pus
let the people of the gospel judge by what has been revealed in it by god . and those who do not judge in accordance with what god has revealed are transgressors .
indeed , it is from solomon , and indeed , it reads : 'in the name of allah , the entirely merciful , the especially merciful ,
verily we have honoured the children of adam . we carry them on the land and the sea , and have made provision of good things for them , and have preferred them above many of those whom we created with a marked preferment .
and during a part of the night , glorify his praises , andafter the prayers .
that god may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and recompense them with the wages of the fairest of what they were doing .
god will judge between those who believe and the jews , the sabians , christians and the magians and the idolaters , on the day of judgement . verily god is witness to everything .
so that you will not be saddened for whatever does not come to you , nor be overjoyed in what has come to you . allah does not love those who are proudand boastful
supplicate not this day ! assuredly ye will not be helped by us .
whereof the clusters are in easy reach .
until , when the messengers gave up hope and thought that they were denied , then came to them our help , and whomsoever we willed were delivered . and our punishment can not be warded off from the people who are mujrimun .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs they said :  this is nothing but magic he has contrived , for we have not heard of this from our fathers of old . 
but god raised him upand closer to himself ; and god is all-mighty and all-wise .
indeed those who oppose allah and his noble messenger have been humiliated , like those before them who were humiliated , and we have indeed sent down clear verses ; and for the disbelievers is a disgraceful punishment .
except those on whom your lord had mercy for which he has created them . but fulfilled shall be the word of your lord .  i will fill up hell with jinns and men . 
then , after him , we sent messengers to their people . they came to them with the clear proofs , but they would not believe in anything they had already rejected . thus we set a seal on the hearts of the hostile .
then they followed them at the sunrise ;
and , when abraham was tried by his lord with commands and he fulfilled them.said ,  indeed , i will make you a leader for the people .  said ,  and of my descendants ?  said ,  my covenant does not include the wrongdoers . 
he is nothing but a man , making up lies about god . we have no faith in him . ”
said he , 'did i not say that thou couldst never bear with me patiently ? '
and when god said , ' o jesus son of mary , didst thou say unto men ,  take me and my mother as gods , apart from god  ? ' he said , 'to thee be glory ! it is not mine to say what i have no right to . if i indeed said it , thou knowest it , knowing what is within my soul , and i know not what is within thy soul ; thou knowest the things unseen
and of his signs is that he created for you wives from among yourselves , that you might reside with them , and has put kindness and mercy between you . surely , there are signs in this for those who think .
and do not urge one another to feed the needy .
are the ones who will have blessings and mercy from their lord : it is they who are on the right path !
and when a community among them said : why preach ye to a folk whom allah is about to destroy or punish with an awful doom , they said : in order to be free from guilt before your lord , and that haply they may ward off .
our lord , we have heard the caller calling to belief ,  believe in your lord !  so we believe . our lord , forgive us our sins and acquit us of our evil deeds , and take us to you in death with the righteous .
they say ,  our lord is too glorious to disregard his promise  .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah , and violate not the bond .
so that we might revive a dead land , and give to drink of it , of that we created , cattle and men a many .
you may inquire of the dwellers of the city where we were , and of the people of the caravan with whom we travelled . we are altogether truthful in what we say . 
and noah said , ‘ my lord ! ‘ do not leave on the earth any inhabitant from among the faithless .
and at the mountains , how they are rooted and fixed firm ?
and it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons misdeeds , and he knows what you do .
god has appointed the kaaba , the holy house , as an establishment for men , and the holy month ; the offering , and the necklaces -- that , that you may know that god knows all that is in the heavens and in the earth ; and that god has knowledge of everything .
cast down what is in thy right hand , and it shall swallow what they have fashioned ; for they have fashioned only the guile of a sorcerer , and the sorcerer prospers not ; wherever he goes . '
then he made his progeny from an extract of water base .
indeed , allah loves those who fight in his cause in a row as though they are astructure joined firmly .
he said , “ what my lord has empowered me with is better . but assist me with strength , and i will build between you and them a dam . ”
there , certainly , is evidencefor you in the case of the two armies . one of them fought for the cause of god . the other were disbelievers . the disbelievers appeared to be twice the size of the believers . however , god supports through his help whomever he wants . it is a good lesson for the people of true vision .
lo ! we , even we , have revealed unto thee the qur'an , a revelation ;
say : 'my prayers and my worship , my life and my death , are all for allah , the lord of the worlds .
she said :  so now you see ! this is the one regarding whom you reproached me . indeed i tried to tempt him to myself but he held back , although if he were not to follow my order , he would certainly be imprisoned and humiliated . 
it will destroy everything by the command of its lord . and when the morning came upon them , there was nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus we requite the guilty people .
andthe day he will call them and say ,  where are my 'partners ' which you used to claim ? 
“ o ibrahim , turn away from this ; indeed your lord ’ s command has come ; and indeed a punishment will come upon them , which will not be averted . ”
so whosoever will , and receive admonition !
such is the seizing of your lord when he seizes the townships that are wrongdoing . indeed his seizing is painful and severe .
those whom they invoke are themselves seeking a way of approach to their lord , vying with each other to be near him . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . surely , the punishment of your lord is to be feared :
we have made it easy to learn lessons from the quran . is there anyone who would receive admonition ?
how many a town we destroyed which was given to wrongdoing , so that its roofs fell down , and how many a well is deserted and how many a lofty castle is in ruins .
and lot too was one of the messengers .
so , that with it we revive dead lands and provide drink for the cattle and the human we created .
allah has full knowledge of the truths beyond the reach of perception both in the heavens and the earth ; and the coming of the hour will take no more than the twinkling of an eye ; it may take even less . indeed allah has power over everything .
the mountains tent-pins ?
andwhatever he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues—there is indeed a sign in that for a people who take admonition .
said he , 'therein you shall live , and therein you shall die , and from there you shall be brought forth . '
they will question you about the hour : 'when shall it be '
all that we relate to thee of the stories of the messengers , - with it we make firm thy heart : in them there cometh to thee the truth , as well as an exhortation and a message of remembrance to those who believe .
and he it is who accepts repentance from his slaves , and forgives sins , and he knows what you do .
it has been revealed by the lord of all the worlds .
but theyhave broken their religion among them into sects , each group rejoicing in its belief .
he said : we will see whether you have told the truth or whether you are of the liars :
and for all there will be ranks from what they do , that he may pay them for their deeds ; and they will not be wronged .
and recall when your lord inspired the angels : ' i am certainly with you . so make firm the feet of those who believe . i will cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve . so strike at their necks and strike at every pore and tip .
indeed those who turned their backs after the guidance had become clear to them , it was satan who had seduced them , and he had given themhopes .
and certainly we know that they say : only a mortal teaches him . the tongue of him whom they reproach is barbarous , and this is clear arabic tongue .
o you who have believed , protect yourselves and your families from a fire whose fuel is people and stones , over which areangels , harsh and severe ; they do not disobey allah in what he commands them but do what they are commanded .
in both of them are of every fruit , two kinds .
and do not disgrace me on the day they areresurrected -
and the magicians fell down in prostration .
god makes clear to you the signs ; and god is all-knowing , all-wise .
those * who bear the throne , and those who are around it , say the purity of their lord while praising him , and they believe in him and seek forgiveness for the believers ; “ o our lord ! your mercy and knowledge encompass all things , therefore forgive those who repented and followed your path , and save them from the punishment of hell . ”
it is he who shows to you his signs and sends down your provision from the sky . yet no one remembers except he who is penitent .
whosoever obeys god , and the messenger -- they are with those whom god has blessed , prophets , just men , martyrs , the righteous ; good companions they !
those who successfully defend themselves after being wronged will not be questioned .
and when the wild beasts shall be gathered together ,
he said , “ did i not tell you that you will never be able to patiently stay with me ? ”
and with them shall be those who restrain the eyes , having beautiful eyes ;
it was not we that wronged them : they wronged their own souls : the deities , other than allah , whom they invoked , profited them no whit when there issued the decree of thy lord : nor did they add aughtbut perdition !
and indeed we did send messengers before youto their own peoples . they came to them with clear proofs , then , we took vengeance on those who committed crimes , andthe believers it was incumbent upon us to help .
allah created the heavens and the earth for just ends , and in order that each soul may find the recompense of what it has earned , and none of them be wronged .
it is he who appointed the night for you to be a garment and sleep for a rest , and day he appointed for a rising .
indeed your lord is the all-mighty , the all-merciful .
when our verses are recited to him , he says : 'fictitious tales of the ancients '
he prayed :  o lord , verily my people accuse me of lies .
and that we know not whether evil is meant for those who are on earth or whether their lord means to bring them good :
prophet , tell your wives ,  if you want the worldly life and its beauty , i shall allow you to enjoy it and set you free in an honorable manner ,
on the day when a violent convulsion will convulse ,
the heart lied notwhat it saw .
behold , they see it as if far off ;
it is revealed to us that a punishment will fall on those who belie and turn away . 
then your hearts hardened after that , so that they were like rocks , rather worse in hardness ; and surely there are some rocks from which streams burst forth , and surely there are some of them which split asunder so water issues out of them , and surely there are some of them which fall down for fear of allah , and allah is not at all heedless of what you do .
those to whom we gave the book before this believe in it ,
on that day , the companions of paradisea better abode and a finer restingplace .
beyond them lies hell . what they have earned will not benefit them at all , nor will those they adopted as lords instead of god . they will have a terrible punishment .
abraham was not a jew , nor yet a christian ; but he was an upright man who had surrendered , and he was not of the idolaters .
then bring your book , if ye say sooth .
he admits whosoever he will to his benevolence . but for the evil-doers he has prepared a painful punishment .
we raised over you several secure ,
they are those who assign a certain share of their property
know well that allah ’ s punishment is severe , and that allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
can a person , who knows that what is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , be considered equal to a blind person ? only those who have understanding take heed .
they deniedand followed their own lusts . yet everything will come to a decision
then moses went back unto his folk , angry and sad . he said : o my people ! hath not your lord promised you a fair promise ? did the time appointed then appear too long for you , or did ye wish that wrath from your lord should come upon you , that ye broke tryst with me ?
but if you turn back , i did not ask for any reward from you ; my reward is only with allah , and i am commanded that i should be of those who submit .
nay , buthe who fulfilleth his pledge and wardeth off ; for lo ! allah loveth those who ward off .
therefore the earthquake seized them , so at morning they remained lying flattened in their homes .
they are but names which you have named , you and your fathers , for which allah has sent down no authority . they follow but a guess and that which they themselves desire , whereas there has surely come to them the guidance from their lord !
they will be awarded the high place forasmuch as they were steadfast , and they will meet therein with welcome and the ward of peace ,
and certainly the warning came to firon 's people .
get us out of this , o lord . if we transgress we will surely be sinful . 
say : bring your witnesses who should bear witness that allah has forbidden this , then if they bear witness , do not bear witness with them ; and follow not the low desires of those who reject our communications and of those who do not believe in the hereafter , and they makeequal to their lord .
so he conceived in his mind a fear on account of them . they said : fear not . and they gave him the good news of a boy possessing knowledge .
good and evil are not equal . repel evil with good , and the person who was your enemy becomes like an intimate friend .
like that of those who lived before you , whose power , wealth , and children were much greater than yours . they enjoyed their share of the worldly gains and you , also , like them , have enjoyed yours . you have been sneaking among the people to cause trouble , just as they had been doing before you . such people 's deeds are devoid of all virtue both in this life and in the life hereafter . they indeed are lost .
he who made the earth a habitat for you , and the sky a structure , and sends water down from the sky , and brings out fruits thereby , as a sustenance for you . therefore , do not assign rivals to god while you know .
or of him who , when passing by a town the roofs of which had caved in , exclaimed ,  how will god restore it to life after its destruction ?  thereupon god caused him to die , and after a hundred years , brought him back to life . god asked ,  how long have you remained in this state ?  he answered ,  i have remained a day or part of a day .  god said ,  no , you have remained in this state for a hundred years . now look at your food and your drink ; they have not rotted . look at your ass . we will make you a sign to mankind . look at the bones -- how we set them together , then clothe them with flesh !  when it had all become clear to him , he said ,  now i know that god has power over all things . 
and they overtook them at sunrise .
surely they that believe , and those of jewry , the sabaeans , the christians , the magians and the idolaters -- god shall distinguish between them on the day of resurrection ; assuredly god is witness over everything .
said :  this is the way which will lead straight to me . 
muster against them whatever you are able of force and tethersof horses , so that you strike terror into the enemies of allah and your enemy , and others besides them whom you do not know but allah does . all that you spend in the way of allah shall be repaid to you . you shall not be wronged .
they said ,  exalted is our lord ! indeed , we were wrongdoers . 
 obey those who ask no reward of you , and who have themselves received guidance .
when the earth is shaken with convulsion
and those who believe in their lord ’ s verses .
and those who are constant , seeking the pleasure of their lord , and keep up prayer and spendout of what we have given them secretly and openly and repel evil with good ; as for those , they shall have theissue of the abode
o you who have believed , do not take as intimates those other than yourselves , for they will not spare youruin . they wish you would have hardship . hatred has already appeared from their mouths , and what their breasts conceal is greater . we have certainly made clear to you the signs , if you will use reason .
when you say to them :  come to what god has revealed , and the prophet ,  they say :  sufficient to us is the faith that our fathers had followed ,  even though their fathers had no knowledge or guidance .
and i become stressed , and my tongue is not fluent , so send aaron too .
and cushions set in rows ,
have they not traveled through the earth and observed how was the end of those before them ? they were greater than them in power , and they plowed the earth and built it up more than they have built it up , and their messengers came to them with clear evidences . and allah would not ever have wronged them , but they were wronging themselves .
he said :  o my lord ! verily , i have called my people night and day .
and do not obey every mean swearer ,
o mankind ! the advice has come to you from your lord and a cure for the hearts – and guidance and mercy for believers .
so exhort , for by your lord 's grace , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and the bookwill be placed , and you will see the mujrimun , fearful of that which istherein . they will say :  woe to us ! what sort of book is this that leaves neither a small thing nor a big thing , but has recorded it with numbers !  and they will find all that they did , placed before them , and your lord treats no one with injustice .
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he pleases . there is no god but he , the exalted in might , the wise .
then he followed a way
those who fear allah , keep their duty to him and avoid evil are not responsible for themin any case , butis to remind them , that they may avoid that .by the verse 4:140 ] .
and he it is who has created the heavens and the earth with truth , and on the day he says : be , it is . his word is the truth , and his is the kingdom on the day when the trumpet shall be blown ; the knower of the unseen and the seen ; and he is the wise , the aware .
neither your relatives nor your children will benefit you on the day of resurrection . he will separate between you . god is observant of what you do .
say : 'none knows the unseen in the heavens and earth except god . and they are not aware when they shall be raised ;
by the strikers of fire ,
then solomon inspected the birds , and said ,  how is it that i do not see the hoopoe ? is he absent then ?
they used to sleep only a little during the night .
in it they adorn clothes of fine green silk and gold embroidery ; and they are given silver bracelets to wear ; and their lord gave them pure wine to drink .
the fast is to be observed for a fixed number of days . if , however , anyone of you be sick or on a journey , he should fast the same number of other days . as for those who can fast , the expiation of this shall be the feeding of one needy person for one fast day , and whoso does more than this with a willing heart does it for his own good . but if you understand the thing , it is better for you to observe the fast .
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and the day the hour appears - that day they will become separated .
and they said , “ we are greater in wealth and children ; we will not be punished ! ”
they spoke among themselves : “ build him a pyre and then throw him into the furnace . ”
and we assigned them comrades , who made their present and their past fairseeming unto them . and the word concerning nations of the jinn and humankind who passed away before them hath effect for them . lo ! they were ever losers .
but yes , there had come to you my verses , but you denied them and were arrogant , and you were among the disbelievers .
they have purchased with the revelations of allah a little gain , so they debarfrom his way . lo ! evil is that which they are wont to do .
and they have broken their religionamong them , all are returning unto us .
she said , 'woe is me ! shall i bear , being an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? this assuredly is a strange thing . '
say , “ what is your opinion – if the punishment of allah were to come upon you suddenly or openly , who would be destroyed except the disbelieving people ? ”
to pharaoh and his nobles who behaved with arrogance , for they were a conceited lot ,
have they determined upon a course ? then we too are determined .
have we not caused thy bosom to dilate ,
from every party we will pluck out whichever of them was the most hardened in disdain of the most merciful .
, remind them , by the grace of your lord , that you are neither a soothsayer or an insane person .
give them the parable of two men . to one we gave two gardens of vines and surrounded them with palm trees and in between the two we placed a sownfield .
allah , there is no god except he . to him belong the most beautiful names .
, follow whatever is revealed to you from your lord and do not follow other guardians besides him . however , you pay very little attention
 and from the evil of the witchcrafts when they blow in the knots ,
immortal youths will serve them
so he misled them with deception . then when they tasted of the tree , that which was hidden from them of their shamebecame manifest to them and they began to stick together the leaves of paradise over themselves . and their lord called out to them :  did i not forbid you that tree and tell you : verily , shaitanis an open enemy unto you ? 
his substance availed him not , nor that which he earned .
those who belie the book and that with which we sent our messengers shall soon know .
she was told ,  enter the palace .  but when she saw it , she thought it was a body of water and uncovered her shins . he said ,  indeed , it is a palacemade smooth with glass .  she said ,  my lord , indeed i have wronged myself , and i submit with solomon to allah , lord of the worlds . 
and pharaoh said , “ o hamaan , build me a tower , that i may reach the pathways .
when they commit an indecency , they say , ‘ we found our fathers practising it , and allah has enjoined it upon us. ’ say , ‘ indeed allah does not enjoin indecencies . do you attribute to allah what you do not know ? ’
, do not let the disbelievers grieve you . to us they will all return and we shall tell them all about what they have done . god knows best what is in everyone 's hearts .
whatsoever of good betideth thee is from allah , and whatsoever of ill betideth thee is because of thy self . and we have sent thee unto the mankind as an apostle ; and sufficieth allah as a witness .
the seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein , glorify him and there is not a thing but glorifies his praise . but you understand not their glorification . truly , he is ever forbearing , oft-forgiving .
or is he who is obedient in the watches of the night , bowing himself and standing , he being afraid of the world to come and hoping for the mercy of his lord .. ? say : 'are they equal -- those who know and those who know not ? ' only men possessed of minds remember .
indeed those who are faithless and do wrong , allah shall never forgive them , nor shall he guide them to any way ,
then we shall attend to the works they have done and then turn them into scattered dust .
they say ,  these things are the writings of the ancients which he has got copied down for himself , and then these are recited to him in the morning and evening . 
my people , this is the she-camel of god , a miracleto you . leave her to graze in the land of god . do not harm her with your evil deeds lest torment will suddenly strike you . 
but they fragmented their religion among themselves , each party boasting about what it had .
warfare is ordained for you , though it is hateful unto you ; but it may happen that ye hate a thing which is good for you , and it may happen that ye love a thing which is bad for you . allah knoweth , ye know not .
and who has no desire for the religion of abraham , except he who fooled himself ? we chose him in this world , and in the everlasting world , he shall be among the righteous .
“ then bind him inside a chain which is seventy arm-lengths . ”
o ye who believe ! intoxicants and gambling , stones , andarrows , are an abomination , - of satan 's handwork : eschew such , that ye may prosper .
by the day , when it displays it ,
never set foot in that place . only a mosque whose foundations have been laid from the very first on godliness is worthy of your visiting it . there you will find men who wish to be purified ; and god loves those who are pure .
say : “ if i disobey my lord , i fear the chastisement of an awesome day . ”
those who spend their wealth for god 's cause may be compared to a grain of corn which sprouts into seven ears , with a hundred grains in each ear : for god grants manifold increase to whom he wills ; god is infinite and all knowing .
they will call to them , “ were we not with you ? ” they will say , “ yes , but you cheated your souls , and waited , and doubted , and became deluded by wishful thinking , until the command of god arrived ; and arrogance deceived you regarding god . ”
we had given the book to moses about which people greatly disagreed . had the word of your lord not been decreed , he would have certainly settled their differences . they were greatly suspicious and doubtful about the book of moses .
stay in your houses and do not flaunt your finery like the formerignorance . maintain the prayer and pay the zakat , and obey allah and his apostle . indeed allah desires to repel all impurity from you , o people of the household , and purify you with a thorough purification .
he will not be questioned about anything he does , but all people will be questioned about their deeds .
does man , then , think that he is to be left to himself , to go about at will ?
is it you that make it grow , or are we the grower ?
thus it was ; and we made another people inherit all that .
, mention in the bookthe story of moses . moses was a sincere person , a messengers and a prophet .
moses said to them : 'cast down what you cast '
our lord , admit them to the everlasting gardens you have promised them and those of their fathers and spouses and progeny that were righteous . surely you alone are most mighty , most wise ;
o you who believe ! take not asbitanahthose outside your religionsince they will not fail to do their best to corrupt you . they desire to harm you severely . hatred has already appeared from their mouths , but what their breasts conceal is far worse . indeed we have made plain to you the ayatif you understand .
andwhen we showed ibrahimthe site of thehouse :  associate not anythingwith me , , and sanctify my house for those who circumambulate it , and those who stand up for prayer , and those who bow , and make prostration ; 
he said : my lord ! vindicate for they belie me .
that they should not worship anyone besides god . ,  i am afraid that you will suffer the most painful torment  .
and we gave moses the book , in order that they might receive guidance .
and there will be with them maidens of restrained glances , of a like age .
vile women are for vile men , and vile men for vile women . good women are for good men , and good men for good women ; such are innocent of that which people say : for them is pardon and a bountiful provision .
say thou : none in the heavens and the earth knoweth the unseen save allah ; nor can they perceive when they will be raised .
in the sky is your provision and that which you are promised .
o people ! you are dependant on allah ; and allah only is the independent , the most praiseworthy .
those who had wished they were in his position the day before were saying , “ indeed , it is god who spreads the bounty to whomever he wills of his servants , and restricts it . had god not been gracious to us , he would have caved in on us . no wonder the ungrateful never prosper . ”
so they plotted a plot , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and thy lord inspired the bee , saying : choose thou habitations in the hills and in the trees and in that which they thatch ;
most beneficent , ever-merciful ,
and if you could but see , when they will be terrified with no escape , and they will be seized from a near place .
the day when the trumpet is blown . on that day we assemble the guilty white-eyed ,
and the angels called out to him when he was standing in the sanctuary worshipping , saying : 'allah gives you glad tidings of john , who shall confirm a word from allah . he shall be a master and chaste , a prophet and from the righteous '
being of pure faith to allah , not associating anything with him . he who associates others with allah is like he who falls from heaven and is snatched away by the birds or carried by the wind to some faroff place .
by the spreading winds spreading .
it is really a reminder for those who fear god and follow the straight path .
and do not argue with the people of the scripture except in the best manner possible , except those who do wrong among them . and say , “ we believe in what was revealed to us , and in what was revealed to you ; and our god and your god is one ; and to him we are submissive . ”
that is the day , the truth , so whosoever wills takes a way to his lord .
the king of mankind ,
had we wished to find a pastime , we would surely have found it in that which is with us , if such had been our will .
and we aided them with fruit and meat , whatever they desire .
they said : but what shall be the requital of this , if you are liars ?
we utterly destroyed them although they were greater in might than these . the examples of ancient peoples have gone before .
and women of post-menstrual age who have no desire for marriage - there is no blame upon them for putting aside their outer garmentsnot displaying adornment . but to modestly refrainis better for them . and allah is hearing and knowing .
it only becomes those who believe in allah and the last day and establish prayer and pay zakah and fear none but allah to visit and tend the mosques of allah . these are likely to be guided aright .
so thatmay question the truthful about their truthfulness . as for the unbelievers , he has kept a painful chastisement in store for them .
he has created the heavens and the earth in just proportions , and has given you shape , and made your shapes beautiful : and to him is the final goal .
on the day when the criminals see the angels , there will , certainly , be no rejoicing for them . rather , they will plead to the angels ,  please keep away from us . 
he raised its vault and fashioned it ,
in order to make it a remembrance for you , and in order that the ears that store may remember .
allah is he who made subservient to you the sea that the ships may run therein by his command , and that you may seek of his grace , and that you may give thanks .
those who believe in allah and the last day ask thee for no exemption from fighting with their goods and persons . and allah knoweth well those who do their duty .
and say to the disbelievers , “ keep on with your works in your places ; we are carrying out ours . ”
except an old woman who lingered ,
god will admit those who believe and do good deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . as for those who disbelieve , they enjoy themselves , and eat as cattle eat , and the fire will be their dwelling .
and those who believe and do good - we do not impose upon any of them a burden beyond his capacity . they are the people of paradise . and there they shall abide .
say , ‘ i do not ask you any reward for it , except that anyone who wishes should take the way to his lord . ’
and the companions of the elevations will call to menwhom they recognize by their mark , saying ,  of no avail to you was your gathering andthat you were arrogant . 
and musa said : if you are ungrateful , you and those on earth all together , most surely allah is self-sufficient , praised ;
we sent not any before thee , except men to whom we revealed : 'question the people of the remembrance , if it should be that you do not know --
do not oppress the orphans
so allah made them taste disgrace in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will surely be greater , if they knew .
thus those associates of theirs have decked out fair to many idolaters to slay their children , to destroy them , and to confuse their religion for them . had god willed , they would not have done so ; so leave them to their forging .
or he causeth them to perish on account of that which they have earned - and he forgiveth much -
does it not suffice for themthat we revealed to you the book that is recited to them ? surely there is mercy and good counsel in it for those who believe .
there is not an animal that moves about on the earth , nor a bird that flies on its two wings , but are creatures like you . we have left out nothing in the book -- they shall all be gathered before their lord .
hesaid : 'give me charge of the storehouses of the land , i am a knowledgeable guardian '
if only we could return we would be among the believers . 
who hears the communications of allah recited to him , then persists proudly as though he had not heard them ; so announce to him a painful punishment .
there is no reproach upon the old nor upon the sick nor upon those who do not have the means to spend , provided they remain faithful to allah and his noble messenger ; and there is no way of reproach against the virtuous ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
indeed those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance which we sent down , after we made it clear to mankind in the book – upon them is the curse of allah and the curse of those who curse .
o my father ! serve not the shaitan , surely the shaitan is disobedient to the beneficent allah :
he causes the night to enter into the day and the day into the night . he has subjected the sun and the moon each running for a named term . such is allah , your lord . to him belongs the kingdom ; and those whom you call upon , other than him , do not possess even as much as the membrane of a datestone .
, recite the book that has been revealed to you and establish prayer . surely prayer forbids indecency and evil . and allah 's remembrance is of even greater merit . allah knows all that you do .
woe unto every liar , sinner !
stop them . they must be questioned . 
they say ,  what kind of a messenger is this who eats food and walks about in the market-places ? why has no angel been sent down with him to warn us ? 
we have produced palm-groves and vineyards for you , in which there are abundant fruits for you ; and you eat these ,
so it was . and we made the children of israel inherit them .
and when they are cast within a narrow space of it chained together , they would plead for death .
thus we showed to abraham the visible and invisible world of the heavens and the earth , that he could be among those who believe .
allah will set your deeds right for you and will forgive you your sins . whoever obeys allah and his messenger has achieved a great triumph .
the prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on themselves , and his wives aretheir mothers ; and the possessors of relationship have the better claim in the ordinance of allah to inheritance , one with respect to another , thanbelievers , andthose who have fled , except that you do some good to your friends ; this is written in the book .
but when he saw their hands went not towards the , he felt some mistrust of them , and conceived a fear of them . they said :  fear not : we have been sent against the people of lut . 
by the heaven of the constellations !
certainly we sent noah to his people . he said , ‘ o my people , worship allah ! you have no other god besides him . indeed i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day . ’
this is for that which your own hands have sent before , andthat allah is not a tyrant to his slaves .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all between , most gracious : none shall have power to argue with him .
it is not binding on the blind , the lame or the sick ; but those who obey god and his apostle will be admitted by god to gardens with running streams ; but those who turn back will suffer a painful doom .
and verily , itis an absolute truth with certainty .
and allah hath appointed for you , of that which he hath created shades , and he hath appointed for you from the mountains places of retreat , and he hath appointed for you coats protecting you from the heat and coats protecting you from the violence . thus he perfecteth his favour on you that haply ye may submit .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem attractive to them so they stumble around in perplexity .
beholdest thou not that allah sendeth down water from the heaven and the earth becometh green ? verily allah is subtile , aware .
when moses said unto his household : lo ! i spy afar off a fire ; i will bring you tidings thence , or bring to you a borrowed flame that ye may warm yourselves .
so when the magicians came , moses said to them , ‘ throw down what you have to throw . ’
and that “ when we heard the teaching of the right way we came to believe in it ; he who believes in his lord shall have no fear of suffering loss or being subjected to any injustice ” ;
they shall have good news in this world 's life and in the hereafter ; there is no changing the words of allah ; that is the mighty achievement .
behold ! you are they whoplead for them in this world 's life , but who will plead for them with allah on the resurrection day , or who shall be their protector ?
, the day we will call forth every people with their record . then whoever is given his record in his right hand - those will read their records , and injustice will not be done to them , as much as a thread .
then his reception is the hot boiling water .
they say exactly the same thing as the people who lived before .
the only reason for which they tormented the believers was the latter 's belief in god , the majestic , and praiseworthy .
save an old woman among those who stayed behind ;
those who remember allah standing , sitting , and lying on their sides , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth , ‘ our lord , you have not created this in vain ! immaculate are you ! save us from the punishment of the fire .
and it is undoubtedly an honour for you and your people ; and you will soon be questioned .
they say : “ had the merciful one so willed , we would never have worshipped these deities. ” but they have no knowledge of the matter and are simply conjecturing .
say :  o lord of all dominions , you give whom it pleases you the kingdom , and you take away the power from whosoever you will ; you exalt whom you please and debase whom you will . all goodness is yours . indeed you have the power over all things .
another sign for them is the night : we strip the day out of it—and they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of judgment concerning that wherein ye have been differing .
would that they had brought four witness to testify to their report . since they brought none , they are liars before god .
never did we destroy a town , but it had warners .
allah created you from dust , then from a drop offluid , then he made you mates . no female conceives or delivers except with his knowledge , and no elderly person advances in years , nor is anything diminished of his life , but it isin a book . that is indeed easy for allah .
a people before you asked about them , but then came to reject them .
o ye who disbelieve ! excuse not yourselves to-day ; ye are only being requited for that which ye have been working .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
the first of them shall say to the last of them , 'you have no superiority over us , then ; so taste the chastisement for what you have been earning . '
when we are dead and have become dust ? that would be a far return !
wealth and children are an adornment of the life of the world . but the deeds of lasting righteousness are the best in the sight of your lord in reward , and far better a source of hope .
or do you have a scripture in which you learn
and we did try solomon : we placed on his throne a body ; but he did turn :
and they ask you the decree concerning menstruation ; say , “ it is an impurity , so stay away from women at such times , and do not cohabit with them until they have cleansed themselves ; so when they have cleansed themselves , cohabit with them the way allah has determined for you ” ; indeed allah loves those who repent profusely , and loves those who keep clean .
believers , shall i direct you to a commerce that will deliver you from a grievous chastisement ?
and let me guide you to your lord so you would fear ? ' 
he went quietly to his wife and returned to his guests with a fat , roasted calf .
they say :  o you to whom the admonition has been revealed , you are surely crazed .
and in heaven is your provision and also what you are being promised .
when that hour comes , every breast-feeding mother will drop her baby out of fear and every pregnant female will cast off her burden . you will see the people behaving as though they were drunk , while , in fact , they are not drunk . they only will look such because of the severity of god 's torment .
and who believe in thiswhich has been sent down upon you , o beloved prophet , and what was sent down before you ; and are certain of the hereafter .
those whose lives the angels take while they are wronging their own souls will offer submission saying ,  we were not doing anything evil !   indeed !  the angels will reply ,  god is aware of what you have been doing ,
and when they returned to their own people , they would speak of them jestingly ;
woe that day to the deniers !
so set thy face to the true religion before there comes a day from god that can not be turned back ; on that day they shall be sundered apart .
and verily we gave unto moses nine tokens , clear proofs . do but ask the children of israel how he came unto them , then pharaoh said unto him : lo ! i deem thee one bewitched , o moses .
and when those who disbelievesee you , they take you not except for mockery :  is this the one who talksabout your gods ?  while they disbelieve at the mention of the most beneficent . .
so the earthquake seized them and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
nor would thy lord be the one to destroy communities for a single wrong-doing , if its members were likely to mend .
therein they shall have what they will dwelling forever ; it is a promise binding upon thy lord , and of him to be required .
so leave them to gossip and play until they encounter the day they are promised .
this community of yours is one community and i am your lord , so worship me .
and his nearest kindred who shelter him
it does not befit any prophet to capture the disbelievers alive until he has profusely shed their blood in the land ; you people desire the wealth of this world ; and allah wills the hereafter , and allah is almighty , wise .
‘ o my people ! observe fully the measure and the balance , with justice , and do not cheat the people of their goods , and do not act wickedly on the earth , causing corruption . ’
as for the faithless , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they shall be the inmates of the fire and remain in it .
blessed be the name of thy lord , full of majesty , bounty and honour .
surely we destroyed the nationsbefore you when they indulged in wrong-doing and refused to believe even when their messengers brought clear signs to them . thus do we recompense the people who are guilty .
if you lend to allah a goodly loanhe will double it for you , and will forgive you . and allah is most ready to appreciate and to reward , most forbearing ,
surely those who guardshall be in the midst of gardens and fountains :
the day the trumpet blast is sounded you will come in hordes ;
so moses felt apprehensive within himself .
when his lord called to him in tuwa 's holy vale ?
but watch thoufor the day when the sky will produce visible smoke
and whoever does righteous deeds , whether male or female , while being a believer - those will enter paradise and will not be wronged , the speck on a date seed .
but not the chosen servants of allah .
and , when hewas old enough to walk with him , he said :  o my son ! i have seen in a dream that i am slaughtering you , so look what you think !  he said :  o my father ! do that which you are commanded , insha ' allah , you shall find me of as-sabirin . 
to god belongs all that the heavens and earth contain . god has knowledge of all things .
and those who defend themselves when they are wronged .
thus when they fulfil their term appointed , either take them back on equitable terms or part with them on equitable terms ; and take for witness two persons from among you , endued with justice , and establish the evidencebefore allah . such is the admonition given to him who believes in allah and the last day . and for those who fear allah , heprepares a way out ,
on the day when the angels and the spirit stand arrayed , they speak not , saving him whom the beneficent alloweth and who speaketh right .
thus indeed do we reward the virtuous .
'if you take any other god except myself ' hereplied , 'you shall be thrown into prison '
lo ! those who merit paradise this day are happily employed ,
this shall be because allah hath verily sent down the book with truth : and verily those who differ respecting the book . are surely in cleavage wide .
depart into the shadow of three masses ,
and give full measures when ye measure and weigh with an even balance that is good , and the best interpretation .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the great , the exalted .
and as for the two of you who are guilty thereof , punish them both . and if they repent and improve , then let them be . lo ! allah is ever relenting , merciful .
or cause the sky to fall on us in pieces as you claimed , or bring allah and the angels before us , face to face ;
believers ! among your wives and your children you have enemies : so beware of them . but if you overlook their offences and forgive and pardon them , then surely , god is most forgiving and merciful .
or have they taken other than allah as intercessors ? say ,  even though they do not possessanything , nor do they reason ? 
conspiracies are from satan , that he may dishearten those who believe ; but he will not harm them in the least , except by leave of god . so let the believers put their trust in god .
lord of the two easts , and lord of the two wests !
by the qur'an , full of wisdom , -
the pharaoh asked :  and what is the lord of all the worlds ? 
when the human being is affected by hardship , he starts to pray while lying on his side , sitting or standing , but when we relieve him from hardship , he starts to act as though he had never prayed to us to save him from the misfortune . this is how transgressors ' deeds are made attractive to them .
then you , the erring ones and those that gave the lie to the truth ,
can you not bring him back ? if you are truthful
and we sent towards madyan , their fellowman shuaib – he therefore said , “ o my people ! worship allah , and anticipate the last day , and do not roam the earth spreading turmoil . ”
from allah , the owner of the elevated passages .
wewere your allies in worldly life andin the hereafter . and you will have therein whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you request
say thou : if that which ye fain would hasten on be with me , the affair would have been decided between me and you ; and allah is the best knower of you the wrong-doers .
your lord is he that maketh the ship go smoothly for you through the sea , in order that ye may seek of his bounty . for he is unto you most merciful .
thereat the angels prostrated , all of them together ,
but they hamstrung her , whereupon they became regretful .
but the chieftains of his people , who were disbelieving , said : if ye follow shu'eyb , then truly ye shall be the losers .
and especially for the jews we forbade which we related to you earlier ; and we did not oppress them , but it is they who wronged themselves .
and guard yourselves against a day in which you shall be returned to allah ; then every soul shall be paid back in full what it has earned , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
surely we created man in the best mould ;
and we said to them :  go , all of you . when i send guidance , whoever follows it will neither have fear nor regret ;
he has no partner . so am i commanded , and i am the first of those who submit . 
and to god belongs the first and the last .
or have they associates who have laid down for them as religion that for which god gave not leave ? but for the word of decision , it had been decided between them . for the evildoers there awaits a painful chastisement .
yet why should god not punish them when they debar people from the sacred mosque , although they are not its guardians ? its rightful guardians are those who fear god , though most of them do not realize it .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days ; then he established himself on the throne . he knoweth whatsoever plungeth into the earth and whatsoever cometh forth therefrom , and whatsoever descendeth from the heaven and whatsoever ascendeth thereto ; and he is with you wheresoever ye be . and allah is of whatsoever ye work a beholder .
and we had prevented from himwet nurses before , so she said ,  shall i direct you to a household that will be responsible for him for you while they are to himsincere ? 
say : ' o people ! if you are in doubt concerning my religion , i worship none of those you worship , other than allah but i worship allah , who will cause you to die , for i am commanded to be among the believers ,
and they have no knowledge thereof ; they follow but a vain opinion , and verily a vain opinion attaineth not aught of the truth .
allah—there is no god except him—is the living one , the all-sustainer . neither drowsiness befalls him nor sleep . to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . who is it that may intercede with him except with his permission ? he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not comprehend anything of his knowledge except what he wishes . his seat embraces the heavens and the earth and he is not wearied by their preservation , and he is the all-exalted , the all-supreme .
and we gave them our mercy , and assigned for them a true and high repute .
then all those deities whom they once used to call upon shall vanish and they will come to know for sure that there is no escape for them .
by heaven with all its tracks
and everyone of them will come to him singly on the day of judgment .
and when they had cast , moses said : that which ye have brought is magic . lo ! allah will make it vain . lo ! allah upholdeth not the work of mischief-makers .
and they who give associatessay : if allah had pleased , we would not have served anything besides allah , we nor our fathers , nor would we have prohibited anything withouthim . thus did those before them ; is then aught incumbent upon the apostles except a plain delivery ?
the people of nuh and ad , and firon , the lord of spikes , rejectedbefore them .
alif-laam-meem .
nor is this the speech of a soothsayer . little do you reflect !
knowest thou not that unto allah belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth ? he punisheth whom he will , and forgiveth whom he will . allah is able to do all things .
“ indeed you * and all that you worship * * besides allah , are the fuel of hell ; in it you must go . ”
no . in fact we have been deprived of it . 
do they not consider the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever things allah has created , and that may be their doom shall have drawn nigh ; what announcement would they then believe in after this ?
on the day when we will cause the mountains to travel around and the earth to turn into a levelled plain , we will also bring all human beings together . no one will be left behind .
that god may recompense the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites or relent towards them , as he will . god is surely forgiving and kind .
indeed we have guided him to the way , be he grateful or ungrateful .
know that whatever property you may gain , one fifth belongs to god , the messenger , the kindred , orphans , the needy and those who need money while on a journey.if you believe in god and what we revealed to our servant on the day of distinctionwhen the armies confronted each other . god has power over all things .
allah has certainly helped you in many situations , and on the day of hunayn , when your great number impressed you , but it did not avail you in any way , and the earth became narrow for you in spite of its expanse , whereupon you turned your backs .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , “ these are stories of earlier people . ”
so created from him a pair , the male and female .
i worship not that which ye worship ;
and during part of the night , celebrate his praises , andafter the postures of adoration .
he sends down water from the skies , which flows in channels according to their capacity , with the scum borne on the surface of the torrent , as rises the scum when metals are heated on the fire for making ornaments and household utensils . this is how god determines truth and falsehood . the scum disappears like the foam on the bank , and that which is useful to man remains on the earth . that is how god sets forth precepts of wisdom .
are you afraid , before your conspiring , to advance freewill offerings ? if you do not so , and god turns again unto you , then perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and obey god and his messenger . god is aware of the things you do .
and the satans have not brought it down .
do they not know that whosoever opposes god and his messenger -- for him awaits the fire of gehenna , therein to dwell forever ? that is the mighty degradation .
spendthrifts are the brothers of satan , and satan is ever ungrateful to his lord --
and he went out before his people in his splendor . those who desired the worldly life said , “ if only we possessed the likes of what quaroon was given . he is indeed very fortunate . ”
we built the universe with our might , giving it its vast expanse .
and he it is who has created man from the water , then he has made for him blood relationship and marriage relationship , and your lord is powerful .
and when they hear idle talk they turn aside from it and say : we shall have our deeds and you shall have your deeds ; peace be on you , we do not desire the ignorant .
when moses said to his people , “ o my people , why do you hurt me , although you know that i am god ’ s messenger to you ? ” and when they swerved , god swerved their hearts . god does not guide the sinful people .
and as to such of your women as have despaired of menstruation , if ye be in doubt thereof , their waiting period is three months , as also of those who have not yet menstruated . and as to those with burthens , their term is when they lay down their burthen . and whosoever feareth allah , he maketh his affair unto him easy .
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not hope for the days of god . he will fully recompense people for whatever they have earned .
“ we only say that some of our gods have possessed you with evil. ” he said , “ i call god to witness , and you to witness , that i am innocent of what you associate .
unquestionably , to allah belongs whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth . and those who invoke other than allah do notfollow  partners .  they follow not except assumption , and they are not but falsifying
those who deny say of those who believe :  had there been any good in it they would not have preceded us in coming to it .  since they have not taken guidance from it , they will say :  this is the same old lie . 
nor repulse the petitioner ;
glory be to him ! exalted above all that they say !
the way of access to the heavens so that may be apprised of the god of musa , and verily i believe him to be a liar . and thus fair- seeming was made unto fir'awn the evil of his work , and he was hindered from the path . and the plot of fir'awn ended only in ruin .
he it is who in the first assault drove forth the people of the book that disbelieved from their homes at the first gathering of forces . you did not believe that they would leave ; while they too thought that their fortresses would defend them against allah . then allah came upon them from whence they did not even imagine , casting such terror into their hearts that they destroyed their homes by their own hands and their destruction was also caused by the hands of the believers . so learn a lesson from this , o you who have perceptive eyes !
or do you feel secure that he whoin the heaven would not send against you a storm of stones ? then you would know howwas my warning .
he will forgive you your sins and respite you till an appointed term . when the term of allah arrives it can not be deferred ; if you but knew '
whoever acts righteously , does so to his own good ; and whoever commits an evil will suffer its consequence . all of you will then be sent back to your lord .
, can you save himagainst whom the sentence of chastisement has become due ; him who has , , already fallen into the fire ? ”
have you not regarded that allah knows whatever there is in the heavens and whatever there is in the earth ? there dost not takes place any secret talk among three , but he is their fourth , nor among five but he is their sixth , nor when they are less than that or more but he is with them wherever they may be . then he will inform them about what they have done on the day of resurrection . indeed allah has knowledge of all things .
those who say , when afflicted with a calamity ,  we belong to god and to him we shall return , 
when paradise is brought near .
he who appointed the earth to be a cradle for you , and therein threaded roads for you , and sent down water out of heaven , and therewith we have brought forth divers kinds of plants .
it is he who created you from dust , then from a drop of fluid , then from a tiny , clinging form , then he brought you forth as infants , then he allowed you to reach maturity , then he let you grow old , though some of you die sooner , and reach your appointed term so that you may reflect .
and if they turn away , know that god is your protector . the best protector , and the best supporter .
i call to witness the qur'an , custodian of all laws , --
god ! there is no deity save him , the living , the sustainer .
if you are on a journey where you can not find a scribe , finalize your contract in the form of a deposit in which the goods are already given to the parties . if you trust each other in such a contract , let him pay back what he has entrusted you with and have fear of god , his lord . do not refuse to testify to what you bore witness . whoever does so has committed a sin . god knows what you do .
he said , “ my lord , judge with justice. ” and , “ our lord is the gracious , whose help is sought against what you allege . ”
the eyes attain him not , but he attains the eyes ; he is the all-subtle , the all-aware .
and similarly , we did not send before you any warner into a city except that its affluent said ,  indeed , we found our fathers upon a religion , and we are , in their footsteps , following . 
they shall burn in a scorching fire ;
surely those who disbelieve in our signs -- we shall certainly roast them at a fire ; as often as their skins are wholly burned , we shall give them in exchange other skins , that they may taste the chastisement . surely god is all-mighty , all-wise .
it was god who created the heavens and the earth . he sends down water from the sky with which he brings forth fruits for your sustenance ; he has made ships subservient to you , so that they may sail across the sea by his command ; and has subjected the rivers to you .
before , as a guidance for people , and he sent down the criterion . as for those who disbelieve in the verses of allah , for them is an intense punishment . allah is mighty , owner of vengeance .
how will you comprehend what sijjin is ?
but the most hapless will flout it ,
has then your lordpreferred for you sons , and taken for himself daughters among the angels ? truly ye utter a most dreadful saying !
the unbelievers have said ,  why was the whole quran not revealed to him at once ?  we have revealed it to you in gradual steps to strengthen your hearts and give you explanations .
they will not believe in it until they see the grievous punishment .
we have given you seven of the pairs , and the grand quran .
god is certainly the great provider , lord of strength and power .
for a tremendous day -
god outspreads and straitens his provision unto whomsoever he will . they rejoice in this present life ; and this present life , beside the world to come , is naught but passing enjoyment .
do you fear that you will notgive in charity before your consultation ? so when you do not do it and allah has turned to you , then keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey allah and his apostle ; and allah is aware of what you do .
those who believe , and whose hearts find rest in the remembrance of allah , verily , in the remembrance of allah do hearts find rest .
is it a wonder for mankind that we have inspired a man among them , saying : warn mankind and bring unto those who believe the good tidings that they have a sure footing with their lord ? the disbelievers say : lo ! this is a mere wizard .
hell , in which they will burn , - and what an evil place to settle in !
o you who have faith ! enter into submission , all together , and do not follow in satan ’ s steps ; he is indeed your manifest enemy .
and say :  the truth is from your lord .  then whosoever wills , let him believe , and whosoever wills , let him disbelieve . verily , we have prepared for the zalimun , a fire whose walls will be surrounding them . and if they ask for helpthey will be granted water like boiling oil , that will scald their faces . terrible the drink , and an evil murtafaqa !
which turned everything it touched to ashes .
not the slightest sound will they hear of hell : what their souls desired , in that will they dwell .
say : 'shall i tell you of things better than these ? for the god-fearing there are , with their lord , gardens beneath which rivers flow ; there they will abide for ever , will have spouses of stainless purity as companions , and will enjoy the good pleasure of allah . ' allah thoroughly observes his servants .
these two kindsmay be compared to the blind and deaf , and those who can see and hear well . are they equal when compared ? will ye not then take heed ?
 allah has begotten off spring or children ?  and , verily , they are liars !
indeed he knows what you say loudly and what you hide .
a register inscribed .
were he to divorce you , his lord might well replace you with better wives -- submissive , believing , pious , penitent , devout in worship , given to fasting -- previously married and virgins .
let the children of israel go with us . ' “
as for those who worked against our signs in order to frustrate them , they shall suffer a painful chastisement .
but it has already been revealed to thee , - as it was to those before thee , -  if thou wert to join , truly fruitless will be thy work , and thou wilt surely be in the ranks of those who lose  .
and those who of their trusts and their covenant are keepers .
tell them , : “ do you indeed disbelieve in him and assign compeers to him who created the earth in two days ? he is the lord of all beings of the universe .
'but if you cry me lies , nations cried lies before you ; and it is only for the messenger to deliver the manifest message . '
: 'david , we have made you a caliph in the earth . judge with justice among people and do not yield to your own preference in case it should lead you from the path of allah . surely , a terrible punishment awaits those who stray from the path of allah , because they forget the day of reckoning '
o mankind ! if you are in doubt about the resurrection , then verily ! we have created youfrom dust , then from a nutfah , then from a clotthen from a little lump of flesh , some formed and some unformed , that we may makeclear to you . and we cause whom we will to remain in the wombs for an appointed term , then we bring you out as infants , thenthat you may reach your age of full strength . and among you there is he who dies , and among you there is he who is brought back to the miserable old age , so that he knows nothing after having known . and you see the earth barren , but when we send down wateron it , it is stirred , it swells and puts forth every lovely kind .
and we have enjoined upon manfor his parents . his mother carried him , in weakness upon weakness , and his weaning is in two years . be grateful to me and to your parents ; to me is thedestination .
it is surely a decisive utterance ;
separating decisively .
who could be more wicked than he who imputes lies to god or denies his revelations ? such as these will receive what is declared in the book , and when our angels come to draw out their souls and ask :  where are they you worshipped other than god ?  they will answer :  they have left us and fled ;  and bear witness against themselves for being infidels .
and if one of them is given the glad tidings of what he professes regarding the most gracious , his face blackens and he is mournful !
yet , even after all the evidence they had seen , they thought it right to jail him for a time .
say :  have you thought of what god has sent you for food , of which you have labelled some as lawful and some forbidden ?  and ask :  has god commanded this , or you are imputing lies to god ? 
we opened the gates of heaven with torrential water
then see what was the end of those who were admonished , -
allah hath gotten ready for them a grievous torment ; so fear allah , o men of understanding ! those who have believed . surely he hath sent down unto you an admonition .
we should have invented a lie against allah if we returned to your religion after allah hath rescued us from it . it is not for us to return to it unless allah our lord shouldwill . our lord comprehendeth all things in knowledge . in allah do we put our trust . our lord ! decide with truth between us and our folk , for thou art the best of those who make decision .
when those who were followed shall renounce those who followed , and they see the chastisement and their ties are cut asunder .
whoever turns aside from it , he shall surely bear a burden on the day of resurrection
until when he reached a place between the two mountains , he found beside the mountains a people who scarcely understood anything .
or do they say :  we are a well-accoutred army ? 
then if allah takes you back to a group of them and they seek permission from you to go out to fight , say to them , “ you shall never go out with me nor ever fight with me against any enemy ; you were happy to remain seated for the first time , therefore remain seated with those who stay behind . ”
those who follow the messenger , the unlettered prophet , whom they find mentioned in the torah and the gospel in their possession . he directs them to righteousness , and deters them from evil , and allows for them all good things , and prohibits for them wickedness , and unloads the burdens and the shackles that are upon them . those who believe in him , and respect him , and support him , and follow the light that came down with him—these are the successful .
he said : i will ask for you forgiveness from my lord ; surely he is the forgiving , the merciful .
and they imagined that there would be no trial ; so they blinded and deafened themselves . thereafter allah relented toward them , then they again blinded and deafened themselves . and allah is beholder of that which they work .
and they said , “ o you upon whom the qur ’ an has been sent , you are indeed insane . ”
and he commanded you not that ye should take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to disbelieve after ye had surrendered ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
we have indeed warned you of a calamity near at hand , a day when man will see what he had sentahead , and the unbeliever will say :  woe alas . ah would that i were dust ! 
those whom they worship besides god are not able to intercede , except for those among them who believe in the truthand who know whom to intercede for .
o apostles ! eat of the good things and do good ; surely i know what you do .
we shall narrate to you the true tidings of moosa and firaun , for the people who have faith .
indeed he hasnearness with us and a good destination .
and burning in hell .
men are overseers over women , by reason of that wherewith allah hath made one of them excel over anot her , and by reason of that which they expend of their substance . wherefore righteous women are obedient , and are watchers in husbands absence by the aid and protection of allah . and those wives whose refractoriness ye fear , exhort them , and avoid them in beds , and beat them ; but if they obey you , seek not a way against them ; verily allah is ever lofty , grand .
and those who take as allies other than him - allah isguardian over them ; and you , , are not over them a manager .
how is it possible for them to accept guidance , whereas a noble messenger who speaks clearly has already come to them ?
assuredly thou wast in neglect thereof ; now we have removed from off thee thy veil , so thy sight today is piercing .
and were persisting in great sin
and they ask thee to hasten on the torment , whereas allah shall not fail his promise . and verily a day with thy lord is as a thousand years of that which ye compute .
is it then other than allah 's religion that they seek , and to him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him shall they be returned .
yes , why not ? whoever fulfilled his pledge and practised piety – and indeed allah loves the pious .
he will teach him the book , the wisdom , the torah and the gospel ,
we sent the messengers only as bearers of good news and as warners . those who believe and reform have nothing to fear , nor shall they grieve .
then is one who laid the foundation of his building on righteousnessfrom allah andhis approval better or one who laid the foundation of his building on the edge of a bank about to collapse , so it collapsed with him into the fire of hell ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
unto whomsoever of you willeth to walk straight .
so if they believe in the like of that which you believe , then they are rightly guided , but if they turn away , then they are only in opposition . so allah will suffice you against them . and he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
to the people of 'ad we sent their brother , hud . he said ,  o my people , worship god , you have no other god but he . then will you not be god-fearing ? 
he who created you , and formed you , and proportioned you ?
companions of the right , what are the companions of the right ?
said he , 'what ails thee , iblis , that thou art not among those bowing ? '
and certainly we have already destroyed the likes of you , but is there anyone who will mind ?
except one who isto burn in hell .
and who is more unjust than he who preventsfrom the masjids of allah , that his name should be remembered in them , and strives to ruin them ? these , it was not proper for them that they should have entered them except in fear ; they shall meet with disgrace in this world , and they shall have great chastisement in the hereafter .
he said , “ i will take refuge on a mountain—it will protect me from the water. ” he said , “ there is no protection from god ’ s decree today , except for him on whom he has mercy. ” and the waves surged between them , and he was among the drowned .
he said , “ o my people , i am to you a clear warner .
they said :  nay , we have come to you with thatwhich they have been doubting .
and when he thinks it is the time of departure
or have they taken others instead of allah as intercessors ? say : “ will they intercede though they may have no power and though they may not even understand ? ”
believers , do not ask questions about things which , if they were made known to you , would only become burdensome for you ; but if you ask them when the quran is being revealed , they shall be made plain to you -- god has kept silent about them : god is most forgiving and forbearing .
those before them denied , and so the doom came on them whence they knew not .
yet no sooner did we take away the affliction from them than they broke their pledge .
their reward will be forgiveness from their lord and gardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever . how blessed is the reward of those who labor .
apart from this , whoever respects the sacred ordinances of god , will find a better reward for him with his lord . you are allowed to eat all cattle except those already mentioned to you . avoid the repugnance of idols , and false and frivolous talk .
your god is none else than allah , beside whom there is no god . his knowledge embraces everything . 
say thou : 'verily own not for you power of hurt nor of benefit
we surely know best those most deserving of the fires of hell ,
saying , “ o our misfortune ! who has raised us from our sleep ? this is what the most gracious had promised , and the noble messengers had spoken the truth ! ”
remove the hitch from my tongue ,
god has made the ka'bah , the sacred house , a means of support as well as the sacred month and the sacrificial animals with their garlands . that is so that you may know that god has knowledge of whatever is in the heavens and on the earth and that he is fully aware of all things .
because they followed what displeases god , and they were averse to pleasing him . so we nullified their deeds .
it was not the devils who brought down the quran :
and obey not the command of the extravagant .
that is because god merges the night into the day , and he merges the day into the night , and because god is hearing and seeing .
for their keeping to the journey in the winter and the summer-
then lo ! on the day of resurrection ye are raised .
by oath of the fig and of the olive ,
he said : as thou hast caused me to remain disappointed i will certainly lie in wait for them in thy straight path .
marked by your lord for the musrifun .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
that allah may separate the wicked from the good , the wicked will he place piece upon piece , and heap them all together , and consign them unto hell . such verily are the losers .
yet before it there was the book of moses which was an authority , and a mercy . thisis the book confirming itin thearabic tongue , to warn the harmdoers and to give glad tidings to those who do good .
i seek refuge in you lest they come to me . 
and those before them belied ; and these have not arrived unto a tithe of that which we vouchsafed unto them . but they belied my apostles . so how terrible was my disapproval
but how will they fare when angels will take their souls at death and will carry them , striking their faces and backs ?
but if they desist , then allah is indeed all-forgiving , all-merciful .
threw themselves down in prostration
and , o my people ! i ask you not for wealth in return for it ; my reward is only with allah and i am not going to drive away those who believe ; surely they shall meet their lord , but i consider you a people who are ignorant :
there you are , arguing on their behalf in the present life , but who will argue with god on their behalf on the day of resurrection ? or who will be their representative ?
in which they will then neither die nor live .
that we may sing your praises much ,
if we could only return to the world and be among the believers . 
i say not unto you :  i have the treasures of allah  nor  i have knowledge of the unseen ,  nor say i :  lo ! i am an angel !  nor say i unto those whom your eyes scorn that allah will not give them good - allah knoweth best what is in their hearts - lo ! then indeed i should be of the wrong-doers .
whatever thing you have been given is the enjoyment of the present life and its adornment ; and what is with god is better and more enduring .
and  my breast is straitened and my tongue is not fluent ; so send aaron as well ;
allah drawsparable : two men , one of whom is dumb , having no power over anything and who is a liability to his master : wherever he directs him he does not bring any good . is he equal to someone who enjoins justice and ison a straight path ?
enjoin on your people service to god , and be yourself constant in it . we do not ask you to provide : it is we who provide for you . the reward is for piety and fear of god .
say : 'work according to your station my people , for indeed i am working ' you shall know to whom will be the good end of the abode . the harmdoers shall not be triumphant .
some of the pharaoh 's nobles considered him to be no more than a skillful magician
and when the earth is stretched out
remember when you were few in number and were accounted weak in the land , ever fearing the onslaught of your enemies , but he provided you with shelter , and supported you with his help and provided you with good things , so that you might be grateful .
we already know how much of them the earth takes away : with us is a record guarding .
has there not been over man a period of time , when he was nothing to be mentioned ?
and they tried to persuade him regarding his guests – we therefore blinded their eyes , “ so taste my punishment , and my warnings . ”
he said , ‘ o my people , i am not in error . rather , i am an apostle from the lord of all the worlds .
that we might make it a memorial for you , and that remembering earsmight remember .
say thou : verily stand upon an evidence from my lord , and ye belie it ; not with me is that which ye fain would hasten on . the judgement is not but of allah . he counteth the truth , and he is the best of deciders .
let them , then , laugh little , and weep much at the contemplation of the punishment for the evil they have committed .
then whoso is given his account in his right hand
and the night when on the wane ,
but those who had been given knowledge said ,  woe to you , god 's reward is better for those who believe and do good deeds : and it is awarded only to those who are steadfast . 
and lo ! unto us belong the latter portion and the former .
whenever they see you , they mock you : 'is this whom allah has sent as a messenger ?
if you want to retaliate , retaliate to the same degree as the injury done to you . but if you are patient , it is better to be so .
and ,  this is what you had been trying to run away from  .
and the human being says , “ when i am dead , will i be brought back alive ? ”
and they were unable to rise up , nor could they help themselves .
they whose eyes were under a cover from my reminder and they could not even hear .
their abode shall be the fire in return for their misdeeds ,
so that he may reward those who have faith and do righteous deeds out of his grace . indeed , he does not like the faithless .
a servant when he prays ?
surely he has no power over those who have faith and who place their trust in their lord .
we were promised this before , and so were our fathers . it is but the fictitious story of the ancients '
for an appointed time  .
would ye go in lustfully unto men instead of women ? aye ! ye are a people addicted to ignorant ways .
people ask you regarding the last day ; proclaim , “ its knowledge is only with allah ; and what do you know , the last day may really be near ! ”
or , ‘ a treasure thrown to him , orhehave a garden from which he may eat ? ’ and the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are just following a bewitched man . ’
they shall recline on high amidst lote trees without thorns
keep vigil the night , except a little
and , in our sight they were indeed among the select , the truly good !
the faithless among the children of israel were cursed on the tongue of david and jesus son of mary . that , because they would disobey and they used to commit transgression .
and his only task when he intends a thing is to command it , “ be ” – and it thereupon happens !
you shall not attain righteousness until you spend out of what you love . allah knows whatever you spend .
o my father ! surely i fear that a punishment from the beneficent allah should afflict you so that you should be a friend of the shaitan .
but the shriek seized them at early morning .
except iblis . he was filled with pride and turned an unbeliever .
verily , those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not .
but the godfearing shall be amidst gardens and fountains :
we shall remove the torment for a while but you will revert to your old ways .
and allah besieges them from all around .
and allah calls to the abode of peace , and guides whomever he wills on the straight path .
it belongs not to a believer to slay a believer , except it be by error . if any slays a believer by error , then let him set free a believing slave , and bloodwit is to be paid to his family unless they forgo it as a freewill offering . if he belong to a people at enmity with you and is a believer , let the slayer set free a believing slave . if he belong to a people joined with you by a compact , then bloodwit is to be paid to his family and the slayer shall set free a believing slave . but if he finds not the means , let him fast two successive months -- god 's turning ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
so that they become a scattered dust ,
god your lord and lord of your forefathers ? 
nor are the shade and the torrid heat .
and ask forgiveness of your lord and then repent to him . indeed , my lord is merciful and affectionate . 
look , how they coin epithets for you ; so they go astray , and can not find the way .
lord of the heavens and the earth , and everything between them—the most merciful—none can argue with him .
we will let the unbelievers taste a terrible punishment , and recompense them with the worst of what they were doing .
they do not ask leave of you who believe in allah and the latter dayfrom striving hard with their property and their persons , and allah knows those who guard .
they said :  by allah ! truly thou art in thine old wandering mind . 
those before them did indeed devise plans , but allah demolished their building from the foundations , so the roof fell down on them from above them , and the punishment came to them from whence they did not perceive .
surely your lord will judge between them by his judgment , and he is the mighty , the knowing .
in stead of him , they pray not except to female beings ; they pray not except to a rebel satan accursed by god .
assuredly , what ye are promised must come to pass .
indeed those who have believed and migrated and waged jihad with their possessions and persons in the way of allah , and those who gaveshelter and help—they are heirs of one another . as for those who have believed but did not migrate , you have no heirdom in relation to them whatsoever until they migrate . yet if they ask your help for the sake of religion , it is incumbent on you to help them , excepting against a people with whom you have a treaty ; and allah watches what you do .
he said ,  o my people have you considered : if i should be upon clear evidence from my lord while he has given me mercy from himself but it has been made unapparent to you , should we force it upon you while you are averse to it ?
they shall be , kept far from it neither shall they hear any whisper of it , and they shall dwell forever in that their souls desired ;
he said :  have you considered what you have been worshipping ,
and allah createth you , then causeth you to die , and among you is he who is brought back to the most abject stage of life , so that he knoweth nothing afterknowledge . lo ! allah is knower , powerful .
we have sent you only as a bearer of good tidings and admonisher for all mankind ; yet most people do not understand .
or some other created thing which may seem to you most difficult !  they will then say :  who will revert us back ?  say :  he who originated you in the first place .  they will shake their heads at you and say :  when will that be ?  say :  in the near future , perhaps ,
then when thou becometh relieved , toil ;
or some created thing that is yet greater in your thoughts ! then they will say : who shall bring us back . say : he who created you at the first . then will they shake their heads at thee , and say : when will it be ? say : it will perhaps be soon ;
then , he who is given his book in his right hand
whereas they had then turned away from him and said , “ he is a madman , tutored ! ” ?
the dominion on that day rhall is ; be the true dominion , of the compassionate , l and it shall be anday upon the infidels hard .
appoint for me a henchman from my folk ,
and be dutiful to my mother . he has not made me haughty or rebellious .
is in their hearts a disease ? or doubt they ? or fear they that allah shall misjudge them , as also his apostle ? aye ! these are the very wrong-doers !
when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book : ‘ you shall explain it for the people , and you shall not conceal it , ’ they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry gain . how evil is what they buy !
then come to firon and say : surely we are the apostles of the lord of the worlds :
nay , but whoso fulfils his covenant and fears god , god loves the godfearing .
o you who believe ! be helpersof allah , as~ isa son of marium said todisciples : who are my helpers in the cause of allah ? the disciples said : we are helpersof allah . so a party of the children of israel believed and another party disbelieved ; then we aided those who believed against their enemy , and they became uppermost .
they ask you , , what they should spend . say ,  whatever you spend of good isfor parents and relatives and orphans and the needy and the traveler . and whatever you do of good - indeed , allah is knowing of it . 
thus did we plan and how excellent is our planning !
thus we narrate to you reports of times gone by ; and we have given you a message from our presence .
is he who founded his building upon duty to allah and his good pleasure better ; or he who founded his building on the brink of a crumbling , overhanging precipice so that it toppled with him into the fire of hell ? allah guideth not wrongdoing folk .
and say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty ; that they should not display their beauty and ornaments except whatappear thereof ; that they should draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their beauty except to their husbands , their fathers , their husband 's fathers , their sons , their husbands ' sons , their brothers or their brothers ' sons , or their sisters ' sons , or their women , or the slaves whom their right hands possess , or male servants free of physical needs , or small children who have no sense of the shame of sex ; and that they should not strike their feet in order to draw attention to their hidden ornaments . and o ye believers ! turn ye all together towards allah , that ye may attain bliss .
and they say : none entereth paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their own desires . say : bring your proofif ye are truthful .
and indeed , there is among you he who lingers behind ; and if disaster strikes you , he says ,  allah has favored me in that i was not present with them . 
now we had forbidden to him aforetime to be suckled by any foster-mother ; therefore she said , 'shall i direct you to the people of a household who will take charge of him for you and look after him ? '
say : 'what do you think if some chastisement of allah or the hour suddenly overtakes you : do you cry to any other than allah ? answer , if you speak the truth .
god is he who has subjected to you the sea , that the ships may run on it at his commandment , and that you may seek his bounty ; haply so you will be thankful .
and verily , your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
surely those who fear god and follow the straight path will be amidst gardens and light ,
“ and when you apprehend someone , you seize him mercilessly ? ”
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip the day out of it , thereupon they are in darkness .
god showers his blessings upon the prophet and the angels seek forgiveness for him . believers , pray for the prophet and greet him with ,  peace be with you . 
they were drowned because of their habitual sinfulness , and sent to hell , and did not find any helper other than god .
are they better , or the people of tubba ' and those before them whom we destroyed ? they were surely sinners .
and he said , “ indeed i shall go to my lord who will guide me . ”
and they have no power to give them help , nor can they help themselves .
:  o lord , deliver me , for they accuse me of lies . 
and no one misguided us except the criminals .
that which they were made to enjoy shall not avail them ?
o my people ! yours is the kingdom this day , being masters in the land , but who will help us against the punishment of allah if it come to us ? firon said : i do not show you aught but that which i see , and i do not make you follow any but the right way .
who provides them with food against hunger , and with security against fear .
but after that you turned away . were it not for god ’ s grace and mercy towards you , you would have been among the losers .
so when she came , it was said :  is your throne like this ?  she said :  as though it were the very same .  andsaid ] :  knowledge was bestowed on us before her , and we were submitted to allah . 
and what can make you know what is the inevitable reality ?
has there not come to you the news of those who disbelieved before ? so they tasted the bad consequence of their affair , and they will have a painful punishment .
and they desired a war against him , but we brought them low .
and at night ; will you not then reflect ?
allah ivill say : 'enter the fire of hell and join the nations of jinn and men that have gone before you . ' as a nation enters hill , it will curse the one that went before it , and when all are gathered there , the last of them shall say of the first : 'our lord ! these are the ones who led us astray . let their torment be doubled in hell-fire . ' he will answer : 'each will have a doubled torment ; although you do not know . '
some arabs of the desert came with ready excuses , asking for leave to stay behind . but those who had lied to god and his prophet stayed at home doing nothing . so the punishment for those who disbelieve among them will be painful .
say , “ come – so that i may recite to you what your lord has forbidden for you that ‘ do not ascribe any partner to him and be good to parents ; and do not kill your children because of poverty ; we shall provide sustenance for all – you and them ; and do not approach lewd things , the open among them or concealed ; and do not unjustly kill any life which allah has made sacred ; this is the command to you , so that you may have sense . ’
and o dear prophet , when my bondmen question you concerning me , then surely i am close ; i answer the prayer of the supplicant when he calls on me , so they must obey me and believe in me , so that they may attain guidance .
this is our provision for you , never to end .
'my curse shall rest on you until the day of recompense '
 am i not better than this one ] , who is mahinand can scarcely express himself clearly ?
as a lesson and a reminder to every penitent worshiper .
and we do not send apostles but as givers of good news and warning , and those who disbelieve make a false contention that they may render null thereby the truth , and they take my communications and that with which they are warned for a mockery .
he said , “ indeed you all – you and your forefathers – were in open error . ”
as for the poets , the erring follow them ,
read ! your lord is the most bountiful one
do not think of those slain for the cause of god as dead . they are alive with their lord and receive sustenance from him .
what , you build a monument on every hill merely for fun
these : their resort shall be hell , and they shall not find therefrom an escape .
why do you not bring to us the angels if you are of the truthful ones ?
never ! in fact they do not fear the hereafter .
and be patient upon your lord ’ s command , , for you are indeed in our sight ; and proclaim the purity of your lord while praising him , whenever you stand .
there is for them glad tidings in this present life and in the everlasting life . the word of allah is unchanging , that is the mighty triumph .
his satanic companion will say ,  our lord , i did not mislead him , but he himself went astray  .
the day it cometh no soul shall speak save by his leave : then of them some shall be wretched and some blessed .
forgive my father , for he is one of those who are astray .
of all men the nearest to abraham are those who follow him , and then this prophet and the faithful ; and god is the protector of all believers .
indeed , our word to a thing when we intend it is but that we say to it ,  be ,  and it is .
those whom they invoke besides allah create nothing and are themselves created .
and be kind to him who follows you of the believers .
the brothers of joseph came and entered his presence . he recognized them , but they did not recognize him .
the wild beasts stampede on the run ,
certainly they soughtdissension before , and they meditated plots against you until the truth came , and allah 's commandment prevailed although they were averse .
and that his endeavour shall be presently observed .
test the orphans until they reach the age of marriage . if you find them to be mature enough , hand over their properties to them . and do not consume it extravagantly or hastily before they grow up . the rich shall not charge any wage , but the poor may charge fairly . when you hand over their properties to them , have it witnessed for them . god suffices as a reckoner .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds—for them is a reward uninterrupted .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth , the cattle and the angels prostrate themselves before god without pride .
i shall respite them , my stratagem is firm .
we gave the book to moses so that perhaps they may have guidance .
see , yonder are their dwellings empty and in ruins because they did wrong . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for a people who have knowledge .
do you want to worship false idols as your lords besides god ?
why should ye be divided into two parties about the hypocrites ? allah hath upset them for theirdeeds . would ye guide those whom allah hath thrown out of the way ? for those whom allah hath thrown out of the way , never shalt thou find the way .
o believers , obey god , and obey the messenger , and do not make your own works vain .
do you , the believers in truth , desire the unbelievers to believe you ? there was a group among them who would hear the word of god and understand it . then they would purposely misinterpret it .
do not address the messenger in the same manner you address one another . god knows those of you who slip away using flimsy excuses . so let those who oppose his orders beware , lest an ordeal strikes them , or a painful punishment befalls them .
and when we intend that we shall destroy a town we command the affluent people thereof , then they transgress therein ; wherefore the word is justified on them ; then we annihilate it with utter annihilation .
he said ,  your lord 's wrath and indignation have already fallen upon you . would you dispute with me about mere names , which you and your fathers have invented , and for which god has revealed no authority ? wait then if you will : i am waiting alongside you . 
say ,  my people , act as you wish . i shall do as i like and you will soon know
they will say : we tarried a day or part of a day , but ask those who keep account .
have you not noticed those who have been given a portion of the book ? whenever their learned men are summoned to the book of allah to judge the differences between them , a party of them turns away in aversion .
alif . lam . mim . sad .
and every soul shall come , and with it a driver and a witness .
but those whose scales weigh light will have ruined their souls ; in hell will they abide .
a guidance and a mercy for the well-doers :
like the behavior of pharaoh ’ s people and those before them . they rejected our signs , so god seized them for their sins . god is strict in retribution .
both cried out : 'our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and do not have mercy on us , we shall surely be among the losers . '
except those who believe and do good and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they are oppressed ; and they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning they shall turn back .
so when we heard the guidance we believed in it ; and he who believes in his lord will neither fear loss nor force .
why then , did not the believers , men and women , when you heard itthink good of their own people and say :  thisis an obvious lie ? 
while he was standing in prayer in the chamber , the angels called unto him :  allah doth give thee glad tidings of yahya , witnessing the truth of a word from allah , andnoble , chaste , and a prophet , - of thecompany of the righteous . 
reclining upon the couches lined with silk brocade , and the fruits of the two gardens will be near at hand .
she said : 'when kings enter a village , they ruin it and humiliate its nobles . and this they will do .
but if any turn away and reject allah , -
o you who have faith ! when you encounter the faithless advancing , do not turn your backsfrom them .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens andthe earth and ad-din wasiba is his . none has the right to be worshipped but allah ) ] . will you then fear any other than allah ?
he said , “ my lord ! i have control only over myself and my brother , so separate between us and between the wicked people . ”
white , sparkling , a delight to the drinkers .
she said : lo ! i seek refuge in the beneficent one from thee , if thou art allah-fearing .
 ' , to attest the law which was before me . and to make lawful to you part of what wasforbidden to you ; i have come to you with a sign from your lord . so fear allah , and obey me .
what could let you know what the height is !
and the pious are not accountable for them in the least , apart from the giving of advice so that they may avoid .
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they call upon other than him is falsehood , and because allah is the most high , the grand .
andwhen moses said to his people ,  o my people , indeed you have wronged yourselves by your taking of the calf . so repent to your creator and kill yourselves . that is best foryou in the sight of your creator .  then he accepted your repentance ; indeed , he is the accepting of repentance , the merciful .
have the unbelievers been duly rewarded for their deeds ?
they will not hear therein any vain or sinful talk ,
we bestowed upon david favor from us : “ o mountains , and birds : echo with him. ” and we softened iron for him .
illustrious scribes
and fight them until there is no oppression , and worship becomes devoted to god alone . but if they cease , then let there be no hostility except against the oppressors .
or some poor wretch in misery ,
by the soul , and that which shaped it
mischief has appeared on land and sea because ofthat the hands of men have earned , thatmay give them a taste of some of their deeds : in order that they may turn back .
verily those who argue in the matter of god 's revelations , without authority having reached them , have nothing but pride in their hearts , and they will not achieve their end . so take refuge in god : surely he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and you have it not in your power to do justice between wives , even though you may wish , but be not disinclinedwith total disinclination , so that you leave her as it were in suspense ; and if you effect a reconciliation and guard , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
when we sent to them two , they impugned both of them . then we reinforced them with a third , and they said , ‘ we have indeed been sent to you . ’
so remember me ; i will remember you . and be grateful to me and do not deny me .
he giveth life and causeth to die , and unto him ye shall be returned .
even till you visit the tombs .
take not with allah another object of worship ; or thouwilt sit in disgrace and destitution .
“ and inform them that the water is to be shared between them ; only those may come whose turn it is . ”
pray to your lord humbly and privately . god does not love the transgressors .
and pharaoh 's wife said ,  he will be a joy to the eye for me and you ! do not slay him : he may well be of use to us , or we may adopt him as a son .  they did not realize what they were doing .
and certainly we sentto nations before you then we seized them with distress and affliction in order that they might humble themselves .
then we delivered him and those in the ark , and made it a sign unto the worlds .
andthose who were settled in al-madinah andthe faith before them . they love those who emigrated to them and find not any want in their breasts of what the emigrants were given but givepreference over themselves , even though they are in privation . and whoever is protected from the stinginess of his soul - it is those who will be the successful .
they will long to get out of the fire , but never will they get out therefrom , and theirs will be a lasting torment .
when thou seest them then thou seest bliss and a great kingdom .
,  o david , indeed we have made you a successor upon the earth , so judge between the people in truth and do not followdesire , as it will lead you astray from the way of allah .  indeed , those who go astray from the way of allah will have a severe punishment for having forgotten the day of account .
there will not avail them against allah their riches or their children at all . th are the fellows of the fire ; therein they will be abiders .
the reckoning for mankind is drawing near , yet they are heedless and turn away .
they said ,  no , but our fathers worshipped them . 
who puts temptations into the breasts of humans ,
tell them :  my service and sacrifice , my life and my death , are all of them for god , the creator and lord of all the worlds .
that is the one who treats the orphan with harshness ,
is it not a sign to them -- that the learned men of the children of israel know that ?
he is god of the heavens and the earth and he knows whatever you conceal , reveal , or gain .
they are those whose works will bear no fruit in this world and in the hereafter nor will they have anyone to help .
not one of you could have prevented it from him .
so we took revenge upon them . both are clearly documented .
and caused much corruption in them ,
solomon ’ s hosts were marched out for him , comprising jinn , humans and birds , and they were held in check .
“ is the qur ’ an which is sent to him , among us ? ” in fact they are in a doubt concerning my book ; in fact , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
that was indeed a clear trial .
god is quite aware as to who your enemies are ; god suffices as a patron , and god suffices as a supporter .
had we revealed it to a non-arab
shall he then who knoweth that which is sent down unto thee is the truth be like unto him who is blind ! only the men of understanding are admonished
truly , it is we who have revealed to you the quran , a gradual revelation .
indeed we sent many noble messengers before you , so we have related to you the affairs of some among them , and not related the affairs of some ; and no noble messenger has the right to bring any sign except with the command of allah ; so the time when the command of allah comes , the true judgement will be delivered and there will the people of falsehood be ruined .
and the dawn when it shineth forth ,
believers , do not be like those who distressed moses and then allah declared him quit of the ill they spoke about him ; and he had a high standing with allah .
and we decreed for the descendants of israel in the book that , “ you will indeed create great turmoil in the earth twice , and you will surely become very proud . ”
spreading branches .
reclining upon couches ranged in rows ; and we shall espouse them to wide-eyed houris .
if a woman fears either ill-treatment or aversion from her husband it is not wrong for the husband and wife to bring about reconciliation among themselves , for settlement is better . man 's soul is always prone to selfishness , but if you do good and are god-fearing , then surely allah is aware of the things you do .
their reward is – with their lord – everlasting gardens of eden beneath which rivers flow , in which they will abide for ever and ever ; allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with him ; this is for one who fears his lord .
thethamud deniedout of their rebellion ,
the recompense of the enemies of god for their rejection of our revelations will be fire as their eternal dwelling .
and they say : when will this promise be fulfilled , if ye are truthful ?
whoso desireth the harvest of the hereafter , we give him increase in its harvest . and whoso desireth the harvest of the world , we give him thereof , and he hath no portion in the hereafter .
then there are others who say ,  our lord , give us what is good in this world and also what is good in the hereafter and save us from the torment of fire . 
they know an outer aspect of the worldly life , but they are heedless of the hereafter .
some of the desert arabs , too , came to make excuses , asking to be granted exemption . those who lied to god and his messenger stayed behind at home . those who denied the truth among them will be afflicted with a painful chastisement ,
when that which shroudeth did enshroud the lote-tree ,
save iblis ; he refused to be among those bowing .
so whosoever willeth may heed it .
the king asked the women about their attempt to seduce joseph . they replied ,  god forbid ! we do not know of any bad in joseph .  the wife of the king said ,  now the truth has come to light . it was i who tried to seduce joseph . he is , certainly , a truthful man . 
we committed the mountains to glorify with him , in the evening and at daybreak .
as for the wall , it belonged to two orphan lads in the city , and under it was a treasure belonging to them . their father was a righteous man ; and thy lord desired that they should come of age and then bring forth their treasure as a mercy from thy lord . i did it not of my own bidding . this is the interpretation of that thou couldst not bear patiently . '
say : 'do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days ? and do you set up equals with him ? he is the lord of the worlds '
by theemissaries sent successively ,
and it shall be said unto them where is that which ye were wont to worship ?
those who believe , and have emigrated and struggled with their possessions and their selves in the way of god , and those who have given refuge and help -- those are friends one of another . and those who believe , but have not emigrated -- you have no duty of friendship towards them till they emigrate ; yet if they ask you for help , for religion 's sake , it is your duty to help them , except against a people between whom and you there is a compact ; and god sees the things you do .
whether he be from the jinn or humans . ”
they will be told ,  eat and drink to your heart 's delight for what you have done  .
with him . so plot against me , all of you , and give me no respite .
moses said ,  do you sayabout the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? but magicians will not succeed . 
and of mankind is one who purchaseth an idle discourse , that he may mislead from allah 's way without knowledge , and taketh it by way of mockery . these ! for them shall be a torment ignominious .
who teacheth by the pen ,
those against whom the sentence is justified will say , “ our lord , these are they whom we misled . we misled them , as we were misled . we beg your forgiveness ; it was not us they used to worship . ”
taught man what he did not know .
destroying everything by the command of its lord , so they became such that naught could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we reward the guilty people .
they would not forbid one another from the wrongs that they committed . surely , evil is what they had been doing .
it is he who merged the two seas : this one sweet and agreeable , and that one briny and bitter , and between the two he set a barrier and a forbidding hindrance .
and say things which they do not act upon ,
every man that day will have concern enough to make him heedless .
they will say : be thou glorified ! it was not for us to choose any protecting friends beside thee ; but thou didst give them and their fathers ease till they forgot the warning and became lost folk .
there is not a soul that does not have a guardian over it .
and that they say what they do not do ? -
surely those who believeand do righteous deeds their lord will guide them aright because of their faith . rivers shall flow beneath them in the gardens of bliss .
these are eight couples , two of sheep , two of goats . now ask them : 'is it either the two males that allah has forbidden or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females may contain ? tell me about this on the basis of sure knowledge , if you speak the truth . '
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers ,  we will surely drive you out of our land , or you must return to our religion .  so their lord inspired to them ,  we will surely destroy the wrongdoers .
among the jews are those who distort words from theirusages and say ,  we hear and disobey  and  hear but be not heard  and  ra'ina ,  twisting their tongues and defaming the religion . and if they had said ,  we hear and obey  and  wait for us ,  it would have been better for them and more suitable . but allah has cursed them for their disbelief , so they believe not , except for a few .
and remind them of the day whereon we shall rather from every community a troop of those who belied our signs , and they shall be held in order .
those men , -allah knows what is in their hearts ; so keep clear of them , but admonish them , and speak to them a word to reach their very souls .
recite what has been sent down to you of the book , and establish the prayer . prayer forbids indecency and dishonor . the remembrance of allah is greater , and allah knows what you do .
were it not for the grace of god and his mercy upon you in this world and the next , you would have suffered a great affliction for the false accusation .
then those who are foremost going ahead ,
but the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said :  he is no more than a human being like you , he seeks to make himself superior to you . had allah willed , he surely could have sent down angels ; never did we hear such a thing among our fathers of old .
unless god wills it to be otherwise . he knows all that is made public and all that remains hidden .
moses said to aaron ,  what prevented you , when you saw that they had gone astray ,
but if you seek god and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then know that god has prepared a great reward for those of you who do good deeds . 
and those of the people of the book who aided them - allah did take them down from their strongholds and cast terror into their hearts.some ye slew , and some ye made prisoners .
though every token come unto them , till they see the painful doom .
like the way of firaun ’ s people , and those before them ; they denied our signs ; so allah seized them because of their sins ; and allah ’ s punishment is severe .
they say :  when will this promisecome to pass ? if you are telling the truth . 
so we destroyed far more powerfulthan they . the example of earlier people is there .
but when there comes the deafening blast
allah will judge among you on the day of resurrection concerning matters about which you disagreed . 
and do not let others ask for small utilities .
that is the reward of allah 's enemies : the fire . therein is their immortal home , payment forasmuch as they denied our revelations .
we have given you the seven oft-recited verses and the great quran .
'that is for what thy hands have forwarded and for that god is never unjust unto his servants . '
' o our lord ' both said , 'we fear lest he may be excessive against us or become insolent '
and we bequeathed upon the people that were abased all the east and the west of the land we had blessed ; and perfectly was fulfilled the most fair word of thy lord upon the children of israel , for that they endured patiently ; and we destroyed utterly the works of pharaoh and his people , and what they had been building .
perish the two hands of abu lahab , and perish he !
the trumpet shall be sounded , when behold ! from the sepulchreswill rush forth to their lord !
and when they feared the consequences thereof and saw that they had gone astray , they said : unless our lord have mercy on us and forgive us , we verily are of the lost .
 the one who answers the prayers of the distressed ones , removes their hardship , and makes you the successors in the land ? is there any lord besides god ? in fact , you take very little heed .
do they feel secure from the devising of allah ? none feels secure from the devising of allah except the loosing nation .
and he is the subjugator over his servants . and he is the wise , the acquainted .
none shall eat it but the sinners .
before them , the nation of noah , the nation of arrass belied and so did thamood
then when the trumpet will be blown with one blowing ,
say : ' i stand upon a clear sign from my lord , and you have cried lies to it . not with me is that you seek to hasten ; the judgment is god 's alone . he relates the truth , and he is the best of deciders . '
they assign unto allah , of the crops and cattle which he created , a portion , and they say :  this is allah 's  - in their make-believe -  and this is forpartners in regard to us .  thus that whichunto his partners in them reacheth not allah and that whichunto allah goeth to theirpartners . evil is their ordinance .
we created two kinds of all things , so that you will remember .
but they will say ,  did not your messengers come to you with clear signs ?  they will say ,  yes .  the keepers will say ,  then prayyourselves .  but the prayer of those who deny the truth is of no avail .
their prayer shall be ,  glory be to you lord ,  and their greeting ,  peace be with you ,  and the only other wordsthey will speak will be ,  it is god , lord of the universe , who deserves all praise . 
a forelock that lies , is sinful .
when they denied it in the past—shooting at something invisible from a far-off place—
and recall what time thy lord proclaimed that he would surely raise upon them , till the day of resurrection , someone perpetrating upon them worst oppression . verily thy lord is swift in chastising , and verily he is forgiving , merciful .
they will remain in it forever – what an evil burden it will be for them on the day of resurrection !
by the morning when it brighteneth .
i will not drive away the faithful .
and uncleanness do shun ,
what , when we are dead and become dust ? that is a far returning ! '
then surely the garden -- that is the abode .
who are dazed in perplexity
would he not know , he who created ? he is the refined , the expert .
and those who guard their chastity ,
some of us are righteous , but some of us are less than that ; we follow divergent paths .
the two seas are not alike . one is fresh , sweet and pleasant to taste , while the other is salt and bitter . yet , from each you eat fresh flesh and bring forth out of it ornaments for you to wear . and you see the ships plow their course through it so that you may seek his bounty , and in order that you give thanks .
and if we had made it as a qur ’ an in a foreign language they would have certainly said , “ why were its verses not explained in detail ? ” what ! the book in a foreign language , and the prophet an arab ? ! proclaim , “ it is a guidance and a cure for the believers ” ; and there is deafness in the ears of those who do not believe , and it is blindness upon them ; as if they are being called from a place far away !
had they been faithful and godwary , the reward from allah would have been better , had they known !
clear is allah of whatever they allege
so the earthquake seized them and they lay , prostrate in their homes .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate yourselves before the sun , nor before the moon , but prostrate yourselves before allah who created them , if it is him that you serve .
naught prevented us from sending the signs but that the ancients cried lies to them ; and we brought thamood the she-camel visible , but they did her wrong . and we do not send the signs , except to frighten .
and isma'iland al-yas ' a , and yunusand lout , and each one of them we preferred above the 'alamin .
and when mankind are gathered together , they will become their enemies , and will deny their worship ?
man is a creature of haste . soon i will show you my signs , but do not ask me to hasten them .
and the world to come is better , and more enduring .
say :  the truth has come , and falsehood had neither precedence nor will reappear . 
let the human reflect of what he is created .
say thou : whosoever is in error -- surely unto him the compassionate lengtheneth a length , until when they behold that wherewith they were threatened , either the torment or the hour , then they shall come to know whosoever is worse in position and weaker as an army . * chapter : 19
the virtuous ones will live in bliss
certainly he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
to everyone we have appointed heirs of that which parents and kinsmen leave , and those with whom you have sworn compact . so give to them their share ; god is witness over everything .
but he who fails to heed my warning will have his means restricted ; and on the day of resurrection we shall raise him blind . 
now dost thou see any remnant of them ?
and many a city , mightier in strength than the city which drave thee forth , we destroyed them , and there was no helper of theirs .
and when a book came to them from allah confirming what was with them , while before that they used to pray for victory over the unbelievers when there came to them what they knew , they disbelieved him . therefore , the curse of allah be upon the unbelievers !
they will be in a lofty garden
 this brother of mine has ninety-nine ewes and i have only one . he said ,  let me have charge of it ,  and got the better of me with his words . 
no one has appointed them to watch over the believers .
did the people of the towns think themselves secure from our wrath that could strike them at night during their sleep
and we sent not before thee any but men unto whom we revealed ; so ask ye the people of the admonition if ye know not .
so celebrate the praise of your lord and be among those who prostrate ,
we explain our signs in detail thus , so that perhaps they may return to us .
if you are unthankful , god is independent of you , yet he approves not unthankfulness in his servants ; but if you are thankful , he will approve it in you . and no soul laden bears the load of another . then to your lord shall you return , and he will tell you what you have been doing . he knows the thoughts within the breasts .
when our communications are recited to him , he says : stories of those of yore .
the people said ,  you are mere mortals like us and the beneficent god has sent nothing . you are only liars . 
and we gave david and solomon knowledge and they said , 'praise belongs to god who has preferred us over many of his believing servants . '
andwhen we told thee : lo ! thy lord encompasseth mankind , and we appointed the sight which we showed thee as an ordeal for mankind , andthe accursed tree in the qur'an . we warn them , but it increaseth them in naught save gross impiety .
and there is a party among them who twist their tongues while reciting the book to make you think that it is part of the book when in fact it is not . they say : 'it is from allah ' , when in fact it is not from allah . they falsely fix a lie upon allah , and do so wittingly .
think not of those who are killed in the way of allah as dead . nay , they are alive , with their lord , and they have provision .
and we pelted them with torrential rain . how dreadful that rain was for those who had been warned !
fulfil the covenant of allah when ye have entered into it , and break not your oaths after ye have confirmed them ; indeed ye have made allah your surety ; for allah knoweth all that ye do .
andabraham : behold , he said to his people ,  serve allah and fear him : that will be best for you- if ye understand !
they will whisper to one another : ‘ you have stayed only for ten . ’
the intercession of their intercessors shall not benefit them .
thinketh man that he is to be left aimless ?
that shall be their meed -- hell-for they disbelieved and held my revelations and my apostles in mockery .
: 'taste , surely you are the mighty and noble !
and that our hosts shall triumph .
who assigned to you the earth for a couch , and heaven for an edifice , and sent down out of heaven water , wherewith he brought forth fruits for your provision ; so set not up compeers to god wittingly .
so leave them until they encounter the day when they will be thunderstruck ,
also we revealed unto moses , 'go with my servants by night ; surely you will be followed . '
those who believe in allah and the last day ask no leave of thee lest they should strive with their wealth and their lives . allah is aware of those who keep their duty .
surely the people who have the best claim to a relationship with abraham are those who followed him in the past , and presently this prophet and those who believe in him ; allah is the guardian of the men of faith .
and when children reach the age of puberty , let them ask permission as those before them asked permission . as such allah makes clear to you his verses . allah is the knower , the wise .
we said : get ye all down from hence , and if there cometh unto you a guidance from me , then whosoever shall follow mine guidance , -- no fear shall come on them , nor shall they grieve .
as for those who believe in god , and hold fast to him , he will admit them into mercy and grace from him , and will guide them to himself in a straight path .
by allah , we have certainly sentto nations before you . but satan made their deeds seem decorous to them . so he is their master today and there is a painful punishment for them .
their account is only upon my lord , if youperceive .
and you may think they are awake , whereas they are asleep ; and we turn them over to the right and the left – and their dog is on the threshold of the cave , with its paws outstretched ; o listener , were you to look at them closely , you would turn back running away from them , and be filled with their dread .
and surely , we have explainedexamples ] in this quran that theymay take heed , but it increases them in naught save aversion .
do not go near the orphans ' property , except with the best of intentions , until they reach maturity . keep your promises ; you will be called to account for every promise which you have made !
we have created the human being from an extract of clay
by the wise qur'an ,
brought down by the trustworthy spirit
and certainly they endeavored to turn him from his guests , but we blinded their eyes ; so taste my chastisement and my warning .
or that he will not suddenly seize them while they are going about to and fro and they will be unable to frustrate his design ,
how ? for if , they get the better of you , they will observe toward you neither kinship nor covenant . they please you with their mouths while their hearts spurn you ; and most of them are transgressors .
this , because you took the revelations of allahin mockery , and the life of the world deceived you . so this day , they shall not be taken out from there , nor shall they be yusta'tabun .
and mention thou in the book lsma ' i ; verily he was true in promise , and was apostle , prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy towns unjustly while their people were negligent .
those who have faith fight in the way of allah , while those who disbelieve fight in the way of taghut . fight , then , against the fellows of satan . surely satan 's strategy is weak .
perhaps those who disbelieve would like to become muslims .
and ask the forgiveness of allah , surely allah is the forgiver , the most merciful .
say :  nothing shall ever happen to us except what allah has ordained for us . he is our maula .  and in allah let the believers put their trust .
when he said to his father and his people ,  what are these statues to which you are devoted ? 
and all that are in the earth , if then it might deliver him .
so guard againstallah and obey me
and know that among you is the messenger of god . had he obeyed you in many things , you would have suffered hardship . but god has given you the love of faith , and adorned it in your hearts , and made disbelief , mischief , and rebellion hateful to you . these are the rightly guided .
those who repent , those who worship , those who praise , those who fast , those who bow , those who prostrate , those who show right and forbid wrong and those who keep the limits of allah in sight ; and give glad tidings to the muslims .
certainly we know the predecessors among you and certainly we know the successors ,
surely we sent it down on a blessed night , we have always sent warnings ,
hameem
noah called to us , and we are the best to answer .
and we taught him the art of making garmentsto protect you in your daring . are ye then thankful ?
the night of ordainment is better than a thousand months .
is then hewho takes chargeof every person and knows all that he has earned ? yet they ascribe partners to allah . say :  name them ! is it that you will inform him of something he knows not in the earth or is ita show of false words .  nay ! to those who disbelieve , their plotting is made fairseeming , and they have been hindered from the right path , and whom allah sends astray , for him , there is no guide .
andby allah , i will surely plan against your idols after you have turned and gone away . 
he is allah than whom there is la ilaha illa huwathe king , the holy , the one free from all defects , the giver of security , the watcher over his creatures , the all-mighty , the compeller , the supreme . glory be to allah ! above all that they associate as partners with him .
they will say :  our lord ! whoever brought this upon us , add to him a double torment in the fire ! 
and had not known my account .
from following me ? did you disobey my command ? ’
god has not begotten a son , nor is there any god besides him . had this been so , each god would have taken away what he had created with him , and some would have risen over the others . god is much too glorious for what they attribute !
but as for those whose faces will turn white , within the mercy of allah . they will abide therein eternally .
we also sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his council , and he said , 'surely , i am the messenger of the lord of all being . '
indeed the muslim men and the muslim women , the faithful men and the faithful women , the obedient men and the obedient women , the truthful men and the truthful women , the patient men and the patient women , the humble men and the humble women , the charitable men and the charitable women , the men who fast and the women who fast , the men who guard their private parts and the women who guard , the men who remember allah greatly and the women who remember —allah holds in store for them forgiveness and a great reward .
a monstrous jinn said ,  i can bring it before you even stand up . i am powerful and trustworthy  .
not even if every sign were to come to them -- until they see the painful punishment .
except the chosen servants of allah .
he said , ‘ if you follow me , do not question me concerning anything until i myself first mention it for you . ’
such is the favor of allah ; he gives it to whom he will , and allah is of abounding favors .
indeed this is a revelation from the lord of the universe ;
travelin the land for four months , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah shall disgrace the faithless .
whether we let you seesome of the chastisement with which we threaten them , or we call you unto us , in any case they are bound to return to us . allah is witness to all what they do .
certainly he saw it yet another time ,
:  your lord and the lord of your fathers before you . 
but he belied and turned away .
they are the ones whose hearts and ears and eyes have been sealed by god ; and these are the heedless .
god will judge between you on the day of judgement in what you are at variance . 
yet they regard the jinn as the partners of allah , although he created them , and without knowledge ascribe to him sons and daughters . exaltations to him ! he is above what they describe .
and thus has the word of your lord come into effect upon those who disbelieved that they are companions of the fire .
and from the evil of the blowers in knots
those whom they call upon themselves seek access to their lord , striving which of them shall be the nearest ; and they hope for his mercy and fear his torment ; verily the torment of thy lord is ever to be guarded against .
and at the mountains , how they are rooted ?
he said , ‘ did i not tell you that you can not have patience with me ? ’
have they bequeathed its unto each other ! nay ! they are a people contumacious .
jonah was certainly a messenger .
as for those who have not fought against you for your religion , nor expelled you from your homes , god does not prohibit you from dealing with them kindly and equitably . god loves the equitable .
but those to whom knowledge had been given said : 'alas for you ! better is the reward of allah for him who believes and does good works ; but none shall receive it except the patient '
then we raised up after them another generation .
they even appoint a share of what we have provided for themthey know nothing of . you shall surely be questioned about the lies you have been fabricating .
thus they were vanquished there , and they went back abased .
what , do they seek to hasten our chastisement ?
master of the day of retribution .
those who believe not in the hereafter , name the angels with female names .
thy lord has neither forsaken thee nor hates thee
hast thou not turned thy vision to one who disputed with abraham about his lord , because allah had granted him power ? abraham said :  my lord is he who giveth life and death .  he said :  i give life and death  . said abraham :  but it is allah that causeth the sun to rise from the east : do thou then cause him to rise from the west .  thus was he confounded whorejected faith . nor doth allah give guidance to a people unjust .
my people ! enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you ; and do not turn back for then you will turn about losers .
there is no sin upon you in seeking your lord ’ s bounty . then when you stream out of ‘ arafat remember allah at the holy mash ‘ ar , and remember him as he has guided you , and earlier you were indeed among the astray .
moses said :  my lord knows best who it is that comes with guidance from him and whose end will be best in the hereafter : certain it is that the wrong-doers will not prosper . 
and we will leave them that day surging over each other , andthe horn will be blown , and we will assemble them inassembly .
even if they are patient , the fire will still be their homes . and if they pray to be allowed to make amends , they will not be allowed to do so .
joseph came to you before with clear signs , but you never ceased to doubt the message he brought you . when he died , you said , 'god will not send another messenger . '   in this way god leaves the transgressors and doubters to go astray --
save him who stealeth the hearing , and them doth a clear flame pursue .
to god belong the last and the first .
though they were not commanded except to worship allah , dedicating their faith to him as men of pure faith , and to maintain the prayer and pay the zakat . that is the upright religion .
as for them , they are but plotting a scheme ,
that is because they say ,  never will the fire touch us except fornumbered days ,  andthey were deluded in their religion by what they were inventing .
you will notice that those whose hearts are afflicted with sicknessonly hasten to join them and say :  we fear lest misfortune should surround us .  it may well be that god may soon sendsuccess , or other command of his . then will they be repentant of what they had concealed in their hearts .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him something of a spirit from him ; and he ordained for you hearing and sight and hearts . little is the thanks ye return .
and mention in the scripture ishmael . he was true to his promise , and was a messenger , a prophet .
say , “ to whom does the earth belong , and everyone in it , if you happen to know ? ”
this quran is a flawless reading text in the arabic language . perhaps they will have fear of god .
how many gardens and fountains did they leave behind ,
and your lord hath said : call unto me , and i shall answer your prayer . verily those who are stiff-necked against my worship , anon they will enter hell abject .
musa said : our lord is he who vouchsafed unto everything its creation , then guided it .
so they rejected them both , and became those who were destroyed .
they said , ‘ o noah , you have disputed with us already , and you have disputed with us exceedingly . now bring us what you threaten us with , should you be truthful .
they swear to you so that you might be satisfied with them . but if you should be satisfied with them - indeed , allah is not satisfied with a defiantly disobedient people .
absolutely not , we will record his words and prolong his punishment .
and verily ! your lord , he is indeed the all-mighty , the most merciful .
those who play with speculation .
are you afraid that you will have to offer charity when you hold private conversation with the prophet ? but if you are unable to do so and allah pardons you , then establish prayer and pay zakah , and obey allah and his messenger . allah is well aware of all that you do .
then if they desist , then verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
he knows the treachery of the eyes and what the breasts conceal .
who amasses wealth and considers it a provision ;
this quran is not such as could have been produced by anyone but god . it fulfills thatwhich came before it and gives a fuller explanation of therevelations . there is no doubt about it : it is from the lord of the universe .
whatever you lend out in usury to gain in value through other people 's wealth will not increase in god 's eyes , but whatever you give in alms in your desire for god 's pleasure will be multiplied .
they shall say : nay , youwere not believers ;
and when the seas are flowed out ,
had we wanted , we could have removed the spirit through whom we sent you revelation . then you would not have found anyone to intercede with us for you
and so their lord answered them : “ i will not waste the work of any worker among you , whether male or female . you are one of another . for those who emigrated , and were expelled from their homes , and were persecuted because of me , and fought and were killed—i will remit for them their sins , and will admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow—a reward from god . with god is the ultimate reward . ”
noble recorders ,
indeed there have been examples before you ; therefore travel in the earth and see what was the end of the rejecters .
and it will be said to them , “ where are those whom you used to worship ? ”
so we gave him the good news of isaac , apostle , who is among the righteous .
god will reward them for what they say—gardens beneath which rivers flow , where they will stay forever . such is the reward of the righteous .
and of the cattlefor burdenandsmall . eat of what allah has provided for you , and follow not the footsteps of shaitan . surely he is to you an open enemy .
and that it is our host that would certainly triumph .
your lord knows best who stray from his path and the guided .
is but a paltry profit ; but they will have a most grievous penalty .
believers , wine and gambling , idols and divining arrows are abominations from the work of satan . avoid them , in order that you prosper .
to the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their possessions , who seek the favor and pleasure of allah , and help allah and his messenger . these are they that are truthful .
but if they turn away , say :  allah is sufficient for me . la ilaha illa huwa , in him i put my trust and he is the lord of the mighty throne .
and if it had not been for the favor of allah upon you and his mercy in this world and the hereafter , you would have been touched for thatin which you were involved by a great punishment
o mary ! remain truly devout to your sustainer , and prostrate yourself in worship , and bow down with those who bow down . 
blessed is he who has dominion over the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . with him is the knowledge of the hour ; and to him you shall all be sent back .
or to a miskinafflicted with misery .
two young men entered the prison along with him . one of them said ,  i saw myselfi was pressing wine .  the other said ,  i dreamed i was carrying bread on my head from which the birds were eating . tell us their meaning ; for we see that you are one who does good . 
and believe in what i reveal , confirming the revelation which is with you , and be not the first to reject faith therein , nor sell my signs for a small price ; and fear me , and me alone .
nay ! man will be a witness against himselfwill speak about his deeds ] .
 and that ye should worship me , this was the straight way ?
“ but if you turn away , i have not asked you for any wage . my wage falls only on god , and i was commanded to be of those who submit . ”
have they not seen how we drive waterto the dry land without any vegetation , and therewith bring forth crops providing food for their cattle and themselves ? will they not then see ?
how many a town rebelled against the commands of its lord and his messengers and we called them sternly to account and punished them severely ,
and it is he , who has let loose the two seas , one palatable and sweet , the other bitter and saltish , and there is a partition between them , which is an insurmountable barrier .
they will be resting therein and will be able to ask for many kinds of fruit and drink .
and they ask you concerning the mountains , say ;  my lord will blast them and scatter them as particles of dust .
unto thy lord that day is the drive .
such was jesus , the son of mary . that is the whole truth , about which they still dispute :
and how should you not fight for the cause of god , and for the helpless old men , women , and children who say ,  deliver us , lord , from this city of wrongdoers , grant us a protector out of your grace and grant us a supporter out of your grace ? 
and also in thamood , when it was said to them , 'take your enjoyment for a while ! '
and by the morning when it shineth forth ,
such is the bounty from allah , and allah is sufficient as all-knower .
this is because allah inserts the night into a part of the day and inserts the day into a part of the night , and because allah is all hearing , all seeing .
and we had already forbiddenfoster suckling mothers for him , until shesaid :  shall i direct you to a household who will rear him for you , and sincerely they will look after him in a good manner ? 
avid listeners to falsehood , devourers ofunlawful . so if they come to you , , judge between them or turn away from them . and if you turn away from them - never will they harm you at all . and if you judge , judge between them with justice . indeed , allah loves those who act justly .
believers , abstain from most suspicion , some suspicion is a sin . neither spy nor backbite one another would any of you like to eat the flesh of his deadbrother ? surely , you would loathe it . fear allah , without doubt allah turnsand he is the merciful .
when he had furnished them with their provision , he said , ‘ bring me a brother that you have through your father . do you not see that i give the full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
and we made mary 's son , and his mother , to be a sign , and gave them refuge upon a height , where was a hollow and a spring :
qaf ; by oath of the glorious qur ’ an .
no ! by the moon
we have formed them in a distinctive fashion ,
and mankind were not but a single ccmmunity then they differed . and had not a word from thy lord gone forth , it would have been decreed between them in respect of that wherein they differ .
there is certainly a good exemplar for you in them—for those who look forward to allah and the last day—and anyone who refuses to complyindeed allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
they said : shu'aib , commandeth thee thy prayer that we should abandon that which our fathers have worshipped , or that we should not do with our riches whatsoever we will ! thou , indeed ! thou forsooth art forbearing , right-minded !
o you who have believed , be persistently standing firm in justice , witnesses for allah , even if it be against yourselves or parents and relatives . whether one is rich or poor , allah is more worthy of both . so follow notinclination , lest you not be just . and if you distortor refuse , then indeed allah is ever , with what you do , acquainted .
and ease for me my task
because he considers himself self-sufficient .
in fierce hot wind and boiling water ,
: eat ye and feed your cattle . lo ! herein verily are portents for men of thought .
the revelation of the scripture is from allah the mighty , the wise .
so o listener ! which favour of your lord will you doubt ?
there is indeed in themsufficient proofs for men of understanding !
blessed is he in whose hands is the kingdom and who has power over all things .
the worst of creatures in the eyes of god are those who are deaf and dumb and devoid of sense .
and had they believed and been pious , then the recompense from allah is extremely good ; if only they knew !
call them to the path of your lord with wisdom and words of good advice ; and reason with them in the best way possible . your lord surely knows who strays from his path , and he knows those who are guided the right way .
he created the heavens and the earth with reason . too glorious and high is he for what they associate with him .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the communications of his lord , then he turns away from them and forgets what his two hands have sent before ? surely we have placed veils over their hearts lest they should understand it and a heaviness in their ears ; and if you call them to the guidance , they will not ever follow the right course in that case .
till when we grasp their luxurious ones with the punishment , behold ! they supplicate .
she said ,  o eminent ones , advise me in my affair . i would not decide a matter until you witnessme . 
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits a gross indecency , her punishment shall be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
had it not been that heglorified allah ,
upon the day when heaven spins dizzily
so be patient just as the resolute among the apostles were patient , and do not seek to hastenfor them . the day when they see what they are promised , as though they had remainedonly an hour of a day . this is a proclamation . so shall anyone be destroyed except the transgressing lot ?
o prophet ! surely we have made lawful to you your wives whom you have given their dowries , and those whom your right hand possesses out of those whom allah has given to you as prisoners of war , and the daughters of your paternal uncles and the daughters of your paternal aunts , and the daughters of your maternal uncles and the daughters of your maternal aunts who fled with you ; and a believing woman if she gave herself to the prophet , if the prophet desired to marry her -- specially for you , not for thebelievers ; we know what we have ordained for them concerning their wives and those whom their right hands possess in order that no blame may attach to you ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
 our lord , do not let our hearts deviate after you have guided us . bestow upon us your mercy . surely you are a munificent giver .
those who find fault with the believers who volunteer their freewill offerings , and those who find nothing but their endeavour they deride -- god derides them ; for them awaits a painful chastisement .
thou makest the night to enter into the day and thou makest the day to enter into the night , thou bringest forth the living from the dead and thou bringest forth the dead from the living , and thou providest whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
when god said , 'jesus son of mary , remember my blessing upon thee and upon thy mother , when i confirmed thee with the holy spirit , to speak to men in the cradle , and of age ; and when i taught thee the book , the wisdom , the torah , the gospel ; and when thou createst out of clay , by my leave , as the likeness of a bird , and thou breathest into it , and it is a bird , by my leave ; and thou healest the blind and the leper by my leave , and thou bringest the dead forth by my leave ; and when restrained from thee the children of israel when thou camest unto them with the clear signs , and the unbelievers among them said ,  this is nothing but sorcery manifest . 
on that day , friends will become each other 's enemies , except the righteous --
so , when they forgot what they were reminded of ; we opened unto them the gates of everything until ; when they rejoiced in what they were given , we seized them suddenly , and behold , they were sore confounded .
and ye will have half of that which your wives may leave , if they have no child , but if they have a child then ye shall have one- fourth of that which they may leave , after paying a bequest they may have bequeathed or a debt . and they shall have one-fourth of that which ye may leaves if ye have no child ; but if ye have a child then they will have one-eighth of that which ye may leave , after paying a bequest ye may have bequeathed or a debt . and if a man or a woman who leaveth the heritage hath no direct heirs but hath a brother or a sister , each of the twain will have a sixth ; and if more than one , then they will have equal shares in one third after paying a bequest they may have bequeathed or a debt without prejudice : an ordinance this from allah ; and allah is knowing , forbearing .
and whomever god guides , for him there is no misleader . is god not powerful and vengeful ?
do they not then reflect on the quran ? nay , on the hearts there are locks .
its emerging fruit as if it was heads of the devils .
say ,  observe what is in the heavens and earth .  but of no avail will be signs or warners to a people who do not believe
those were the ones upon whom allah bestowed favor from among the prophets of the descendants of adam and of those we carriedwith noah , and of the descendants of abraham and israel , and of those whom we guided and chose . when the verses of the most merciful were recited to them , they fell in prostration and weeping .
and it is he who produced for you hearing and vision and hearts ; little are you grateful .
so that they may eat from its fruits , whereas they are not manufactured by their hands ! so will they not be grateful ?
o ye who believe ! fulfil the compacts . allowed unto you is the beast of the flock except that which is rehearsed unto you , not allowing the chase while ye are in a state of sanctity . verily allah ordaineth whatsoever he will .
who may inherit from me and inherit from the house of jacob , and make him , my lord , pleasing ! ’
believers , be the supporters of justice and the testify to what you may have witnessed , for the sake of god , even against yourselves , parents , and relatives ; whether it be against the rich or the poor . god must be given preference over them . let not your desires cause you to commit injustice . if you deviate from the truth in your testimony , or decline to give your testimony at all , know that god is well aware of what you do .
and the kingsaid :  verily , i sawseven fat cows , whom seven lean ones were devouring - and of seven green ears of corn , andothers dry . o notables ! explain to me my dream , if it be that you can interpret dreams . 
we shall not postpone it except until a counted term .
bring our fathers back , if you are truthful . ’
yet he has not scaled the height .
verily it is we who have revealed the book to thee in truth : so serve allah , offering him sincere devotion .
as for one who givesand fears ,
you approach men lustfully in place of women . you are a people who exceed all bounds . '
they had sought to do evil to him , but we caused them to be the worst losers ,
soon we shall brand him on his snout .
neither darknesses and light ,
the lord said ,  moses , your request is granted .
everyone in the heavens and the earth asks him . every day he is engaged in some work .
so he cast it down , and lo ! it was a serpent , gliding .
 yea , enter thou my heaven !
and they say ,  when isthis promise , if you should be truthful ? 
verily , messengers were denied before you , but with patience they bore the denial , and they were hurt , till our help reached them , and none can alter the wordsof allah . surely there has reached you the informationabout the messengers .
and preferred the present life ,
and a tree springing out of mount sinai , producing oil , and seasoning for those who eat .
and the two seas are not alike : this , fresh , sweet , good to drink , thisbitter , salt . and from them both ye eat fresh meat and derive the ornament that ye wear . and thou seest the ship cleaving them with its prow that ye may seek of his bounty , and that haply ye may give thanks .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and gave them nadratanand joy .
then we forgave you after that so perhaps you would be grateful .
thou art not at all a warder over them .
‘ this is the fire which you used to deny !
o you who have believed , fear allah and believe in his messenger ; he willgive you a double portion of his mercy and make for you a light by which you will walk and forgive you ; and allah is forgiving and merciful .
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the sustainer slumber taketh hold of him not , nor sleep . his is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth . who is he that shall intercede with him except with his leave ! he knoweth that which was before them and that which shall he after them , and they encompass not aught of his knowledge save that which he willeth . his throne comprehendeth the heavens and the earth , and the guarding of the twain wearieth him not . and he is the high , the supreme .
the day when the sky will be like molten copper ,
and those who guard their chastity .
all that is in heavens and earth exalt allah , the king , the pure , the almighty , the wise .
—he who gives his wealth to purify himself
the parable of those who take guardians besides allah is as the parable of the spider that makes for itself a house ; and most surely the frailest of the houses is the spider 's house did they but know .
he replied : 'am i to trust you with him as i once trusted you with his brother ? why , allah is the best of guardians , and he is the most merciful of themerciful '
we offered our trustto the heavens , to the earth , and to the mountains , but they could not bear this burden and were afraid to accept it . mankind was able to accept this offer but he was unjust to himself and ignorant of the significance of this trust .
and unto each we have appointed heirs of that which parents and near kindred leave ; and as for those with whom your right hands have made a covenant , give them their due . lo ! allah is ever witness over all things .
or , lest when it sees the punishment should say : ' o that i might return , and be among those that did good '
as if they were eggs carefully protected .
but it is they who are really causing corruption , though they do not realize it .
in preference to women you satisfy your lust with men . indeed you are a people who are guilty of excess . 
and raised couches ;
then when they opened their baggage , they found their stock-in-trade had been returned to them . they said :  o our father ! whatcan we desire ? this our stock-in-trade has been returned to us : so we shall getfood for our family ; we shall take care of our brother ; and adda full camel 's load . this is but a small quantity .
and wherein there shall be with them well-matched , bashful mates .
and the man who believed said :  o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of right conducthas been sent ] .
and we have recorded everything in a book ,
verily those who love that in decency should be propagated regarding those who believe , for them shall be a torment afflictive in the world and the hereafter . and allah knoweth , and ye know not .
we also gave them our signs , yet they turned away from them .
allah eases and restricts the sustenance for whomever he wills ; and the disbelievers rejoiced upon the life of this world ; and the life of this world , as compared with the hereafter , is just a brief utilisation .
for they were not anticipating any reckoning .
and you will become divided into three categories .
surely we have sent unto you a messenger as a witness over you , even as we sent to pharaoh a messenger ,
and we have brought unto thee the truth , and verily we say sooth .
verily the virtuous shall be in bliss ;
so that god may forgive you your past and future sins and complete his favour to you and guide you to a straight path ,
are you confident that he will not cause a track of land to cave in beneath you , or unleash a tornado against you , and then you find no protector ?
“ so it is self evident that what you call me towards has no benefit being prayed to , either in this world or in the hereafter , and that our return is towards allah , and that the transgressors only are the people of the fire . ”
indeed , the reward of the everlasting life is better for those who believe and are cautious .
or do they cause you any benefit or harm ? 
when they come close to it , their ears , eyes and skins will testify against them for their misdeeds .
allah burdens not a person beyond his scope . he gets reward for thatwhich he has earned , and he is punished for thatwhich he has earned .  our lord ! punish us not if we forget or fall into error , our lord ! lay not on us a burden like that which you did lay on those before us ; our lord ! put not on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear . pardon us and grant us forgiveness . have mercy on us . you are our maulaand give us victory over the disbelieving people .
so surely you and what you worship ,
a messenger to the children of israel : “ i have come to you with a sign from your lord . i make for you out of clay the figure of a bird ; then i breathe into it , and it becomes a bird by god ’ s leave . and i heal the blind and the leprous , and i revive the dead , by god ’ s leave . and i inform you concerning what you eat , and what you store in your homes . in that is a sign for you , if you are believers . ”
he only shall tend allah 's sanctuaries who believeth in allah and the last day and observeth proper worship and payeth the poor-due and feareth none save allah . for suchis it possible that they can be of the rightly guided .
abraham charged his children with this , and so did jacob , saying : 'my sons , allah has chosen for you the religion . do not die except being submissive '
and when he came to the waters of midian he found a crowd of people watering , and saw two maidens holding back . he asked :  what is the trouble with you ?  they said :  we can not water our flock till the shepherds have driven away theirs , and our father is a very old man . 
how will you know what the night of determination is ?
as to those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have surely made their deeds fair-seeming to them , but they blindly wander on .
o you who believe , fulfil your obligations . made lawfulfor you are animals except those mentioned ; but unlawful during pilgrimage is game . god ordains whatsoever he wills .
those who reject our revelations and are too arrogant to uphold them—the doors of heaven will not be opened for them , nor will they enter paradise , until the camel passes through the eye of the needle . thus we repay the guilty .
and david and solomon , when they gave judgment concerning the field , when people 's sheep had strayed and browsed therein by night ; and we were witnesses to their judgment .
every one of them , on that day , will have enough to preoccupy him .
so when they will see it close , the faces of the disbelievers will become ghastly , and it will be declared , “ this is what you were demanding . ”
and let not those who disbelieve ever think thatwe extend their timeit is better for them . we only extend it for them so that they may increase in sin , and for them is a humiliating punishment .
o people of the scripture , why do you argue about abraham while the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? then will you not reason ?
the promise of allah ; allah does not renege on his promise , but most people do not know .
and he will loose heaven upon you in torrents
admonish thou then ; thou art but an admonisher .
whosoever comes with a good deed , he shall have better than it ; and they shall be secure from terror that day .
the people of lot cried lies to the warnings .
so moses conceived in his mind afear .
for , that day , his chastisement will be such as nonecan inflict ,
‘ today you have no power to benefit or harm one another , ’ and we shall say to those who did wrong , ‘ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ’
we have put fetters around their necks which reach up to their chins so that they are standing with their heads upright ,
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found , beneath them , a people who scarcely understood a word .
they will be told ,  suffer the torment . you had thought yourselves to be majestic and honorable .
i shall assuredly cut off alternately your hands and feet , then i shall crucify you all together . '
it is he who sends down manifest ayatto his slavethat he may bring you out from darkness into light . and verily , allah is to you full of kindness , most merciful .
and toaad we sent their brother , hood . he said : 'worship allah , my nation , for you have no god except he . will you not then be cautious '
my lord , bestow wisdom upon me ; unite me with the righteous ;
whether ye publish a good deed or conceal it or cover evil with pardon , verily allah doth blot outand hath power .
i have placed my trust in god , my lord and your lord . there is not a creature but he holds it by the forelock . my lord is on a straight path .
o you who have believed , it is not lawful for you to inherit women by compulsion . and do not make difficulties for them in order to takepart of what you gave them unless they commit a clear immorality . and live with them in kindness . for if you dislike them - perhaps you dislike a thing and allah makes therein much good .
and they intended to do him an evil , but we made them the worst losers .
you certainly wished to diebefore you actually faced death . then you faced death .
eat the lawful and good things allah has provided you , and be wary of allah in whom you have faith .
and built above you seven strong firmaments ,
and those whose faces will be shining , are in the mercy of allah ; they will abide in it forever .
by the star when it sets :
who makes me to die and then revives me ,
have you heard the story of moses ?
and those who respect their trusts and covenants ;
be steadfast , for verily god does not let the reward of those who are upright and do good to go waste .
i am for you an honest messenger .
he who was a believer said : 'follow me , my nation , so that i may guide you to the right path .
and those who attained the right path – allah increases the guidance for them and bestows their piety to them .
it is freeing the neck ,
and he found you unawareand guided you ?
marked by your lord for those who waste their substance . 
but it is nothing other than a reminder for all the worlds .
moreover he comprehended in his design the sky , and it had beensmoke : he said to it and to the earth :  come ye together , willingly or unwillingly .  they said :  we do come , in willing obedience . 
so did they not travel in the land to see what sort of fate befell those who preceded them ? allah poured ruin upon them ; and for the disbelievers are several like it .
and an overflowing cup .
let not those among you who are endued with grace and amplitude of means resolve by oath against helping their kinsmen , those in want , and those who have left their homes in allah 's cause : let them forgive and overlook , do you not wish that allah should forgive you ? for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
we do not send the angels down except with reason , and they will not be held back .
to everyone we have assigned beneficiaries in what is left by parents and relatives . those with whom you have made an agreement , give them their share . god is witness over all things .
and that those who have been given knowledge may know that itis the truth from your lord , and that they may believe therein , and their hearts may submit to it with humility . and verily , allah is the guide of those who believe , to the straight path .
our lord , and admit them to the gardens of eden that thou hast promised them and those who were righteous of their fathers , and their wives , and their seed ; surely thou art the all-mighty , the all-wise .
say :  i am only a man like you . it has been inspired to me that your ilahis one ilah . so whoever hopes for the meeting with his lord , let him work righteousness and associate none as a partner in the worship of his lord . 
indeed allah was truly pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you beneath the tree – so he knew what was in their hearts – he therefore sent down peace upon them , and rewarded them with an imminent victory .
above them are mountains of fire and beneath them are mountains of fire ; allah scares his bondmen with this ; “ o my bondmen ! fear me ! ”
those to whom the book was given did not divide themselves until the clear proof came to them .
or do they envy people due to what allah has given them from his grace ? in that case , we bestowed the book and the wisdom upon the family of ibrahim , and we gave them a great kingdom .
bring them back to me. ” and he began caressing their legs and necks .
have you not regarded those who dispute the signs of allah , where they are being led away ?
they said , ‘ you certainly know that we have no interest in your daughters , and indeed you know what we want . ’
the day they will emerge from the graves rapidly as if they were , toward an erected idol , hastening .
is this better as an entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
no one verbally denounces his faith in god - unless he is forced - but his heart is confident about his faith . but those whose breasts have become open to disbelief will be subject to the wrath of god and will suffer a great torment .
he said : did i not say that you will not be able to have patience with me ?
without saying : insha ' allah .
sowithdraw from them . the day that the caller will callto a terrible thing .
then after the distress , he sent down security for you . slumber overtook a party of you , while another party was thinking about themselvesand thought wrongly of allah - the thought of ignorance . they said ,  have we any part in the affair ?  say you :  indeed the affair belongs wholly to allah .  they hide within themselves what they dare not reveal to you , saying :  if we had anything to do with the affair , none of us would have been killed here .  say :  even if you had remained in your homes , those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death ,  but that allah might test what is in your breasts ; and to mahis that which was in your hearts , and allah is all-knower of what is inbreasts .
he will have no power , nor anyone to help him .
who do not invoke any god apart from god , who do not take a life which god has forbidden except for a cause that is just , and do not fornicate -- and any one who does so will be punished for the crime ,
he said , ‘ take hold of it , and do not fear . we will restore it to its former state .
yet after that we pardoned you , so that you might be grateful .
surely you speak at variance ,
and we have created for them of the like thereunto whereon they ride .
say ,  it is god who has settled you on the earth and to him you will be resurrected  .
who believe in the unseen , establish the salats and expendout of what we have bestowed on them ;
fight them until there is no morepersecution , and religion belongs wholly to god : if they desist , then surely god is watchful of what they do ,
andwhen we did deliver you from pharaoh 's folk who were afflicting you with dreadful torment , slaughtering your sons and sparing your women . that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
on that day all your secrets will be exposed .
that was a people that hath passed away . they shall reap the fruit of what they did , and ye of what ye do ! of their merits there is no question in your case !
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of allah , the king , the holy , the mighty , the wise .
and of the wandering arabs there is he who taketh that which he expendethas a loss , and awaitethturns of fortune for you . the evil turn of fortune will be theirs . allah is hearer , knower .
he said , ‘ my lord knows every wordin the sky and on the earth , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ’
but those that believe and work righteous deeds , they are the best of creatures .
lo , it is to him alone that you cry and then , if he so wills , he removes the distress for which you had cried to him . then you forget the partners you had set up with allah .
another of his signs is this : the heavens and the earth stand firm by his command and afterwards when he calls you , behold , from the earth you will come forth .
they will excuse themselves unto you when ye return to them . say thou : excuse not yourselves , we shall by no means believe you : allah hath already declared unto us some tidings of you , and allah will behold your work and so will his apostle ; and thereafter ye will be brought back unto him who knoweth the hidden and the manifest , who will then declare unto you that which ye have been working .
in fact , people want to have eternal life in this world .
then nearer to thee and nearer !
amid thornless lote trees
then do they feel secure that there will not come to them an overwhelmingof the punishment of allah or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they do not perceive ?
most auspicious is he in whose control is the entire kingship ; and he is able to do all things .
ye can not exciteagainst him .
] said :  believe you in him ] before i give you permission ? verily ! he is your chief who taught you magic . so i will surely cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , and i will surely crucify you on the trunks of date-palms , and you shall surely know which of usor the lord of musa ] can give the severe and more lasting torment . 
and it becometh not a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decided an affair , that they shouldclaim any say in their affair ; and whoso is rebellious to allah and his messenger , he verily goeth astray in error manifest .
and you will never be able to be equalbetween wives , even if you should strive . so do not incline completelyand leave another hanging . and if you amendand fear allah - then indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
have they not seen how god originates the creation , and then reproduces it ? this is easy for god .
what hencefort shall make thee belie the requital ?
and indeed , they will eat from it and fill with it their bellies .
reclining therein , they will call for abundant fruits and drinks ,
till the appointed day . 
did i not enjoin you , sons of adam , not to worship satan -- for he is your sworn enemy ,
verily he hath no authority over those who believe and in their lord trust
and those who hold fast to the book , and perform the prayer -- surely we leave not to waste the wage of those who set aright .
these are only names given by yourselves and your fathers . god has not given them any authority . they , , only follow mere conjecture and the desires of their souls , even though guidance has already come to them from their lord .
there were in the city nine men who spread corruption in the land , and would not reform .
“ and indeed they have angered all of us . ”
they say : shall we indeed be restored tofirst state ?
this will be their reward and their efforts will be appreciated .
indeed , those- destroyed is that in which they are , and worthless is whatever they were doing . 
the foolish will ask ,  what has made them turn away from their direction of prayer which they used to face ?  say ,  the east and the west belong to god . he guides whom he pleases to the right path . 
 so go you both to him , and say : 'verily , we are messengers of your lord , so let the children of israel go with us , and torment them not ; indeed , we have come with a sign from your lord ! and peace will be upon him who follows the guidance !
say , “ i ask of you no payment for this—only that whoever wills may take a path to his lord . ”
and those who take revenge when rebellion harms them .
but satan said ,  my lord , grant me respite until the day of resurrection , 
they turned back and asked : 'what have you lost '
, proclaim what you are commanded , and pay no heed to those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
again , no indeed ; but soon you shall know .
then we roused them , in order to test which of the two parties was best at calculating the term of years they had tarried !
and if you invite them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking at you while they do not see .
he will sip and will not find it easy to swallow it . death will approach him from every quarter , yet he will not die . more intense suffering will lie ahead of him .
and your lord has commanded that you shall not servebut him , and goodness to your parents . if either or both of them reach old age with you , say not to them  ugh  nor chide them , and speak to them a generous word .
and mentions the name of his lord and prays .
was he not a drop of fluid which gushed forth ?
allah is he who sends the winds , so they raise clouds , and spread them along the sky as he wills , and then break them into fragments , until you see rain drops come forth from their midst ! then when he has made them fall on whom of his slaves as he will , lo ! they rejoice !
he said : in truth thou knowest that none sent down thesesave the lord of the heavens and the earth as proofs , and lo ! i deem thee lost , o pharaoh .
who , then , doth more wrong than one who utters a lie concerning allah , and rejects the truth when it comes to him ; is there not in hell an abode for blasphemers ?
 we answered his prayer , relieved him from his hardships , brought his familyand gave him twice as much property as that . it was a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
allah surely fulfilled his promisewhen you were slaying them by his leave until the moment when you flagged and quarrelled among yourselves about the matter , and acted against the order of . soon he showed you what you had intensely desired - for some among you sought this world and some of you sought the next . thereupon , in order to put you to a test he turned you away from your foes . still he pardoned you after that for allah is bounteous to those who believe .
o prophet ! why do you prohibit what god has permitted for you , seeking to please your wives ? god is forgiving and merciful .
and we sent down from the heaven water in measure , and we caused it to settle in the earth ; and verily to take it away we are able .
say : cry unto thosewhom ye assumebeside him , yet they have no power to rid you of misfortune nor to change .
so , ask those who deny the truth if it was harder to create them than all the other things we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
and when they are called to allah and his apostle that he may judge between them , lo ! a party of them turn aside .
and the swollen sea
and whomsoever allah guideth , then he is the guided ; and whomsoever he sendeth astray -- for such thou wilt by no means find friends beside him . and we shall gather them on the day of judgment on their faces , blind and deaf and dumb ; their abode being hell ; so oft as it grosweth dull we shall increase for them the flame .
if two men commit a like abomination , punish them both . if they repent and mend their ways , leave them alone . god is forgiving and merciful .
those who have bought unfaith for faith will not hurt allah in the least , and there is a painful punishment for them .
and other such torments .
he thinks that his wealth will make him last forever !
one day will allah raise them all up : then will they swear to him as they swear to you : and they think that they have something . no , indeed ! they are but liars !
and whatever affliction befalls you , it is on account of what your hands have wrought , andhe pardons most .
until , when he came to the rising place of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom wehad provided no shelter against the sun .
this is the farthest limit of their knowledge . surely your lord alone knows best who has strayed away from the path and who has come to guidance .
those who conceal the clearwe have sent down , and the guidance , after we have made it clear for the people in the book , -on them shall be allah 's curse , and the curse of those entitled to curse , -
among them are those who torment the prophet , and say , ‘ he is an ear. ’ say , ‘ an ear that is good for you . he has faith in allah and trusts the faithful , and is a mercy for those of you who have faith. ’ as for those who torment the apostle of allah , there is a painful punishment for them .
except those who repent before you have power over them . for you must know that allah is forgiving , the most merciful .
eat notof thaton which allah 's name has not been pronounced , for sure it is fisq . and certainly , the shayatindo inspire their friendsto dispute with you , and if you obey themlegal by eating it ] , then you would indeed be mushrikun made lawful to you to eat that which allah has made unlawful to eat and you obeyed them by considering it lawful to eat , and by doing so you worshipped them , and to worship others besides allah is polytheism ] .
you shall have your religion and i shall have my religion .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they manifest .
they will have therein whatever they want and will receive from us more rewards
and when he attained his maturity and became full grown , we granted him wisdom and knowledge ; and thus do we reward those who do good .
they will answer , ‘ no , youhad no faith .
those whom youworship besides god , are themselves servants just like yourselves . if your claim was true , they should answer your prayers .
rather each one of them desires that he should be given open books .
and it is with the same directive that we revealed to you this arabic writ . were you indeed to follow the vain desires of people after the true knowledge has come to you , none will be your supporter against allah , and none will have the power to shield you from his punishment .
and burning in hell-fire .
and o dear prophet , your lord is the perfect , the merciful ; o people ! if he wills , he can remove you and bring others in your stead – the way he created you from the descendants of others .
requital corresponding .
o believers , if you listen to the infidels they will make you turn your backs , and you will be the losers .
when thy sister went and said : shall i show you one who will nurse him ? and we restored thee to thy mother that her eyes might be refreshed and might not sorrow . and thou didst kill a man and we delivered thee from great distress , and tried thee with a heavy trial . and thou didst tarry years among the folk of midian . then camest thoubyprovidence , o moses ,
if a lucky chance befall you , it is evil unto them , and if disaster strike you they rejoice thereat . but if ye persevere and keep from evil their guile will never harm you . lo ! allah is surrounding what they do .
and the morning when it appears ,
they said :  a confused medley of dreams : and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams . 
and that those who believe not in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful torment .
glad for their effort past ,
but then satan tempted him by saying :  o adam , should i show you the tree of immortality , and a kingdom that will never know any wane ? 
none denies it but the sinful transgressors .
then he who had been rebellious
be steadfast in prayer , pay the religious taxand bow down in worship with those who do the same .
or did not those who inherited the land after its owners , get enough guidance that if we will , we can afflict them with calamity for their sins ? and we set seals upon their hearts so they do not hear .
the tribe of ad rejected the messengers .
devote yourselves to god , not associating any partners with him . whoever associates anything with god is like one who falls from heaven and is snatched by the birds or carried away by the wind to a distant place .
and god has given you in your homes habitats for you , and has provided for you out of the hides of livestock portable homes for you , so you can use them when you travel , and when you camp ; and from their wool , and fur , and hair , furnishings and comfort for a while .
he said : o adam ! inform them of their names . then when he had informed them of their names , he said : did i not say to you that i surely know what is ghaib in the heavens and the earth andi know what you manifest and what you hide ?
if you were to ask them : “ who created them ? ” they will surely say : “ allah. ” whence are they , then , being led astray ?
when he made the slumber overcome you , so it was as a peacefulness from him , and sent down water from the sky upon you to purify you with it , and to remove the impurity of satan from you , and to give your hearts fortitude and firmly establish your feet with it .
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
say ,  who is it who delivers you from the dark depths of land and sea when you call out to him humbly and in secret , saying ,  if he rescues us from this , we shall most certainly be among the grateful.  ? 
he said ,  no one despairs of the mercy of his lord except those who are in error .
and because they used to take usury whereas they were forbidden from it , and they used to wrongfully devour people ’ s wealth ; and for the disbelievers among them , we have kept prepared a painful punishment .
that will envelop the people . this will be a painful torment .
so they departed , whispering together ,
the day when every soul will find present whatever good it has done ; and as for the evil , it has done , it will wish there were a far distance between it and itself . allah warns you to beware ofhim , and allah is most kind toservants .
and never pray over any of them when he dies , nor stand at his graveside . they indeed defied allah and his apostle and died as transgressors .
he created the heavens and the earth for a purpose . he formed you and gave you the best of forms . to him you shall all return .
he created the human being from a drop of fluid , yet he becomes an open adversary .
they will be given double the reward , the recompense of their patience – and they repel evil with good , and spend part of what we have provided them .
it is neither your fancies nor the fancies of the people of the book which matter . whoever does evil shall reap its consequence and will find none to be his protector and helper against allah .
nay , it is a reminder to him who fears :
hast thou not observed thine lord-how he hath stretched out the shadow ? and if he had willed he would have made it still . then we have made the sun for it an indication .
and peace be upon the envoys ;
is it that there is a disease in their hearts ? or do they doubt , or are they in fear , that allah and his messenger will deal unjustly with them ? nay , it is they themselves who do wrong .
many a generation has been destroyed by our command since noah 's time . your lord is well aware and fully observant of the sins of his servants .
so he followed a certain road
moses returned to his people in anger and great sorrow . he said ,  my people , did your lord not make you a handsome promise ? was my absence too long for you ? did you desire that your lord 's wrath should descend upon you , when you broke your promise to me ? 
believers , remember allah frequently ,
as for those who are faithless and deny our signs , they shall be the inmates of hell .
but we will this day deliver you with your body that you may be a sign to those after you , and most surely the majority of the people are heedless to our communications .
so that the people of the book may know that they do not control allah grace in any wise and that in allah ’ s hand is all grace , which he grants to whomever he wishes and allah is dispenser of a mighty grace .
the sun runs to its fixed restingplace ; that is the decree of the almighty , the knower .
and we will draw forth from among every nation a witness and say : bring your proof ; then shall they know that the truth is allah 's , and that which they forged shall depart from them .
some he has guided and some have earned misguidance : they have taken devils rather than god as their patrons , thinking that they are rightly guided .
and said : “ thisis merely a sorcery of yore ;
and they say : what ! when we have become lost in the earth , shall we then certainly be in a new creation ? nay ! they are disbelievers in the meeting of their lord .
o you who believe , do not kill game when you are on pilgrimage . and anyone among you who does so on purpose should offer livestock of equivalent value , determined by two honourable persons among you , , to be brought to the ka'bah as an offering ; or else expiate by giving food to the poor , or its equivalent in fasting , so that he may realise the gravity of his deed . god has forgiven what has happened in the past ; but any one who does so again will be punished by god . and god is severe in requital .
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then , forsooth , be raised ?
and our commandment shall be but one , as the twinkling of an eye .
or do they have your lord 's treasures in their keeping ? or have absolute authority over them ?
now ask them if their lord has daughters , and they sons ?
he is god -- the creator , the originator , the giver of form . his are the most excellent names . everything in the heavens and earth declares his glory . he is the mighty , the wise one .
he said : only allah will bring it upon you if he will , and ye can by no means escape .
and that you should judge between them by what allah has revealed , and do not follow their low desires , and be cautious of them , lest they seduce you from part of what allah has revealed to you ; but if they turn back , then know that allah desires to afflict them on account of some of their faults ; and most surely many of the people are transgressors .
'hast thou not seen how god drives the clouds , then composes them , then converts them into a mass , then thou seest the rain issuing out of the midst of them ? and he sends down out of heaven mountains , wherein is hail , so that he smites whom he will with it , and turns it aside from whom he will ; wellnigh the gleam of his lightning snatches away the sight .
move not thy tongue with it to hasten it ;
or the water thereof become deep sunken so that therefor thou canst not make a search .
and say : o my lord ! i seek refuge in thee from the evil suggestions of the shaitans ;
surelythose who disbelieve and act unjustly allah will not forgive them nor guide them to a path
, say ,  people of the book , why do you deny the revelation of godeven though you know very well that it is from god ? .
and it destroyed everything over which it passed and reduced it to dust .
will say ,  how long did you remain on earth in number of years ? 
they say : shall we indeed be restored to the first state ,
nor the shade and the heat ,
i shall surely punish him severely or order him to be executed , unless he gives me a good reason for his absence . 
o you who believe ! whoever of you goes back on his religion—god will bring a people whom he loves and who love him , kind towards the believers , stern with the disbelievers . they strive in the way of god , and do not fear the blame of the critic . that is the grace of god ; he bestows it upon whomever he wills . god is embracing and knowing .
and mention our servant job , when he called out to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and pain . ”
they said , “ are we to follow one of us , a human being ? we would then go astray , and end up in hell .
then after them we sent musaand harunto fir'aunand his chiefs with our ayat . but they behaved arrogantly and were mujrimunfolk .
it is he who has made the night as a covering for you , sleep as a rest for you , and the day for you to rise again .
and why should we not put our trust in allah when it is indeed he who has guided us to the ways of our life ? we shall surely continue to remain steadfast in face of your persecution . all those who have to put trust , should put their trust only in allah . 
say , “ if you love god , then follow me , and god will love you , and will forgive you your sins. ” god is forgiving and merciful .
say : ' i ask no wage of you ; that shall be yours . my wage is only upon allah and he is witness over everything '
when your lord said to the angels ,  i will create the human being out of pure mud-moulded clay .
then it is said unto them : where arethat ye used to make partners
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he designed you , and designed you well , and to him is the final return .
and we bestowed upon himisaac and jacob , and bestowed prophethood and the book on his descendants and granted him his reward in this world ; he will certainly be among the righteous in the hereafter .
for those who fear their lord without seeing him and dread the hour .
and verily our host ! they are to be overcome .
such were the populations we destroyed when they committed iniquities ; but we fixed an appointed time for their destruction .
those who demand a full measure from others
indeed allah restrains the heavens and the earth from convulsing ; and were they to convulse , who could stop them except allah ? indeed he is most forbearing , oft forgiving .
he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
i have set my face with single-minded devotion , towards him who has created the heavens and the earth , and i am not one of the polytheists . 
a general proclamation isthis day of the greater pilgrimage on the part of god and his apostle , that god is not boundto idolaters , nor is his apostle . it is , therefore , better for you to repent . if you do not , remember that you can not eludegod . so announce to those who deny the truth the news of painful punishment ,
verily ! the torment of their lord is that before which none can feel secure ,
and pray :  o my lord , let my entry be with honour , and let my exit be with honour , and grant me power from you which would helpme . 
“ that you did not come after me ? so did you disobey my order ? ”
all that is on earth will perish :
and of his signs is that you see the earth stilled , but when we send down upon it rain , it quivers and grows . indeed , he who has given it life is the giver of life to the dead . indeed , he is over all things competent .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it just as they recognize their own sons . but , some of them knowingly conceal the truth .
he bestows wisdom upon anyone he wills , and he who is given wisdom is in fact given great wealth , but only those who have common sense learn lessons from these things .
on the day that allah will raise them up all , then they will swear to him as they swear to you , and they think that they have something ; now surely they are the liars .
: lo ! this is a reward for you . your endeavourhath found acceptance .
what , do they associate that which creates nothing and themselves are created ,
and thus do we detail the verses , andthe way of the criminals will become evident .
do you have clear authority ?
and eyes will be humbly cast down .
and every soul will come forward , accompanied by a driver and a witness .
until a known span ?
and it is he who accepts repentance from his bondmen , and pardons sins * , and knows all your deeds .
we have been promised this , we and our forefathers , before . this is not but legends of the former peoples . 
then enter the ranks of my chosen bondmen !
he created all the kinds and made for you the ships and the cattle such which you ride ,
if ye divorce them before ye have touched them and ye have appointed unto them a portion , thenhalf of that which ye appointed , unless theyagree to forgo it , or he agreeth to forgo it in whose hand is the marriage tie . to forgo is nearer to piety . and forget not kindness among yourselves . allah is seer of what ye do .
and it was revealed to noah , saying , 'none of thy people shall believe but he who has already believed ; so be thou not distressed by that they may be doing .
and indeed it is mentioned in the earlier books .
the booty which allah gave to his noble messenger from the people of the townships , is for allah and his noble messenger , and for the relatives , and the orphans , and the needy and the travellers – so that it does not become the wealth of the rich among you ; and accept whatever the noble messenger gives you ; and refrain from whatever he forbids you ; and fear allah ; indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
 and we are not going to be punished . 
and his wife- the carrier of firewood .
and you are carried on them and on boats .
to the thamud peoplesalih , one of their own brethren . he said :  o my people ! worship allah : ye have no other god but him . it is he who hath produced you from the earth and settled you therein : then ask forgiveness of him , and turn to him : for my lord isnear , ready to answer . 
say , “ have you considered those partners of yours that you worship instead of god ? show me what they have created on earth . or do they have any share in the heavens ? ” or have we given them a book whose clear teachings they follow ? in fact , the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but delusions .
say thou : verily my prayer and my rites and my living and my dying are all for allah , lord of the worlds .
only those who believe not therein seek to hasten it , and those who believe are fearful thereof and know that it is the truth . lo ! verily these who debate concerning the hour are in error far-off .
god had already helped you at badr , when you were weak . fear god , so that you may be grateful .
however , the records of the deeds of the virtuous ones will certainly be in illiyin .
the messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his lord , and so do the believers . each believes in allah and his angels , his books , and his messengers , we do not differentiate between any one of his messengers . they say : 'we hear and obey.your forgiveness lord , and to you is the arrival .
mankind ! the messenger has brought you the truth from your lord , so believe for your own good . and if you deny the truth , know that to god belongs all that the heavens and the earth contain . god is all knowing and wise .
the reward in the next life is certainly better for the faithful ones who have observed piety in this life .
he said ; fear not ; verily i shall be with you twain : i shall hear and see .
do they not see how many generations we have destroyed before them ? never shall they return to them .
and your lordarrives with the angels in ranks ,
when thou recitest the koran , we place between thee , and those who do not believe in the world to come , a curtain obstructing ,
one who abandons his home for the cause of god will find many places of refuge in the vast land and one who dies , after having abandoned his home to get near to god and his messenger , will receive his reward from god . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they said , ‘ so has your lord said . indeed he is the all-wise , the all-knowing . ’
o people ! fear your lord , who created you from a single soul , and created from it its mate , and propagated from them many men and women . and revere god whom you ask about , and the parents . surely , god is watchful over you .
moses said : ' o my nation , if you believe in allah , put your trust in him , if you have surrendered '
who set some other god along with allah . but they will come to know .
and i too am devising a guile .
allah is benevolent upon his bondmen – he bestows sustenance to whomever he wills ; and he only is the all powerful , the most honourable .
whoever brings virtue shall receivebetter than it , but whoever brings vice—those who commit misdeeds shall not be requited except for what they used to do .
they said , ‘ we were tormented before you came to us andafter you came to us. ’ he said , ‘ maybe your lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land , and then he will see how you act . ’
when god will say , “ o jesus son of mary , recall my favor upon you and upon your mother , how i supported you with the holy spirit . you spoke to the people from the crib , and in maturity . how i taught you the scripture and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel . and recall that you molded from clay the shape of a bird , by my leave , and then you breathed into it , and it became a bird , by my leave . and you healed the blind and the leprous , by my leave ; and you revived the dead , by my leave . and recall that i restrained the children of israel from you when you brought them the clear miracles . but those who disbelieved among them said , ` this is nothing but obvious sorcery . ' “
and we gave them of our mercy and we appointed to them a truthful , highly sincere tongue ,
and treasures and goodly dwellings ,
andzakariya , when he cried to his lord :  o my lord ! leave me not without offspring , though thou art the best of inheritors . 
and when abraham , and ishmael with him , raised up the foundations of the house : 'our lord , receive this from us ; thou art the all-hearing , the all-knowing ;
it is such as these who have ruined their souls , and that which they fabricated shall fail them .
god knows the unseen things of the heavens and the earth . god sees all that you do .
whether you do some good openly or in secret , or forgive an ill done to you , that god is forgiving and all-powerful .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
whenever you did good , it was to your own advantage ; and whenever you committed evil , it was to your own disadvantage . so , when the time of the fulfilment of the second promise arrived , disfigure your faces and enter the templeas they had entered the first time , and destroy whatever they could lay their hands on .
and among his signs is this , that he created youfrom dust , and thenfrom adam 's rib , and then his offspring from the semen , and ] , - behold you are human beings scattered !
they ask thee about thehour - when will be its appointed time ? say :  the knowledge thereof is with my lord : none but he can reveal as to when it will occur . heavy were its burden through the heavens and the earth . only , all of a sudden will it come to you .  they ask thee as if thou wert eager in search thereof : say :  the knowledge thereof is with allah , but most men know not . 
we know that what they say grieves you . it is not you that the wrongdoers are rejecting , rather it is the signs of god that they reject .
and fixed the mountains like pegs ,
he will punish whomever he wishes and have mercy on whomever he wishes , and to him you will be returned .
and if one of them is informed of the news ofthat which he set forth as a parable to the most beneficent , his face becomes dark , gloomy , and he is filled with grief !
sayto these mushrikun and kafirun ) :  o al-kafirun !
and they denied him , so we destroyed them . indeed in that is a sign , but most of them were not to be believers .
and certainly our word has already gone forth in respect of our servants , the apostles :
and who brings out the pasturage ,
shall i tell you upon whom the devils descend ?
do not marry idolatrous women unless they join the faith . a maid servant who is a believer is better than an idolatress even though you may like her . and do not marry your daughters to idolaters until they accept the faith . a servant who is a believer is better than an idolater even though you may like him . they invite you to hell , but god calls you to paradise and pardon by his grace . and he makes his signs manifest that men may haply take heed .
had god given abundant sustenance to his servants , they would have certainly rebelled on earth , but he sends them a known measure of sustenance as he wills . he is all-aware of his servants and watches over them all .
in plain arabic speech .
devote yourself single-mindedly to the religion . and follow the natureas made by god , that nature in which he has created mankind . there is no altering the creation of god . that is the right religion . but most people do not realize it .
would that we might return again , and be among the believers '
he said :  shall i seek for you a god other than theallah , when it is allah who hath endowed you with gifts above the nations ? 
believers , when you contract a debt for a fixed period , put it in writing . let a scribe write it down between you with fairness ; no scribe shall refuse to write as allah has taught him . therefore , let him write ; and let the debtor dictate , fearing allah his lord , and do not decrease anything of it . if the debtor is a fool , or weak , or unable to dictate himself , let his guardian dictate for him in fairness . call to witness two witnesses of your men , if the two are not men , then a man and two women from the witnesses whom you approve ; so that if one of the two errs , one of them will remind the other . whenever witnesses are called upon they must not refuse , and do not be weary to write it down , be it small or large , together with its term . this is more just with allah ; it ensures accuracy in testifying and is the least of doubt . unless it is present merchandise that you circulate between you ; then no guilt shall be on you if you do not write it down and take witnesses when you are selling , and let no harm be done to either scribe or witness . if you do , that is a transgression in you . fear allah . allah teaches you , and allah has knowledge of everything .
tell them :  my lord has forbidden repugnant acts , whether open or disguised , sin and unjust oppression , associating others with god , of which he has sent down no authority , and saying things of god of which you have no knowledge . 
and by the witness and that whereunto he beareth testimony ,
and woe to him ; how he plotted !
that left nothing it came upon , except that it was ashes .
the kinsmen who gave him shelter ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you form your judgement ?
and whenever a chapter is revealed , they look at one another , “ does anyone see you ? ” then they slip away . god has diverted their hearts , because they are a people who do not understand .
and do not marry women that your fathers married , unless it be a thing of the past ; surely that is indecent and hateful ; an evil way .
prohibited to youare your mothers , your daughters , your sisters , your father 's sisters , your mother 's sisters , your brother 's daughters , your sister 's daughters , yourmothers who nursed you , your sisters through nursing , your wives ' mothers , and your step-daughters under your guardianshipof your wives unto whom you have gone in . but if you have not gone in unto them , there is no sin upon you . andthe wives of your sons who are from yourloins , and that you taketwo sisters simultaneously , except for what has already occurred . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
take the lead towards forgiveness from your lord and a paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth , prepared for those who have faith in allah and his apostles . that is allah ’ s grace , which he grants to whomever he wishes , and allah is dispenser of a great grace .
or do ye say that abraham , isma'il isaac , jacob and the tribes were jews or christians ? say : do ye know better than allah ? ah ! who is more unjust than those who conceal the testimony they have from allah ? but allah is not unmindful of what ye do !
do they worship , other than allah , that which has no power to provide them with anything either from the heavens or earth , and can do nothing !
say :  each one awaits the consequence ; so you wait . you will come to know soon who are the men of the straight path and who have come to guidance .
and they sought helpand every froward potentate was bought to naught ;
this indeed was true . we knew all that he did there .
wavering in between : neither with these , nor with those . and whomever allah leads astray , you will never find any way for him .
and they took many spoils , and allah is the almighty , and the wise .
then again , what will convey to you what the day of justice is ?
nay ! rather , what they used to do has become like rust upon their hearts .
whenever he decides to create something he has only to say ,  exist ,  and it comes into existence .
when hud , their brother , said to them , ‘ will you not be wary ?
woe to man ! how ungrateful he is !
and we made the children of israel to pass the sea ; then they came upon a people who kept to the worship of their idols they said : o musa ! make for us a god as they havegods he said : surely you are a people acting ignorantly :
lo ! my protecting friend is allah who revealeth the scripture . he befriendeth the righteous .
it is not the flesh and blood of your sacrifice that pleases god . what pleases god is your piety . god has made subservient to you the sacrificial animals so that perhaps you will glorify him ; he is guiding you . , give the glad newsto the righteous people .
allah makes plain to you his verses , and allah is the knower , the wise .
and are repelled . theirs is an unceasing chastisement .
said moosa , “ i seek the refuge of mine and your lord , from every haughty person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ”
and defilement flee !
and they will advance toward each other mutually questioning .
no indeed ! when the earth is levelled to a plain ,
pray to your lord in humility and unseen . he does not love the iniquitous .
he it is who hath made you successors in the earth . so whosoever disbelieveth , on him will befall his infidelity . and for the infidels their infidelity increaseth with their lord naught save abhorence . and for the infidels their infidelity increastth naught save loss .
 who make mischief in the land , and mend not . 
it is allah who takes away the souls of people at the hour of their death , and takes away at the time of sleep the souls of those that have not died . then he retains the souls of those against whom he had decreed death and returns the souls of others till an appointed time . surely there are signs in this for a people who reflect .
hesaid ,  i will never send him with you until you give me a solemn pledge , before god , that you will indeed bring him back to me , unless you yourselves are trapped .  and when they had given him their solemn pledge , said ,  god shall be witness to all that we say . 
on the day when you will witness it , every nursing mother will forget her nurseling and every pregnant one will discharge her burden , and youwill see people as if they are drunk , whereas they will not be intoxicated , but the fact is that allah ’ s punishment is very severe .
and you are freein this city .
 that they bring up to you all well-versed sorcerers . 
say  o people of the scripture ! you have nothingtill you act according to the taurat , the injeel , and what hasbeen sent down to you from your lord .  verily , that which has been sent down to youfrom your lord increases in many of them their obstinate rebellion and disbelief . so be not sorrowful over the people who disbelieve .
they denied him , and will surely be brought to punishment ,
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
when ye sought help of your lord and he answered you : i will help you with a thousand of the angels , rank on rank .
what about someone whose heart god has opened to islam , so that he follows a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the mention of god . those are in manifest error .
we had already , beforehand , taken the covenant of adam , but he forgot : and we found on his part no firm resolve .
there they will cry out : 'our lord , bring us out , and we will do good , other than what we have done ' what , did we not make your lives long enough to remember for whosoever would remember ? a warner came to you , so taste now ! none shall help the harmdoers .
or do they say , 'why , he has forged it ' ? say : 'then produce a sura like it , and call on whom you can , apart from god , if you speak truly . '
he had warned them of our assault , but they disputed the warnings .
or , something similar to the circumstances of the nations of noah , aad , and thamood , and those who came after them . allah does not want to wrong his worshipers .
we tried pharaoh 's nation before them . a noble messenger came to them ,
how can there be an admonition unto them , when surely there came unto them an apostle manifest !
how can he who created the heavens and the earth not be able to create others like them ? why not ? he is the real creator all-knowing .
do you not see that allah has subjected to you all that is on the earth , and the ships which run upon the sea by his command ? he holds the sky back lest it should fall upon the earth except by his permission . allah is gentle to people , the most merciful .
these are the verses of a book luminous .
and indeed the hereafter and this world both belong to us .
wherefore announce thou unto them a torment afflictive .
on that day , man will say , “ where is the escape ? ”
but those who are wrongdoers will become the fuel of hell . 
and raised the mountains like supporting poles ?
for the protection of the qureaish --
do not yield to the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and disregard the hurt that comes from them , and put your trust in allah . allah suffices as the guardian to entrust one 's affairs to .
and it is he who hath produced you from one person , and thenceforth provided for you an abode and a depository . surely we have expounded the signs unto a people who understand .
say : 'is that better , or the garden of eternity , that is promised to the godfearing , and is their recompense and homecoming ? '
say :  what ! will ye instruct allah about your religion ? but allah knows all that is in the heavens and on earth : he has full knowledge of all things .
remember ye implored the assistance of your lord , and he answered you :  i will assist you with a thousand of the angels , ranks on ranks . 
by the snorting , panting horses ,
god will open the hearts of whomever he wants to guide to islam , but he will tighten the chest of one whom he has led astray , as though he was climbing high up into the sky . thus , god places wickedness on those who do not accept the faith .
and by the swelling sea ,
or lest he should say , when he sees the chastisement : “ o that i might return again , and be among those who do good . ”
warn the men .
they were succeeded by generations who inherited the scripture and chose the materials of this world , saying , “ we will be forgiven. ” and should similar materials come their way , they would again seize them . did they not make a covenant to uphold the scripture , and to not say about god except the truth ? did they not study its contents ? but the home of the hereafter is better for the cautious ; will you not understand ?
it isunto thee that thou hungerest not therein nor art naked ,
he said , “ o aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray .
ah ! ye are those who love them , but they love you not , - though ye believe in the whole of the book . when they meet you , they say ,  we believe  : but when they are alone , they bite off the very tips of their fingers at you in their rage . say :  perish in your rage ; allah knoweth well all the secrets of the heart . 
their elite go about : ‘ go and stand by your gods ! this is indeed the desirable thing .
we shall tell them ,  do not cry for help on this day ; you will receive none from us  .
and say :  my lord ! i seek refuge with you from the whisperingsof the shayatin .
indeed , allah orders justice and good conduct and giving to relatives and forbids immorality and bad conduct and oppression . he admonishes you that perhaps you will be reminded .
so allah protected him from the evilof what they planned , and the most evil punishment overtook firon 's people :
and he is the supreme over his creatures , and he sendeth guardians over you until when death cometh unto one of you our messengers take his soul , and they fail not .
the inevitable ! .
and it sailed with them through waves like mountains , and noah called to his son who was apart ,  o my son , come aboard with us and be not with the disbelievers . 
and whosoever desires the world to come and strives after it as he should , being a believer -- those , their striving shall be thanked .
, leave them alone in their dark ignorance for an appointed time .
and those that outstrip suddenly
so now taste , for that you forgot the encounter of this your day ! we indeed have forgotten you . taste the chastisement of eternity for that you were doing ! '
him shall i soon roast in hell .
those who left their homes in the cause of god after having been oppressed , will be given by us a better place in the world , and if they knew , the guerdon of the next would be greater
blest be he in whose hand is the dominion , and he is over everything potent .
for them is good news in the life of this world and in the hereafter.that is the great success .
lo ! thy lord is ever watchful .
when they came to him , they said :  peace .  he answered :  peace .  they were a people he did not recognise .
follow that which is sent down to you from your lord and do not follow guardians other than him ; little do you remember .
wheresoever ye may be , death shall overtake you , even though ye be in fortresses plastered . and if there betideth them some good , they say : this is from god . and if there betideth them some ill , they say : this is because of thee . say thou : everything is from allah . what aileth then this people , that well-nigh they understand not any speech
say : whoever is an enemy to gabriel-for he brings down theto thy heart by allah 's will , a confirmation of what went before , and guidance and glad tidings for those who believe , -
until ye come to the graves .
and also to warn those who say :  allah has taken to himself a son , 
our lord ! surely we have heard a preacher calling to the faith , saying : believe in your lord , so we did believe ; our lord ! forgive us therefore our faults , and cover our evil deeds and make us die with the righteous .
nay , is he not acquainted with what is in the books of moses-
and to those who shall follow the messenger the unlettered prophetwhom they shall find written with them in the torah and the gospel . he will order kindness upon them and forbid them to do evil . he will make good things lawful to them and prohibit all that is foul . he will relieve them of their burdens and of the shackles that weigh upon them . those who believe in him and honor him , those who aid him and follow the light sent forth with him , shall surely prosper '
and we had already forbidden suckle-nurses for him , so she said , “ shall i show you a household that will nurse this child of yours , and they are his well-wishers ? ”
then we made you successors in the land after them so that we may see how you act .
we inspired moses and his brother with this message :  provide dwellings for your people in egypt , make your dwellings into places of worship , and establish regular prayers : and give glad tidings to those who believe ! 
and they are guided to goodly words and they are guided into the path of the praised one .
there is a group of them who alter their voice while reading out a text , so that you may suppose it to be from the book , though it is not from the book , and they say , ‘ it is from allah , ’ though it is not from allah , and they attribute lies to allah , and they know .
and they said :  why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ?  say :  allah is certainly able to send down a sign , but most of them know not . 
will you bid others to piety and forget yourselves , while you recite the book ? do you not exercise your reason ?
it shall befall on a day whereon the heaven shall become like unto dregs of oil .
in them shall be good and pleasing .
but if they turn away , you are responsible only for conveying the message clearly .
their call therein will be ,  exalted are you , o allah ,  and their greeting therein will be ,  peace .  and the last of their call will be ,  praise to allah , lord of the worlds ! 
and guard them against evil deeds ; whomsoever thou guardest against evil deeds on that day , on him thou hast had mercy ; and that is indeed the mighty triumph .
and we saved them with their nation from a great distress .
how terrible it will be for them when the angels take away their souls by striking their faces and their backs .
and their speech was naught but that they said : our lord ! forgive us our sins and our extravagance in our affairs , and make our foothold firm , and make us triumph over the disbelieving people .
and your lord declared he would send men against them who would inflict dreadful suffering on them till the day of doom , for your lord is swift in retribution , though he is certainly forgiving and kind .
and they say ,  o you upon whom the message has been sent down , indeed you are mad .
these will be the faces of the sinful disbelievers .
that was a people that hath passed away . they shall reap the fruit of what they did , and ye of what ye do ! of their merits there is no question in your case :
and it is he who sends down water from the sky ; so with it we produced all things that grow ; hence we produce from it vegetation from which we bring forth grains in clusters ; and from the pollen of dates , dense bunches – and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates , similar in some ways and unlike in some ; look at its fruit when it bears yield , and its ripening ; indeed in it are signs for the people who believe .
and verily to that he is witness .
and a multitude from the latter .
the likeness of those who choose other patrons than allah is as the likeness of the spider when she taketh unto herself a house , and lo ! the frailest of all houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
he would have surely turned us away from our gods if we had not adhered to them .  they will know soon who is farther away from the path when they see the punishment !
then he called to his lord :  these are a sinful people . 
and saying : be not proud against allah . lo ! i bring you a clear warrant .
unto him is the true call , and those whom they call upon beside him answer them not at all , save as is answered one stretching out his palms to water that it may reach his mouth , while it will reach it not . and the supplication of the infidels only goeth astray .
we did not create them except in truth . but most of them do not know .
sad . i call to witness the admonishing qur'an .
say :  it is allah alone who delivers you from this and from every distress , and yet you associate others with allah in his divinity . 
who sees youwhen you stand up .
even against those who set up with god another god . certainly they will soon know !
and , when abraham said to his father azar ,  do you take idols as deities ? indeed , i see you and your people to be in manifest error . 
further evidenceare the ships which stand as mountains in the sea .
'call on your lord ' they said , 'to make known to us what she shall be ' he said :  he says she is a cow neither old , nor virgin , middling between both .  therefore , do as you have been ordered '
and if they incline to peace , then incline to itand rely upon allah . indeed , it is he who is the hearing , the knowing .
and we send down of the qur'an that which is healing and mercy for the believers , but it does not increase the wrongdoers except in loss .
and they do not understand , when explained to .
when he came to his lord , with a sound heart . .
therefore remindin case the reminder profits .
for we shall certainly turn it to barren dust .
some among the people of the book wish to lead you astray , yet they lead none astray but themselves , though they do not realise .
the judgement on whatever you differ rests with allah . such is allah , my lord ; in him i have put all my trust and to him i always turn in devotion .
those who answer the call of their lord will receive good rewards . whatever those who have not answered the call of their lord offer to redeem themselves , even if they offer double the wealth of the whole earth , will not be accepted . they will face a terrible reckoning and their dwelling will be hell , a terrible place to rest !
except those who repent before you apprehend them ; so know well that allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
say , “ the angel of death put in charge of you will reclaim you . then to your lord you will be returned . ”
if now you have any strategy , use it against me .
they will be attended by youths who will not age -- when you see them you will think them to be like sprinkled pearls --
and they belied themwrongfully and arrogantly , though their ownselves were convinced thereofare from allah , and musais the messenger of allah in truth , but they disliked to obey musa , and hated to believe in his message of monotheism ] . so see what was the end of the mufsidun .
and when my slaves ask youconcerning me , then , i am indeed near . i respond to the invocations of the supplicant when he calls on me . so let them obey me and believe in me , so that they may be led aright .
we have indeed sent it as a qur ’ an in the arabic language , so that you may understand .
thesending down of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the command was given : 'earth ! swallow up your water ' ; and : 'heaven ! abate ! ' so the water subsided , the command was fulfilled , and the ark settled on mount judi , and it was said : 'away with the wrong-doing folk ! '
the master of the day of recompense .
you can not escape him anywhere on earth . you have no protector or helper other than god .
fir'aunsaid :  if you choose an ilahother than me , i will certainly put you among the prisoners . 
you shall not see therein any crookedness or unevenness .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that if a sign came to them , they would surely believe in it . say ,  the signs are only with allah .  and what will make you perceive that even if a sign came , they would not believe .
this was how you considered your lord , but he knows you better than you know yourselves . thus , you are now lost  .
but their faith could not help them once they witnessed our might . this has been god ’ s way of dealing with his servants . and there and then the disbelievers lost .
he said , ‘ so shall it be . your lord has said , ‘ ‘ it is simple for me. ’ ’ certainly i created you before when you were nothing . ’
and certainly we have repeatedin this quran that they may be mindful , but it does not add save to their aversion .
say ,  what do you think will happen if this quran is from god and you have rejected it ? besides , a witness from among the israelites has testified to the divinity of a book like it and believed in itwhile you have arrogantly denied it . god does not guide the unjust .
the arrogant will say to the weak :  did we hold you back from guidance after it had come to you ? certainly not . in fact you were yourselves guilty . 
who madewith allah another deity ; then throw him into the severe punishment . 
he said , 'as for the evildoer , him we shall chastise , then he shall be returned to his lord and he shall chastise him with a horrible chastisement .
they started arguing and whispering to each other
women are your planting place ; come then to your planting place as you please and forwardfor your souls , and fear allah . and know that you shall meet him . give glad tidings to the believers .
they said ,  o woe to us ! indeed , we were wrongdoers . 
moses asked ,  what if i were to bring you clear proof ? 
will be brought together for an appointment on an appointed day .
those who buy unbelief at the price of faith , they will nothing hurt god ; and there awaits them a painful chastisement .
today he shall have no loyal friend here ,
and for allah only is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and towards allah is the return .
and when youprayed to your lord for help , he answered : ' i am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession '
verily my protector is allah who hath revealed the book , and he protecteth the righteous .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth : he gives life and brings death , and he has power over all things .
he placed firm mountains on the earth , and blessed it . he measured out its means of sustenance all in four days ; this is for those who ask for it .
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and so will they be on the day of judgement . lo ! 'ad disbelieved in the lord . lo ! ruined are 'ad , the people of hud .
there is no god but allah . he will certainly gather you all together on the day of resurrection - the day regarding which there can be no doubt . whose word can be truer than allah 's ?
thou art no other than a warner .
surely that which you are promised is about to fall !
this is because thy lord is not one to destroy a town for its wrong-doing while its people are unaware .
and the earth brings forth her burdens ,
prophet , tell the captives with you ,  if god finds anything good in your hearts , he will give you a better reward than that which was taken from you and will forgive you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself wholly to god , and is a doer of good , and follows the faith of abraham the monotheist ? god has chosen abraham for a friend .
and we helped him against a people who rejected our signs as false . they were indeed an evil people and so we drowned them all .
and when any tidings of peace or war come to them they spread the news around . had they gone to the prophet or those in authority among them , then those who check and scrutinize would have known it , and but for the favour of god and his mercy you would certainly have followed satan , except a few .
that , for what your hands have forwarded , and for that god is never unjust unto his servants . '
fight them until there is no more fitnaand religion belongs to god alone . if they desist , then let there be no hostility , except towards aggressors .
, tell them ,  i have no control over my suffering or benefits unless god wills . every nation is destined to live for an appointed time . they can neither delay that time nor can they cause it to come sooner .
when they commit an indecency , they say : 'this is what we found our fathers practicing , and with it allah has ordered us ' say : 'allah does not order indecency . would you tell of allah what you do not know '
but they turned away . so we sent against them the floodof arim , and exchanged their gardens with two others bearing bitter fruit andtamarisks , and here and there a few lotus trees .
how then , if ye disbelieve , shall ye escape , on a day which shall make children grey-headed .
so for their breaking of the covenant we cursed them and made their hearts hard . they distort words from theirusages and have forgotten a portion of that of which they were reminded . and you will still observe deceit among them , except a few of them . but pardon them and overlook . indeed , allah loves the doers of good .
and strive hard in allah 's cause as you ought to strive . he has chosen you , and has not laid upon you in religion any hardship , it is the religion of your father ibrahim . it is hewho has named you muslims both before and in this , that the messengermay be a witness over you and you be witnesses over mankind ! so perform as-salat , give zakat and hold fast to allahhe is your maula , what an excellent maulaand what an excellent helper !
and each shank clasps the other shank ,
and fear he who created you and the former creation . 
that day man will be informed about whathe had sent aheadandleft behind .
do they not see the shadows of all things god has created incline to the right and the left , bowing in obeisance to god ?
he said : my lord ! help me because they deny me .
that which ye give in usury in order that it may increase onpeople 's property hath no increase with allah ; but that which ye give in charity , seeking allah 's countenance , hath increase manifold .
behold , we sent it down on the night of power ;
and among them are some who look at thee : but canst thou guide the blind , - even though they will not see ?
he said : my lord ! appoint unto me a sign . allah said : thy sign is that thou shalt not speak unto mankind for three days save by beckoning ; and remember thy lord much and hallow him in the evening and morning .
if only the faithless knew about the time when they will not be able to keep the fire off their faces and their backs , nor will they be helped !
and those who guard their private parts ,
or that :  had the book been sent down to us we would surely have been guided better than they .  so you have now received from your lord a clear proof and a guidance and grace . then who is more wicked than he who denies the signs of god and turns away from them ? we shall punish those severely who turn away : a requital indeed for having turned aside .
andtrees layered
and when i have proportioned him and breathed into him of mysoul , then fall down to him in prostration . 
and we delivered those who had faith and were godwary .
o you who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves and serve your lord , and do good that you may succeed .
, tell them to travel in the land and see what happened to those who rejected the truth .
during your first uprising of evil we shall send to you
'eat of the good things with which we have provided you and do not transgress therein lest my anger should fall upon you , and upon whosoever my anger falls has assuredly fallen ,
and we granted him , out of our mercy , his brother aaron , a prophet .
believers ! shall i guide you to a profitable course that will save you from a painful punishment ?
indeed the worst beasts in the sight of allah are the people who disbelieve and do not accept faith .
indeed , the righteous will be among shades and springs
vverily , the hyprocrites will be in the lowest depthsof the fire ; no helper will you find for them .
we sent a stone-hurtling storm against them , except the family of lot whom we saved in the early hours of the morning
and verily they had well-nigh tempted thee away from that which we have revealed unto thee , that thou shouldst fabricate regarding something else ; and then surely they would have taken thee as a friend !
and the heaven and the earth wept not for them , nor were they reprieved .
and so it is that against every prophet we have set up the evil ones from among men and jinn , some of them inspire others with specious speech only by way of . delusion . had it been your lord 's will , they would not have done it . leave them alone to fabricate what they will .
have you seen if he was upon guidance
they said : it is equal unto us whether thou admonishest or art not of the admonishers .
say , “ roam the earth , and observe the fate of those who came before . most of them were idolaters . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . he gives life to the earth after its death , and you shall be raised to life in the same way .
certainly , if you have patience and piety , even if the enemy attacks immediately after this , god will help you with another force of five thousand angels , all splendidlydressed .
a record of misdeeds written .
but they called their friend , and he dared , and he slaughtered .
and you were not expecting that the bookwould be sent down to you , but it is a mercy from your lord . so never be a supporter of the disbelievers .
so he shall have an agreeable life
then rush thereby upon an assembly :
would that you knew what illiyin is !
when the wife of imran said , “ my lord ! i pledge to you what is in my womb – that it shall be dedicated purely in your service , so accept it from me ; indeed you only are the all hearing , the all knowing . ”
which neither give strength nor satisfy the hunger .
that allah may reward the true for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites , if he wishes , or accept their repentance . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
the fools among the people will say : 'what has made them turn away from the direction they were facing ' say : 'the east and the west belong to allah . he guides whom he will to the straight path '
except allah 's chosen servants .
whether you say a thing aloud or inaudibly , he has knowledge of the secret and the hidden .
and allah presents an example of those who believed : the wife of pharaoh , when she said ,  my lord , build for me near you a house in paradise and save me from pharaoh and his deeds and save me from the wrongdoing people . 
for such there will be the gardens of eden with streams running in them . they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and wear green garments of silk and brocade , reclining therein on couches . how excellent a reward , and how good a resting place !
all-knower of the unseen and seen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the heaven shall be opened so that it shall be all openings ,
laughing , and rejoicing ,
when we told the angels to prostrate before adam , they all obeyed except ibliswho abstained out of pride and so he became one of those who deny the truth .
those whom you invoke besides god are created beings like you . so call on them and let them answer your call , if what you say is true .
but they slaughtered her , and became full of remorse .
so that he may clarify for them what they differ about , and that the faithless may know that they were liars .
only the unbelievers dispute the revelations of god . so do not let their activities in the land deceive you .
allah has not chosen any child , nor any other god along with him – were it so , each god would have taken away its creation , and each one would certainly wish superiority over the other ; purity is to allah above all the matters they fabricate .
they were the ones , who on being told ,  god is only one ,  become puffed-up with pride
then they belied him ; there upon we delivered him and those with him in the ark , and drowned those who belied our signs ; verily they were a people blind .
and among the people of the book there are some who would restore you even if you were to entrust a treasure of gold , and of them there are some whom were you to entrust with one gold piece , will not restore it unless you stand over them . that is because they say : 'we will not be taken to task for whatever we may do to non-jews . thus they falsely fix a lie upon allah , and do so wittingly .
soldiersdefeated there among the companies .
we fed not the needy ,
and these wait but for one shout , wherefrom there will be no deferment .
that they may bear their loads complete on the day of resurrection , and some of the loads of those that they lead astray without any knowledge . o evil the load they bear !
lo ! those who give alms , both men and women , and lend unto allah a goodly loan , it will be doubled for them , and theirs will be a rich reward .
when he covered you with a trance as asecurity from him , and he sent down water from the sky to purify you with it , and to repel from you the defilement of satan , and to fortify your hearts , and to makefeet steady with it .
by those that direct an affair !
upon the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountains become a slipping heap of sand .
and recall when you implored your lord for help and he responded to you : ' i will indeed reinforce you with a thousand angels , coming host after host . '
and you were not expecting that the book would be conveyed to you , buta mercy from your lord . so do not be an assistant to the disbelievers .
one day the earth and the mountains will be in violent commotion . and the mountains will be as a heap of sand poured out and flowing down .
verily there is a sign in this , yet many of them do not believe .
whereas they were not sent over them as watchers .
and it is allah who sendeth the winds , and they raise a cloud ; then we drive it unto a dead land and we quicken thereby the earth after the death thereof . even so shall be the resurrection .
then will fill your bellies with it .
 take a handful of herbs ,  , and apply and rub them , and do not make a mistake .  we found him patient in adversity , an excellent devotee , always turning in repentance .
the inmates of the fire will call out to the inhabitants of paradise , ‘ pour on us some water , or something of what allah has provided you. ’ they will say , ‘ allah has indeed forbidden these two to the faithless ! ’
and we would have guided them to a straight path .
but when the prayer is ended , then disperse abroad in the land and seek of allah 's grace , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
, certainly we did send messengers before you among the nations which have gone by .
so he threw it down , and lo , it became a running serpent .
cut offthehand of the thief , male or female , as a recompense for that which they committed , a punishment by way of example from allah . and allah is all-powerful , all-wise .
and fear the turmoil which will certainly not fall only upon a few selected unjust people among you ; and know that allah ’ s punishment is severe .
say : o my servants who believe ! be careful ofyour lord ; for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious ; only the patient will be paid back their reward in full without measure .
do you think that you will be left secure --
do you call upon baal and forsake the best of the creators ?
when he cried unto his lord a cry in secret ,
we will make them taste the lesser torment , prior to the greater torment , so that they may return .
they said : 'let us swear by allah to attack him and his family at night , then we will tell his guardian we were not witnesses of the destruction of his family ; and surely we are truthful '
who denied , and turned away .
we delivered moses and all who were with him ;
their lord , on that day , is fully informed of them .
truly such will be our bounty ; it will never fail ; -
it is just a revelation that is revealed ,
o ye who believe ! obey allah and his messenger , and turn not away from him when ye hear .
we have revealed the torah , wherein is guidance and light . the submissive prophets ruled the jews according to it , so did the rabbis and the scholars , as they were required to protect god ’ s book , and were witnesses to it . so do not fear people , but fear me . and do not sell my revelations for a cheap price . those who do not rule according to what god revealed are the unbelievers .
we have enjoined on man kindness to parents : but if theystrivethee to join with meanything of which thou hast no knowledge , obey them not . ye haveto return to me , and i will tell youof all that ye did .
he knows all the unseen and seen . he is the most great and high .
and if we willed we could surely take away that which we have revealed to you by inspiration . then you would find no protector for you against us in that respect .
why do not the learned men and the doctors of law prohibit them from their speaking of what is sinful and their eating of what is unlawfully acquired ? certainly evil is that which they work .
the people of noah before them : they were surely a sinful people .
is it they who apportion thy lord 's mercy ? we have apportioned among them their livelihood in the life of the world , and raised some of them above others in rank that some of them may take labour from others ; and the mercy of thy lord is better thanthat they amass .
on the day when the punishment will envelop them , from above them , and from beneath their feet , he will say , “ taste what you used to do ! ”
said dawud , “ he is indeed being unjust to you in that he demands to add your ewe to his ewes ; and indeed most partners wrong one another , except those who believe and do good deeds – and they are very few ! ” thereupon dawud realised that we had tested him , so he sought forgiveness from his lord , and fell prostrate and inclined .
so they went on until they came to the people of a town . they asked its people for food , but they refused to extend them any hospitality . there they found a wall which was about to collapse , so he erected it . he said , ‘ had you wished , you could have taken a wage for it . ’
with it we grow for you gardens of date-palms and vines : in them have ye abundant fruits : and of them ye eat , -
midian , and moses had also called their prophets liars . i gave respite to the unbelievers , then sized them with torment . how terrible was that torment !
that the terminus is toward your lord ,
say : “ this is a tiding of tremendous import
and he turned his back and behaved arrogantly
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the immaculate book .
and he said ,  indeed , i gave preference to the love of goodover the remembrance of my lord until the sun disappeared into the curtain . 
indeed abraham was a whole community by himself , obedient to allah , exclusively devoted to him . and he was never one of those who associated others with allah in his divinity .
had we prescribed for them , : ‘ slayyour folks or leave your habitations , ’ they would not have done it except a few of them . and if they had done as they were advised , it would have been better for them and stronger in confirming .
that he did create in pairs , - male and female ,
o you who believe ! remember the favour of allah unto you when some people desiredto stretch out their hands against you , butwithheld their hands from you . so fear allah . and in allah let believers put their trust .
there is no one in the heavens and earth but that he comes to the most merciful as a servant .
 this is what was promised for you , - for every one who turnedin sincere repentance , who kept ,
and allah hath created the heavens and the earth with truth , and that every soul may be repaid what it hath earned . and they will not be wronged .
clear is your lord , the lord of might , of whatever they allege .
so the intercession of intercessors shall not avail them .
and they swore by allah their strongest oaths that if a warner came to them , they would be more guided thanone of thenations . but when a warner came to them , it did not increase them except in aversion .
the true kingship on that day belongs to the most gracious ; and that is hard for the disbelievers .
are they better or the people of tubba and those afore them ? we destroyed them ; verily they were culprits .
so when he had turned away from them and from those whom they worshipped besides allah , we gave him ishaqueand ya'qub , and each one of them we made a prophet .
but whoever brings evil—their faces will be tumbled into the fire . will you be rewarded except for what you used to do ?
except thosewho believe and do righteous deeds and remember allah often and defendafter they were wronged . and those who have wronged are going to know to whatreturn they will be returned .
for them is a torment in the life of this world , and certainly , harder is the torment of the hereafter . and they have no protector against allah .
before this , the book of moses was a guide and a blessing . this book confirms the torah . it is in the arabic language so that it may warn the unjust people , and give glad news to the righteous ones .
saying ,  we declare our belief in the lord of the universe ,
recite thou in the name of thy lord who hath created -
did we not soothe your heart ?
then we reduced him to the lowest of the low ,
 hewill forgive you of your sins and respite you to an appointed term . verily , the term of allah when it comes , can not be delayed , if you but knew . 
whatever is in the heavens and earth exalts allah , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
say : 'it has been revealed to me that a company of the jinn gave ear , then they said ,  we have indeed heard a koran wonderful ,
and they say ,  if we were to follow the guidance with you , we would be swept from our land .  have we not established for them a safe sanctuary to which are brought the fruits of all things as provision from us ? but most of them do not know .
so we wreaked our vengeance on them : now see what was the end of those who rejected !
, say ,  i am a mere mortal like you . i have received a revelation that your lord is the only one . so be up-right and obedient to him and seek forgiveness from him .
that you may not grieve for what escapes you , nor rejoice in what has come to you ; god loves not any man proud and boastful ,
and they became divided only after knowledge reached them , - through selfish envy as between themselves . had it not been for a word that went forth before from thy lord , to a term appointed , the matter would have been settled between them : but truly those who have inherited the book after them are in suspiciousdoubt concerning it .
verily god has enjoined justice , the doing of good , and the giving of gifts to your relatives ; and forbidden indecency , impropriety and oppression . he warns you so that you may remember .
this is so that the disbelievers among people given the book may know that they do not have any control over allah ’ s munificence , and that the munificence is in allah ’ s hand– he bestows to whomever he wills ; and allah is extremely munificent .
o muhammad , we have sent you only to proclaim good tidings and to give warning .
 verily , the hour is coming and my will is to keep it hidden that every person may be rewarded for that which he strives .
if youare looking for conquest , you certainly had a great chance . but if you were to give up such a desire , it would be better for you . if you again wage war against us , we will be ready for such a confrontation . your man-power will be of no help to you no matter how much you have ; god is with the believers .
we offered the trust to the heavens , and the earth , and the mountains , but they refused to bear it , and were afraid of it , and the human carried it . surely , he is a harmdoer , and ignorant .
and those who make unlawful to them and wish to free themselves from what they uttered , in that casethe freeing of a slave before they touch each other . that is an admonition to you . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
and why should we not rely upon allah while he has guided us to ourways . and we will surely be patient against whatever harm you should cause us . and upon allah let those who would relyrely . 
they said ,  o salih ! we had great hopes in you . do you forbid us to worship what our fathers worshipped ? we are in grave doubt , amounting to suspicion , concerning that to which you call us . 
would any of you like that he may own a garden of dates and grapes , with rivers flowing beneath it – in it are all kinds of fruits for him – and he reaches old age and has young children ; therefore a windstorm containing fire came to the garden , burning it ? this is how allah explains his verses to you , so that you may give thought .
if you speak loudly ; he has indeed knowledge of the secret and the hidden .
how will you comprehend what the day of judgement is ?
and the lord said to the angels :  i am with you ; go and strengthen the faithful . i shall fill the hearts of infidels with terror . so smite them on their necks and every joint , , 
iblis said :  my lord ! grant me respite till the day when they will be resurrected . 
even so we have appointed to every prophet an enemy among the sinners ; but thy lord suffices as a guide and as a helper .
and those whoseare lighter in the scale shall perish for violating our signs .
the intimate friends on that day will be hostile unto one another save the god-fearing .
this is news of the unknown we reveal to you , which neither you nor your people knew before . so endure with patience . the future is for those who keep away from evil and follow the straight path .
and the sun and the moon will be united .
those who deny the day of judgment
and had you seen when the angels will cause to die those who disbelieve , smiting their faces and their backs , and : taste the punishment of burning .
which sailed on under our supervision : a reward for him who had been shown ingratitude .
the army is defeated asthe confederates .
and he is the forgiving and loving one .
allah it is who hath raised the heavens without pillars that ye can see , then he established himself on the throne , and subjected the sun and the moon , each running unto a period determined . he disposeth the affair , and detaileth the signs , that haply of the meeting with your lord ye may be convinced .
the lord of moses and aaron '
but allah has been gracious to us and has protected us from the punishment of the burning wind .
if you have been wounded they too have suffered a wound . we cause this alternation of night and day in the affairs of men so that god may know those who believe , taking some as witnessfrom your ranks , for god does not like those who are unjust .
into the boiling water , then into the fire they are poured ;
who hath created me , and he guideth me .
those are they for whom is the worst of punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
the first house of god to be set up for men was at bakkah the blessed , a guidance for the people of the world .
warn those who deny the revelations of god and unjustly slay the prophets and those who call people to be just , that they will suffer a painful torment .
but he who repents , and believes , and does righteous deeds , may well be among the winners .
we sent a revelation to moses and his brother to build houses for their people in the pharaoh 's town and to build them facing one another.that therein they should pray and that moses should give the glad newsto the faithful ones .
those ! they are the infidels , the ungodly .
those who split up their religion , and becomesects , - each party rejoicing in that which is with itself !
but only those who repent and believe and act righteously will have their sins replaced by virtue ; god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it is he who created you . then some of you are faithless and some of you are faithful , and allah watches what you do .
verily we created man from a product of wet earth ;
he has prescribed for you the religion which he enjoined upon noah and which we revealed to you , and which we enjoined upon abraham and moses and jesus , commanding : “ establish this religion and do not split up regarding it. ” what you are calling to is very hard upon those who associate others with allah in his divinity . allah chooses for himself whomsoever he pleases and guides to himself whoever penitently turns to him .
indeed we have made it simple in your language , so that they may take admonition .
and among them is he who says , “ our lord , give us goodness in this world , and goodness in the hereafter , and protect us from the torment of the fire . ”
we made a covenant with adam before you , but he forgot , and we found him lacking in constancy .
god will admit those who believe and act righteously into gardens watered by flowing rivers . god does whatever he wills .
and likewise we elected for our cause and guided on to a straight way some of their forefathers and their offspring and their brethren .
and on that day you will see the guilty linked together in chains .
and they will never long for it , because of the evil deeds they have done in the past ; and allah knows the unjust , very well .
fellows of the garden shall be on that day in a goodly abode and a gocdly re pose .
and wed the singles among you , and those who are fit among your servants and maids . if they are poor , god will enrich them from his bounty . god is all-encompassing , all-knowing .
to us are known those of you who hasten forward , and those who lag behind .
surely he was one of our believing servants .
say , “ who rescues you from the calamities of the land and the sea – whom you call upon crying loudly and in whispers that , ‘ if we are saved from this we will surely be grateful ’ ? ”
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? in fact , they are not certain .
god blots out usury , but freewill offerings he augments with interest . god loves not any guilty ingrate .
 how can i have a son ,  she said ,  when no man has touched me , nor am i sinful ? 
and he will turn to his people , rejoicing !
said :  o my lord ! help me : for that they accuse me of falsehood ! 
nay ! on that day they will be entirely submissive .
verily , we created man of the best stature ,
or move during your prostration with the worshippers .
'what thrusted you into sakar ? '
see they not what is before them and what is behind them , of the heaven and the earth ? if we will , we shall sink the earth with them , or cause a piece of the heaven to fall upon them . verily , in this is a sign for every faithful believer that , and turns to allah .
indeed we shall inherit the earth and all that is on it , and only towards us will they return .
he will say , “ by god , you almost ruined me .
but he who is given his record behind his back , -
and we did not give them any books which they may read , nor did we send to them any herald of warning before you .
and if we had made it a non-arabic qur'an , they would have said ,  why are its verses not explained in detail ? is it a foreignand an arab ?  say ,  it is , for those who believe , a guidance and cure .  and those who do not believe - in their ears is deafness , and it is upon them blindness . those are being called from a distant place .
will have a most pleasing life .
maintain the weights with justice , and do not shorten the balance ! ’
but they hamstrung her . thensaid :  you have but three days to enjoy life in your homes . infallible is this promise .
and what loss have they if they had believed in allah and in the last day , and they spend out of what allah has given them for sustenance ? and allah is ever all-knower of them .
and they ascribe to allah that which they detest , and their tongues utter the lie that unto them shall be good ; undoubtedly unto them shall be the fire , and they will be hastened thereto .
and do not swallow up your property among yourselves by false means , neither seek to gain access thereby to the judges , so that you may swallow up a part of the property of men wrongfully while you know .
the evil of their actions will then become clear to them . the punishment they mocked will engulf them .
and when they returned to their own people , they would return jesting ;
what harm would have befallen them if they had believed in allah and the last day , and spent on charity what allah had bestowed upon them as sustenance ? for allah indeed has full knowledge of them .
but they said : 'lord , make the stages between our journeys longer ' so they wronged themselves ; so we made them news and we tore them utterly into pieces . surely , there are signs in this for every one who is patient , thankful .
the last shall be better for you than the first .
god will call the unbelievers on the day of judgment and ask them ,  where are your idols in which you had faith ?
and we brought near , there , the others .
so i swear by mawaqiof the stars .
he questions our resurrection of him , but has forgotten his own creation . he has said ,  who will give life to the bones which have become ashes ? 
he said : surely these are my guests , therefore do not disgrace me ,
why was it not that the believing men and women , when you heard it , thought good of their own people , and had said , “ this is a clear accusation ” ?
o you who believe ! take your precautions , and either go forthin parties , or go forth all together .
 tomorrow they will know who is the impudent liar !
and certainly haroun had said to them before : o my people ! you are only tried by it , and surely your lord is the beneficent allah , therefore follow me and obey my order .
and assuredly mocked were apostles before thee ; then i respited those who disbelieved ; thereafter took hold of them ; so of what wise hath been my requital .
who are certain that they are going to meet their lord , and that unto him they are going to return .
have the accounts of your predecessors not reached you : the people of noah , the ad , the thamud , and those who came after them - they whose number is not known to any except allah ? their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they thrust their hands in their mouths , and said :  we do surely reject the message you have brought , and we are in disquieting doubt about what you are summoning us to . 
then why do you not , if you are exempt from the reckoning and recompense
we inflicted punishment on them , but they humbled not themselves to their lord , nor do they submissively entreat ! -
he said : what ! shall i seek for you a god other than allah while he has made you excelcreated things ?
therefore fear allah as much as possible , and heed the commands , and obey , and spend in allah ’ s cause , for your own good ; and whoever is rescued from the greed of his own soul – is they who will be successful .
then let man look at his food , :
hastening to the inviter . the unbelievers shall say : this is a hard day .
the believers who left their homes , and strove for the cause of god and those who gave them refuge and helped them , are true believers . they will have forgivenessandhonorable provisions .
but none attains to this except those who are steadfast ; none attains to this except those endowed with mighty good fortune .
whereas the hereafter is better and more lasting .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will send you back on your heels , and you will turn backas losers .
that . and whoso hath retaliated with the like of that which he was made to suffer and then hathbeen wronged , allah will succour him . lo ! allah verily is mild , forgiving .
but they rejected noah , calling him a liar . so we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and made them successors , and drowned all those who had rejected our signs as false . consider , then , the fate of those who had been warned .
if you remain patient and god-fearing , and the enemy should fall upon you all of a sudden , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels clearly marked ! 
everyone upon the earth will perish ,
or were you witnesses when death approached jacob , when he said to his sons ,  what will you worship after me ?  they said ,  we will worship your god and the god of your fathers , abraham and ishmael and isaac - one god . and we are muslimsto him . 
to god belongs the kingship of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour takes place , on that day the falsifiers will lose .
within a fewyears time ; only for allah is the command , before and after ; and the believers will rejoice on that day .
if a man divorces her again , she becomes unlawful for himuntil she has married another man . then if he divorces her there is no harm if the two unite again if they think they will keep within the bounds set by god and made clear for those who understand .
but the most wretched shall avoid it ,
do the people reckon that they will be left to say 'we believe , ' and will not be tried ?
on it are fruits and palm-trees with sheathed clusters ,
say : 'believe in it , or believe not ; those who were given the knowledge before it when it is recited to them , fall down upon their faces prostrating ,
indeed the dead * do not listen to your call nor do the deaf * listen to your call , when they flee turning back .
besides this , there will be two other gardens .
so do not obey the deniers .
he shall presently call for death ,
'then say to them : ' allah 's is the conclusive argument . surely , had he willed , he would have guided you all to the truth .
i desire of them no provision , neither do i desire that they should feed me .
between them shall be a veil , and on the heights will be men who would know every one by his marks : they will call out to the companions of the garden ,  peace on you  : they will not have entered , but they will have an assurance .
then she conceived him and withdrew with him to a far-off place .
and for those who disbelieved in their lord is the punishment of hell , and wretched is the destination .
you have had a good example in them for whoever hopes for god and the last day . and whosoever turns away , surely god is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
and indeed , we have left thereof a sign , a clear sign ? unto a people who understand .
and he said unto him of the twain who he knew would be released : mention me in the presence of thy lord . but satan caused him to forget to mention it to his lord , so hestayed in prison for some years .
and we gave them clear proofs in the command ; so they did not differ except after the knowledge had come to them – due to jealousy among themselves ; indeed your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the matter in which they differ .
and enjoins piety ?
and when they saw them they would say , ‘ indeed those are the astray ! ’
in fact allah raised him towards himself ; and allah is almighty , wise .
'come forth betimes upon your tillage , if you would pluck ! '
though we had sent among them warners .
truly , to us is their return ;
do not be sorry for them , nor be distressed for what they devise .
he said , ‘ in it you will live , and in it you will die ; and from it you will be raised . ’
and we bestowed upon him of our mercy his brother aaron , a prophet .
and we called out to him , “ o ibrahim ! ”
and we set up over their hearts veils lest they understand it , and in their ears heaviness and when thou mentionest in reciting the qur'an thy lord alone , they turn backward as averters .
 we are your companions in this life and in the hereafter . therein you shall have all that your souls desire , and therein you shall have all that you ask for
they said : in allah we put trust . our lord ! oh , make us not a lure for the wrongdoing folk ;
but verily it is truth of assured certainty .
say ,  you who are jews , if you claim that you are favoured by god out of all people , then long for death , if you are truthful . 
thecrash !
like the behaviour of the people of fir'aunand those before them ; they belied our ayat , so allah seizedthem for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they argued with you about the truth after it had been made clear , as though they were being led to certain death while looking .
repel evil by what is better . we are aware of what they describe .
have you not seen he who argued with abraham about his lord that allah had given him the kingship ! when abraham said : 'my lord is he who revives , and causes to die ' he said : ' i revive , and cause to die ' abraham said : 'allah brings up the sun from the east ; so you bring it from the west ' then he who disbelieved became pale . allah does not guide the nation , the harmdoers .
said :  cast it down , o musa ! 
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth , and god encompasses everything .
say : allah gives you life , then he makes you die , then will he gather you to the day of resurrection wherein is no doubt , but most people do not know .
and are constant in their prayer ;
the unjust man will bite at his hand and say ,  would that i had stood by the messenger !
she desired him , and he desired her , had he not seen the proof of his lord . it was thus that we diverted evil and indecency away from him . he was one of our loyal servants .
and i will give them respite ; indeed my plan is very solid .
and if you tried to enumerate the favors of god , you will not be able to count them . god is forgiving and merciful .
indeed , those who believe and do righteous works , their lord will guide them for their belief , beneath them rivers will flow in gardens of bliss .
he said , ‘ the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , —should you have conviction . ’
it is not possible for all believers to go out . so a part of each sectionshould goin order that the others may acquire understanding of law and divinity , and warn their companions on return so that they may take heed for themselves .
zachariah prayed to god saying ,  lord , show me the evidence .  the lord replied ,  you must not speak to people for three days except with gestures . commemorate your lord often and glorify him in the early mornings and the evenings . 
and we caused to grow , over him , a spreading plant of the gourd kind .
and by the night when it is still , -
he will not be questioned as to that which he doeth , but they will be questioned .
those who do not answer the caller of allah can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor shall any one protect them other than him ; those are in clear error '
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve marching for war , then turn not your backs to them .
we sent to thamud their brother saleh .  o you people ,  said he ,  worship god , for you have no other god but he . clear proof has come to you already from your lord , and this she-camel of god is the token for you . leave her free to graze upon god 's earth , and do not molest her lest a grievous punishment should befall you .
who seeks to drive you from your land !  pharaoh said ,  what then do you advise ? 
to pharaoh and his chiefs : but these behaved insolently : they were an arrogant people .
most of their discussions do not contain any good , except of the one who enjoins charity or goodness or peace-making among people ; whoever does that to seek the pleasure of allah – we shall soon give him a great reward .
certainly we have drawn for mankind in this quran everyparable . indeed if you bring them a sign , the faithless will surely say , ‘ you are nothing but fabricators ! ’
so go forth with my servants by night ; surely you will be pursued :
“ we will bring down upon the people of this town a scourge from heaven , because of their wickedness . ”
splitter of the dawn , he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for calculation . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
vaults them over
enquire of the city wherein we were , and the caravan in which we approached ; surely we are truthful men  . '
and that this is my path , straight ; so do you follow it , and follow not divers paths lest they scatter you from his path . that then he has charged you with ; haply you will be godfearing . '
and the night as it settles .
and by oath of the saying of my prophet “ o my lord ! these people do not accept faith ! ”
and the day the hour appears the criminals will swear they had remained but an hour . thus they were deluded .
alif ; lam . mim .
and what cause have ye why ye should not spend in the cause of allah ? - for to allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth . not equal among you are those who spentand fought , before the victory , . those are higher in rank than those who spentand fought afterwards . but to all has allah promised a goodly . and allah is well acquainted with all that ye do .
o mankind ! keep your duty to your lord and fear a day when the parent will not be able to avail the child in aught , nor the child to avail the parent . lo ! allah 's promise is the very truth . let not the life of the world beguile you , nor let the deceiver beguile you , in regard to allah .
tell them about the guests of abraham .
who repent for their sins , worship god , praise him , travel through the land , kneel down and prostrate themselves in obedience to god , make others do good and prevent them from sins and abide by the laws of god , will receive a great reward . let this be glad news for the believer .
and obey allah and the messenger , that ye may find mercy .
and verily the hereafter will be better for thee than the present .
how is it that he has received guidance ? in fact , he is the most untruthfull and arrogant person  .
 by god ,  said they ,  you will never stop thinking of joseph till you are consumed or perish . 
to dwell therein . the promise of allah is true : and he is exalted in power , wise .
and they belied our revelations with strong belying .
or , were they created out of nothing ? or , were they their own creators ?
and of his signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the variation of your languages and complexions ; verily herein are signs for men of knowledge .
that is more likely that they will give testimony according to itsobjective , orthey would fear thatoaths might be taken after their oaths . and fear allah and listen ; and allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers- they are the sincere , and the witnesses , in the eyes of their lord : they shall have their reward and their light . but those who reject allah and deny our signs , - they are the companions of hell-fire .
on that day true sovereignty will belong to the all-beneficent , and it will be a hard day for the faithless .
and the divorced women shall keep themselves in waiting for three courses nor is it allowed unto them that they should hide that which allah hath created in their wombs , if they believe in allah and the last day . and their husbands are more entitled to their restorations during the same , if they desire rectification . unto women is due likes that which is due from women reputably . and for men is a degree over them . and allah is mighty , wise .
the day when the horn shall be blown . on that day , we shall assemble all the sinners with blued eyes ,
and fruit abundant .
and the earth brings out its loads .
in order to benefit you and your cattle .
and yusuf 's brothers came and went in to him , and he knew them , while they did not recognize him .
a man came running from the farthest part of the city saying ,  my people , follow the messengers .
have you not seen how those who dispute the revelations of god , turn away from truth to falsehood ?
beholdest thou not that allah hath subjected to himself for you whatsoever is on the earth and the ships running in the sea by his command ? and he with holdeth the heaven that it fall not on the earth save by his leave . verily allah is , unto mankind , clement , merciful .
you have no control over them .
, say to them ,  travel through the land and see how he has begun the creation and how he will invent the next life . god has power over all things .
those of the children of israel who took to unbelief have been cursed by the tongue of david and jesus , son of mary , for they rebelled and exceeded the bounds of right .
now that we have listened to the guidance , we believe in it . whoever believes in his lord does not need to fear loss or oppression .
we narrate their story to you in all truth . they were a few young men who believed in their lord ; so we gave them greater guidance .
and when allah alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who believe not in the hereafter are filled with disgustbesides him- son of maryam , 'uzair , an angel , a pious man , a jinn , or any other creature even idols , graves of religious people , saints , priests , monks , etc . ] are mentioned , behold , they rejoice !
this is a reminder , and indeed for the cautious is a fine return ,
we have made devilish enemies for every prophet from among people and jinn . they whisper attractive but and deceitful words to each other . had your lord wanted , the devils would not have seduced people . keep away from them and the falsehood which they invent .
and the elders among them went forth saying : “ go ahead and be steadfast in adhering to your deities . what is being said is with a design . ”
but turn away from them , and say  peace !  but soon shall they know !
they had naught against them save that they believed in allah , the mighty , the owner of praise ,
when your lord said to the angels : ' i am placing on the earth a caliph , ' they replied : 'will you put there who corrupts and sheds blood , when we exalt your praises and sanctify you ? ' he said : ' i know what you do not know '
and they shall call , ' o
or you have a garden of date palms and vines , and cause streams to flow plentifully in the midst of them ;
the jews say , 'ezra is the son of god ' ; the christians say , 'the messiah is the son of god . ' that is the utterance of their mouths , conforming with the unbelievers before them . god assail them ! how they are perverted !
the holy month for the holy month ; holy things demand retaliation . whoso commits aggression against you , do you commit aggression against him like as he has committed against you , and fear you god , and know that god is with the godfearing .
some of them find fault with thee touching the freewill offerings ; if they are given a share of them they are well-pleased , but if they are given none then they are angry .
who should inherit me and inherit from the children of yaqoub , and make him , my lord , one in whom thou art well pleased .
or do they say , “ he invented it himself ” ? say , “ if i invented it myself , there is nothing you can do to protect me from god . he knows well what you are engaged in . he is sufficient witness between me and you . he is the forgiver , the merciful . ”
said ,  what prevented you from prostrating when i commanded you ?  said ,  i am better than him . you created me from fire and created him from clay . 
when they listen to what has been sent down to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears , because of the truth they recognize . they say ,  our lord , we believe , so count us among those who bear witness .
let not those who are niggardly with what god has granted them out of his bounty think that it is good for them . indeed , it is evil for them . what they are niggardly about shall be hung about their necks like a collar on the day of resurrection . it is god who will inherit the heavens and the earth : god is aware of all that you do .
who determines the nature , and guided it accordingly ;
truly , did he go about among his people , rejoicing !
and that it is hewho causes death and gives life ;
if you ask them who it is that has created the heavens and the earth and subjugated the sun and the moon , they will say ,  god .  how then are they turned away ?
thy lord doth know that thou standest forthnigh two-thirds of the night , or half the night , or a third of the night , and so doth a party of those with thee . but allah doth appoint night and day in due measure he knoweth that ye are unable to keep count thereof . so he hath turned to you : read ye , therefore , of the qur'an as much as may be easy for you . he knoweth that there may beamong you in ill-health ; others travelling through the land , seeking of allah 's bounty ; yet others fighting in allah 's cause , read ye , therefore , as much of the qur'an as may be easy ; and establish regular prayer and give regular charity ; and loan to allah a beautiful loan . and whatever good ye send forth for your souls ye shall find it in allah 's presence , - yea , better and greater , in reward and seek ye the grace of allah : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
if thou wert to question them , 'who created the heavens and the earth ? ' they would be sure to reply , 'they were created by , the exalted in power , full of knowledge ' ; -
and they say : what aileth this messengerthat he eateth food and walketh in the markets ? why is not an angel sent down unto him , to be a warner with him .
so if you find them in battle , kill them in a manner which makes those behind them scamper back , in the hope that they may learn a lesson .
and these honorable scribes know whatever you do .
or possess they the unseen so that they can writedown ?
pharaoh went back and concerted all his stratagem and returned for the encounter .
what will explain to you what the ascent is ?
'there were some foolish ones among us , who used to utter extravagant lies against allah ;
so glorify the name of your lord , the magnificent
there is no good in most of their secret talk , except in the case of those who enjoin charity and kindness , or reconciliation between people . if anyone does that , seeking the pleasure of god , we will give him an immense reward .
neither can a people anticipate its term , nor delay it .
verily those who disbelieve and hinder others from the way of allah and then die as infidels , allah shall by no means forgive them .
whoever is guided is guided only forhis own soul , and whoever goes astray , goes astray only to its detriment . no bearer shall bear another ’ s burden . we do not punishuntil we have sentan apostle .
in this way we showed abraham our kingdom of the heavens and the earth , so that he might have certainty of faith .
the extravagant are brethren of the devils , and the devil is ever ungrateful to his lord .
as for those who retaliate after being wronged , there is no ground for action against them .
and of those whom we have created are a people who guide with the truth and thereby they do justice .
and he fails that corrupts it !
the polytheists will now say , “ had allah willed , we would not have ascribed partnersnor would have our forefathers , nor would we have forbidden anything ” ; similarly those before them had denied , till the time they tasted our punishment ; say , “ do you have any knowledge so you can offer it to us ? you follow only assumptions and only make guesses . ”
and indeed we settled the children of israel in an honourable dwelling place , and provided them with good things , and they differed not until the knowledge came to them . verily , allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection in that in which they used to differ .
again , ruin seize him , how did he hatch a scheme ?
moses answered ,  your lord says , she should be a heifer which has not been yoked to plough the land or water the fields , a heifer free from any blemish .   now you have told us the truth ,  they answered , and they sacrificed it , though they would rather not have done it .
say , ,  praise be to allah , and peace upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better or what they associate with him ? 
then he showed him the greatest sign .
there is no fault in you , if you divorce women while as yet you have not touched them nor appointed any marriage-portion for them ; yet make provision for them , the affluent man according to his means , and according to his means the needy man , honourably -- an obligation on the good-doers .
so today those who believe shall laugh at the unbelievers ;
have they not travelled through the land and seen what was the end of those who have gone before them ? they were stronger than them and made a more impressive mark upon the land , yet god destroyed them for their sins , they had no one to defend them against him ,
it does not befit the majesty of god that he should beget a son . glory be to him ! he is far above that : when he decrees something , he says only ,  be !  and it is .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , and humble themselves before their lord—these are the inhabitants of paradise , where they will abide forever .
they measure not god with his true measure ; surely god is all-strong , all-mighty .
the revelation of the bookis from the lord of the 'alaminin which there is not doubt !
if we had caused this qur'an to descend upon a mountain , thouverily hadst seen it humbled , rent asunder by the fear of allah . such similitudes coin we for mankind that haply they may reflect .
and it is he who has releasedthe two seas , one fresh and sweet and one salty and bitter , and he placed between them a barrier and prohibiting partition .
i swear by the receding stars ,
then glorify your lord with his praise and seek his forgiveness . he is always ready to accept repentance .
other messengers were mocked before you but i respited the unbelievers , then i seized them . and how was my retribution !
we are the one who give life and death , and to us will be the destination .
it is he who forms you in the wombs however he wills . there is no deity except him , the exalted in might , the wise .
o ye who believe ! fear allah and be with those who are true .
indeed in the alternation of night and day , and whatever allah has created in the heavens and the earth , there are surely signs for a people who are godwary .
and certainly we gave the book to musa , but it has been differed about , and had not a word already gone forth from your lord , judgment would certainly have been given between them ; and most surely they are in a disquieting doubt about it .
whoever intercedes for a good cause has a share in it , and whoever intercedes for an evil cause shares in its burdens . god keeps watch over everything .
say , ‘ i do not say to you that i possess the treasuries of allah , nor do i know the unseen , nor do i say to you that i am an angel . i follow only what is revealed to me. ’ say , ‘ are the blind one and the seer equal ? so do you not reflect ? ’
is there a malady in their hearts , or they are deluded , or afraid that god and his prophet would be unjust in dealing with them ? not so ; they are themselves unjust .
and we sent not down upon his people , after him , any host out of heaven ; neither would we send any down .
your companion has neither strayed nor is he deluded ;
but your wishing will not avail unless allah , the lord of the universe , so wishes .
as for those who disbelieve and repel from god ’ s path and from the sacred mosque—which we have designated for all mankind equally , whether residing therein or passing through—and seek to commit sacrilege therein—we will make him taste of a painful punishment .
and at dawn , they would pray for pardon .
did he not find thee an orphan , and shelter thee ?
thus we have made some of them a means for testing others so that they should say : 'are these theones among us upon whom allah has bestowed his favour ? ' yes , does allah not know well who are the thankful ?
like the people of noah before them , who were surely oppressors and rebellious ;
and you will be requited only for what you used to do
but they turned away , so we unleashed against them the flood of the dam ; and we substituted their two gardens with two gardens of bitter fruits , thorny shrubs , and meager harvest .
when we said to the angels ,  prostrate yourselves to adam  , they prostrated themselves , but not iblis : he refused .
but we send down the angels only to bring justice and then they will not be reprieved .
so they can not listen to the high assembly , for they are pelted from every side .
and on that day there shall be scowling faces ,
then when our decree came to pass , we turned the upside thereof downward , and we rained thereon stones of baked clay , piled up .
he said : o my lord ! judge thou with truth ; and our lord is the beneficent allah , whose help is sought against what you ascribe .
we shall set up just scales on the day of resurrection so that none will be wronged in the least . , even if it be the weight of a grain of mustard seed . we shall suffice as reckoners .
he sends down waterfrom the sky , and the valleys flow according to their measure , but the flood bears away the foam that mounts up to the surface , andfrom thatwhich they heat in the fire in order to make ornaments or utensils , rises a foam like unto it , thus does allahshow forth truth and falsehood . then , as for the foam it passes away as scum upon the banks , while that which is for the good of mankind remains in the earth . thus allah sets forth parables .
the night of power is better than a thousand months ;
when they are told : “ follow what allah has revealed , ” they say : “ we will rather follow that which we have found our forefathers following. ” even though satan might invite them to the chastisement of the blazing fire ?
enter into it , then bearpatiently , or do not bearpatiently , it is the same to you ; you shall be requited onlywhat you did .
indeed , there are signs in the heavens and earth for believers ,
o children of adam ! dress properly at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be excessive . he does not love the excessive .
surelythose who love that scandal should circulate respecting those who believe , they shall have a grievous chastisement in this world and the hereafter ; and allah knows , while you do not know .
do they see nothing in the government of the heavens and the earth and all that allah hath created ? that it may well be that their terms is nigh drawing to an end ? in what message after this will they then believe ?
andthe day when we raise up of every nation a witness , then there is no leave for disbelievers , nor are they allowed to make amends .
who are humble in their prayers ;
their gains are only a means of enjoyment in this life . however , their destination is hell , the terrible dwelling .
and this is our argument , which we gave ibrahim against his people ; we raise to high ranks whomever we will ; indeed your lord is wise , all knowing .
and when they see a miracle , they mock
they said : then bring himbefore the people 's eyes that they may testify .
and o prophet , enjoin the believing men to restrain their gaze and guard their private parts . this is a more righteous way for them : allah has knowledge of what they do .
thamud ,
and a tongue , and a pair of lips ,
being on the higher horizon .
then if you slide back after the clear signshave come to you , then know that allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
woe to the falsehood-mongers , -
they said :  who has done this to our gods ? surely he is one of the wrong-doers . 
and persevere for your lord 's sake .
he said , ' i am going to my lord ; he will guide me .
and firaun said , “ o court members ! i do not know of any other god for you , except myself ; therefore , o haman , build a lofty palace for me by baking concrete in order that i may sneak a look at the god of moosa – and according to me , he is indeed a liar . ”
and if they violate their oaths after their covenant and revile your religion , fight those leaders of infidelity-verily no oaths will hold in their case that haply they may desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but cometh unto the beneficent as a slave .
‘ that you let the descendants of israel go with us . ’ ”
and remember thee oft .
and he it is who originates the creation , then reproduces it , and it is easy to him ; and his are the most exalted attributes in the heavens and the earth , and he is the mighty , the wise .
the thunder exalts his praise , and so are the angels are in awe of him . he looses the thunderbolts and smites whosoever he will . yet they dispute aboutallah who is mighty in power .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? aye , he verily is able to do all things .
and , indeed we gave musathe guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the scripture ] ,
then if they turn away , proclaim , “ i have proclaimed a war against you on equal terms ; and what do i know whether the promise which is given to you , is close or far ? ”
pay heed ! indeed upon the friends of allah is neither any fear , nor any grief .
we followed them with jesus son of mary , to confirm that which was before him of the torah , and we gave him the evangel containing guidance and light , confirming what was before it of the torah , and as guidance and advice for the godwary .
father ! indeed a knowledge has already come to me , which has not come to you . so follow me that i may guide you to a right path .
but for those who fear their lord are gardens beneath which rivers flow – abiding in it for ever – the hospitality from their lord ; and that which is with allah , is the best for the righteous .
say - for allah 's is the final argument - had he willed he could indeed have guided all of you .
and no messenger would come to them except that they ridiculed him .
to him is referred the knowledge of the hour : no date-fruit comes out of its sheath , nor does a female conceivenor bring forth the day thatwill propound to them the ,  where are the partners ( ye attributed to me ?  they will say ,  we do assure thee not one of us can bear witness ! 
when the unbelievers behold thee , they take thee only for mockery : 'ha , is this the one who makes mention of your gods ? ' yet they in the remembrance of the all-merciful are unbelievers .
which none denieth save each criminal transgressor ,
by oath of the clear qur ’ an .
he causes the break of day , and has made the night for rest and he made the sun and the moon to a precise measure . that is the measure determined by the all mighty and the all knowing .
when the messengers came unto them from before them and from behind them , saying , 'serve none but god , ' they said , 'had our lord willed , surely he would have sent down angels ; so we disbelieve in the message you were sent with . '
if they deny you—before them the people of noah , and aad , and thamood also denied .
then we delivered him and his household save his wife : we destined hers to be of the lingerers .
and he made it a word lasting among his posterity that haply they should return .
they said ,  we are missing the measure of the king . and for he who produces it isa camel 's load , and i am responsible for it . 
do the sick at heart imagine that god will not bring to light their malice ?
no part of the matter is thine , whether he turns towards them again , or chastises them ; for they are evildoers .
those who listen to the word , and follow the bestin it : those are the ones whom allah has guided , and those are the ones endued with understanding .
the haughty ones remarked . 'most certainly we disbelieve in that which you believe . '
before him noah cried out to us , and we heard his prayer . we saved him and all his household from a great distress .
and our fore-fathers of yore ? ”
nor will i worship those whom you have worshipped ;
and they who believe and whose seed follow them in faith , we cause their seed to join them , and we deprive them of nought of theirwork . every man is a pledge for that which he hath earned .
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
the lord of the two easts , the lord of the two wests .
and remember allah on the days numbered . then whosoever hastenoth in two days on him is no sin , and whosoever delayeth , on him is no sin : this for him : who feareth . so fear allah , and know that verily unto him shall ye be gathered .
he hath no partner . this am i commanded , and i am first of those who surrender .
and she , in whose house he was , sought to seduce him , she closed the doors and said :  come on , o you .  he said :  i seek refuge in allah ! truly , heis my master ! he made my stay agreeable ! . verily , the zalimunwill never be successful . 
said :  o moses , i raised you above all men by sending my messages and speaking to you ; so receive what i give you , and be grateful . 
and who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , or cries lies to the truth when it comes to him ? what , is there not in gehenna a lodging for the unbelievers ?
there will be no one among the people of the book who will not believein himbefore their deaths . on the day of judgment , will testify against them .
the people of noah , who lived before them , had also rejected . they rejected our servant and said ,  he is an insane person so let us drive him away  .
or has something been guaranteed by any of those whom they associate with allah in his divinity ? ” if so , let them bring forth their associates , if they are truthful .
o ye who believe ! avoid much suspicion ; verily some suspicion is a sin . and espy not , nor backbite one another : would any of you love to eat the flesh of his dead brother ? ye detest that . and fear allah verily allah is relenting , merciful .
it is not for allah to take a son ! exaltations to him ! when he decrees a thing he only says : 'be ' and it is .
gardens of eden with gates open wide to them ,
we therefore buried him and his house into the earth ; so he had no group to help save him from allah ; nor could he take revenge .
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? he could have kept it motionless if he liked . yet we make the sun its pilot to show the way .
and indeed , your lord - he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
and they attribute to god what they themselves dislike , while their tongues utter the lie that theirs is the goodness . without a doubt , for them is the fire , and they will be neglected .
saying : o our father ! we went racing one with another , and left joseph by our things , and the wolf devoured him , and thou believest not our saying even when we speak the truth .
no , indeed , he has brought the truth , and confirmed the messengers .
tell them plainly :  this is my way : i call you to allah , on the basis of clear perception - both i and those who follow me . allah - glory be to him - is free of every imperfection . i have nothing to do with those who associate others with allah in his divinity . 
but whosoever is given his record behind his back ,
but when he reached it , a voice called out :  blessed is he who is in the fire and all around it . praised be god , the lord of all the worlds .
say , “ i was prohibited from worshiping those you invoke besides god , now that clear revelations have come to me from my lord ; and i was commanded to submit to the lord of the worlds . ”
and , for what your tongues describe , do not utter the lie , this is lawful and this is unlawful , in order to forge a lie against allah ; surely those who forge the lie against allah shall not prosper .
he sends the angels with the spirit to carry his orders to whichever of his servants he wants so that they would warn people that he is the only god and that people must have fear of him .
he said ,  my lord , then reprieve me until the day they are resurrected . 
solomon said :  set the throne before her casually , and let us see whether she gets to the truth or is one of those who are not guided to what is right . 
then we gave moses the book , completingon him who is virtuous , and as an elaboration of all things , and as a guidance and mercy , so that they may believe in the encounter with their lord .
and those who preserve their chastity
enjoyment in this world ; then to us is their return ; then we will make them taste the severe punishment because they used to disbelieve
 and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgment .
and indeed we sent nooh towards his people – he therefore said , “ o my people ! worship allah , you do not have any other god except him ; so do you not fear ? ”
every soul shall taste death , and to us you shall be returned .
verily your lord is allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then established himself on the throne , making the night cover the day , seeking it swiftly , and created the sun and the moon and the stars subjected to service by his command . lo ! his is the creation and the command . blessed is allah , the lord of the worlds .
and if yecall them to the guidance they hear not ; and thouseest them looking toward thee , but they see not .
who have been sent to you . our only duty is to preach clearly to you  .
those who purify their souls will certainly have everlasting happiness
those who , if we established them in the land , will establish the prayers and pay the obligatory charity , order with honor and forbid dishonor , and to allah is the end of all affairs .
andthose who reject our communications and turn away from them haughtily -- these are the inmates of the fire they shall abide in it .
near it is the paradise of abode .
but as for him who believes and acts righteously , his will be a goodly reward and we shall enjoin upon him only mild commands . 
and upon them and on the ships you are carried .
that it is he who brings laughter and tears ;
and you can not guide the blind away from their error . you will only make hear those who believe in our verses so they are muslims .
verily i have set my countenance towards him who hath created the heavens and the earth , upright , and am not of the associaters .
and made his progeny from a quintessence of the nature of a fluid despised :
and they said , “ these cattle and crops are forbidden ; only those whom we wish can eat them ” – in their opinion – and some cattle are those which they have forbidden riding upon , and some cattle over which they do not mention the name of allah while slaughtering – all this is fabricating lies against allah ; he will soon repay them for their fabrications .
we recite to you some of the story of moses and the pharaoh for a genuine purpose , and for the benefit of the believing people .
and they have led many astray . : 'allah , do not increase the harmdoers except in error '
this is so ! and for the taghun , will be an evil final return ,
confer on me a worthy repute among the posterity ,
say , ‘ to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ to allah . he has made mercy incumbent upon himself . he will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , in which there is no doubt . those who have ruined their souls will not have faith . ’
the one who was released said , having remembered after a time , “ i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me out . ”
unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and unto allah all things are returned .
ha-mim .
he will be far away from the most pious .
relate in the bookmary , when she withdrew from her family to a place in the east .
the'aad belied the sent ones .
he is only a man in whom is a madness , so watch him for a while .
the day they will hear the blastin truth . that is the day of emergence .
but to the learned among them , and the believers who affirm what has been revealed to you and was revealed to those before you , and to those who fulfil their devotional obligations , who pay the zakat and believe in god and the last day , we shall give a great reward .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them , so serve him and be patient in his service . do you know any one equal to him ?
and proclaim the bounty of your lord .
it is not for the prophet and those who have believed to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even if they were relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are companions of hellfire .
those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a lie that he made up , and others have helped him at it. ” they have committed an injustice and a perjury .
as well as many other signs , as by the starsfind direction .
and what will make you know what it is ?
and showed him two highways ?
if you are killed in the cause of god , or die—forgiveness and mercy from god are better than what they hoard .
god , the self-sufficient one .
verily your lord is immensely mighty , most compassionate .
but those who are pious and obedient to their lord , will have gardens with streams of running water where they will abide as guests of god ; and what is with god is best for the pious .
but those who have been promised a good reward by us will be kept far away from hell --
or have they other deities who have ordained for them a religion to which allah has not consented ? but if not for the decisive word , it would have been concluded between them . and indeed , the wrongdoers will have a painful punishment .
have they not seen the earth , how much of every fruitful kind we make to grow therein ?
those who believe and do good works shall be admitted among the righteous .
but they belied him , so the earthquake seized them , and when morning came , they were found fallen crouched in their dwellings , dead .
he said ,  both you and your fathers have certainly been in error . 
and they sought a decision , and every stubborn rebel was destroyed .
in a preserved tablet .
such is the fact . and whoso venerates the sanctity of all that have been ordained as symbols of allah surely does so because it is part of the true piety of the hearts .
were we then fatigued with the first creation ? yet are they in doubt with regard to a new creation .
and the most unfortunate one will avoid it ,
those shall be rewarded with sublime abodes for their patience and steadfastness , and they shall be met there with greetings and ‘ peace , ’
god is the light of the heavens and the earth . a metaphor for his light is a niche in which there is a lamp placed in a glass . the glass is like a shining star which is lit from a blessed olive tree that is neither eastern nor western . its oil almost lights up even though it has not been touched by the fire . it is light upon light . god guides to his light whomever he wants . god uses various metaphors . he has the knowledge of all things .
they are in ranks with allah . allah sees what they do .
so howwill it be when the angels remove their souls , striking at their faces and their backs !
the infidels should not think that they can bypass . surely they can not get away .
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
and they appoint for that which they knew not a portion of that wherewith we have provided them by allah ! ye will surely be questioned regarding that which ye have been fabricating .
that day all information will be withheld from them , so they will not question one another .
and if a woman fears from her husband contempt or evasion , there is no sin upon them if they make terms of settlement between them - and settlement is best . and present insouls is stinginess . but if you do good and fear allah - then indeed allah is ever , with what you do , acquainted .
:  he is only a man possessed : waitwith him for a time . 
then he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
they said , “ woe to us—we were indeed domineering .
he will forgive you your sins and admit you into gardens underneath which rivers flow , and to dwelling-places goodly in gardens of eden ; that is the mighty triumph ;
ta sin mim .
such was the rampart that gog and magog could not scale , nor could they pierce it .
they shall enter the gardens of eden , where they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and with pearls , and there , their robes shall be of silk .
ibrahim was not a jew nor a christian but he wasupright , a muslim , and he was not one of the polytheists .
we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and gave them a refuge on a hillside where there was a hollow and a spring .
but among men there are some who spend their time in idle diversions only to lead people astray from the path of god , and without knowledge , hold it up to ridicule : for such there is a humiliating punishment in store .
and when the wild beasts are herded together ,
the exalter of ranks , the lord of the throne . he causeth the spirit of his command upon whom he will of his slaves , that he may warn of the day of meeting ,
we send not the angels down except with the truth , and in that case , theywould have no respite !
believers ! if you fear allah he will grant you a criterion and will cleanse you of your sins and forgive you . allah is lord of abounding bounty .
o woe is me ! would that i had not taken such a one for a friend !
and we sent noah and abraham , and established in their line prophethood and revelation : and some of them were on right guidance . but many of them became rebellious transgressors .
just because he has wealth and sons ,
thinks he that none can overcome him ?
say , ‘ he is the all-beneficent ; we have faith in him , and in him do we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ’
as we have sent a messenger from your own people to show you evidence about me , to purify you from sins , to teach you the book , give you wisdom and instruct you in that which you did not know ,
whatever allah grants to men ofmercy , there is none to withhold it , and what he withholds there is none to send it forth after that , and he is the mighty , the wise
on that day , they will share in the punishment .
by the wise koran ,
men too , and beasts and cattle -- diverse are their hues . even so only those of his servants fear god who have knowledge ; surely god is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
and he drew out his hand , and behold ! it was white to all beholders !
he quickeneth and giveth death , and unto him ye will be returned .
say thou : o people of the book ! what is it that ye persecute us for save that we believe in allah and in that which hath been sent down unto us and that which hath been sent down aforetime ? and most of you are transgressors .
they celebrate his praises night and day , nor do they ever flag or intermit .
when the earth will be shaken with a mighty shaking ,
a sending down from the lord of all being .
surely we revealed the message , and we will surely preserve it .
and we caused a gourd tree to grow over him .
then they will be toppled into it , together with the seducers .
this is the punishment for what your hands committed -- for , god never does the least wrong to his servants . 
o you who have believed , do not betray allah and the messenger or betray your trusts while you know .
hell fire will become visible for those who would see it .
say ,  for you is the appointment of a dayyou will not remain thereafter an hour , nor will you precede . 
what are they waiting for – except the last day , that it may suddenly come upon them while they are unaware ?
no one who carries a burden bears another 's load ; and even if the burdened soul cry out for help none will carry the least of its burden , however close a relative it may be . you can only warn those who fear their lord in secret and fulfil their devotional obligations . whoever grows in goodness does so for himself . to god is the journeying back .
a marital relation can only be resumed after the first and second divorce , otherwise it must be continued with fairness or terminated with kindness . it is not lawful for you to take back from women what you have given them unless you are afraid of not being able to observe god 's law . in this case , it would be no sin for her to pay a ransom to set herself free from the bond of marriage . these are the laws of god . do not transgress against them ; those who do so are unjust .
and whosoever findeth not a slave to free on him is the fasting for two months in succession before the twain touch each other , and on him who is not able to do so is the feeding of sixty needy ones . that is in order that ye may believe in allah and his apostle ; and these are the ordinances of allah . and for the infidels is a torment afflictive .
they wish to extinguish the light of god by uttering blasphemies ; but god will not have it so , for he wills to perfect his light , however the unbelievers be averse .
do not obey the faithless and the hypocrites , and disregard their torments , and put your trust in allah , and allah suffices as trustee .
those who do not believe in allah 's communications , surely allah will not guide them , and they shall have a painful punishment .
and waymarks ; and by the stars they are guided .
ta . sin . these are the verses of the qur'an and a book luminous .
these are the revelations of god which we recite to you in all truth , for you are truly one of the messengers .
surely your lord is allah , who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then established himself on the throne , governing all affairs of the universe . none may intercede with him except after obtaining his leave . such is allah , your lord ; do therefore serve him . will you not take heed ?
when you recite the qur'an , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ;
on seeing them you would fancy them to be awake though they were asleep ; and we caused them to turn their sides to their right and to their left , and their dog sat stretching out its forelegs on the threshold of the cave . had you looked upon them you would have certainly fled away from them , their sight filling you with terror .
some of them will believe in it , some will not . your lord knows the transgressors well .
o ye who believe ! on you resteth the case of yourselves ; it can hurt you not as to whosoever strayeth so long as ye keep yourselves guided . unto allah is the return of you all ; then he shall declare unto you that which ye were wont to work .
did we not widen your bosom ?
nay , but the record of the vile is in sijjin -
do they have any associateswho have laid down for them a way pertaining to faith which allah did not sanction ? but for the fact that a decree had already been made , the matter between them would have been decided once and for all . surely a grievous chastisement awaits the wrong-doers .
do they then wait for aught but the hour that it should come to them all of a sudden ? now indeed the tokens of it havecome , but how shall they have their reminder when it comes on them ?
men whom neither trafficking nor bargaining diverteth from the remembrance of allah and the establishment of the prayer and the giving of the poor-rate , fearing a day whereon upset will be the hearts and sights .
therefore listen not to the unbelievers , but strive against them with the utmost strenuousness , with the .
and do not falter in the pursuit of the enemy . if you are aching , they are aching as you are aching , but you expect from god what they can not expect . god is knowledgeable and wise .
and yet they had already covenanted with allah not to turn their backs , and a covenant with allah mustbe answered for .
this is jesus , the son of mary ; and this is the truth about him concerning which they are in doubt .
other than god ? can they save you or even save themselves ? 
and when they opened their bags , they found their money had been returned to them . they said :  o our father ! whatcan we desire ? this , our money has been returned to us , so we shall getfood for our family , and we shall guard our brother and add one more measure of a camel 's load . this quantity is easy . 
for the fellows on the right hand .
and we rained down on them a rain . then see what was the end of the mujrimun .
truly the righteous will be in bliss :
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
allah is my lord and your lord , therefore , worship him . this is the straight path  '
that it is he who destroyed the former ‘ ad ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news ;
as for those who rejected our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
: “ this is because while you were on earth you took delight in untruth and exulted in it .
nor were the people of the scripture divided until after the clear proof came unto them .
and hold firmly to the rope of allah all together and do not become divided . and remember the favor of allah upon you - when you were enemies and he brought your hearts together and you became , by his favor , brothers . and you were on the edge of a pit of the fire , and he saved you from it . thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may be guided .
whom no human has touched before , nor jinn .
god alternates the night and the day -- truly , in this there is a lesson for men of insight .
bring us our fathers , if you speak truly ! '
or have they an ilahother than allah ? glorified be allah from all that they ascribe as partners
have you not considered those who left their homes in many thousands , fearing death ? allah said to them ,  die  ; then he restored them to life . and allah is full of bounty to the people , but most of the people do not show gratitude .
they said , “ glory be to you ! we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . it is you who are the knowledgeable , the wise . ”
allah sets forthparable of two men : one of them dumb , with no power of any sort ; a wearisome burden is he to his master ; whichever way be directs him , he brings no good : is such a man equal with one who commands justice , and is on a straight way ?
surely , the people who are nearest to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
they swore their strongest oaths by allah that if a warner came to them , they would follow his guidance better than anyof the peoples : but when a warner came to them , it has only increased their flight , -
if you enumerate allah ’ s blessings , you will not be able to count them . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful ,
do they not see the birds above them flying wings spread out or folded ? nothing holds them aloft but god . all things are within his purview .
they have set up jinns as associates with god , even though he created them ! they have even dared , in their ignorance , to attribute sons and daughters to him . hallowed be he and exalted far above what they ascribe to him ,
and pharaoh caused a proclamation to be made among his people saying : o my people ! is not mine the sovereignty of egypt and these rivers flowing under me ? can ye not then discern ?
have you not seen those who have established friendship with the people who are subject to the wrath of god ? they do not belong to you nor you to them , yet they knowingly try to prove their point by using false oaths .
is in the houses that god has declared to be highly respected and his name be mentioned therein in glory in the morning and evening
so persevere with becoming patience .
surely this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord ; so fear me . '
as a favor and a blessing from god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
he said , “ then get out of here , for you are an outcast ” .
is it falsified gods , instead of god , that you want ?
o you who believe ! say notra'ina but say unzurnaand hear . and for the disbelievers there is a painful torment .
in replacing you with your likes , and transforming you into what you do not know .
and we relate to you all the accounts of noble messengers , in order to steady your heart with it ; and in this the truth has come to you , and for the muslims a preaching and advice .
o prophet , fear allah and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . indeed , allah is ever knowing and wise .
“ this is on account of what your hands have forwarded , and because god is not unjust towards the creatures . ”
and they serve , apart from god , what neither profits them nor hurts them ; and the unbeliever is ever a partisan against his lord .
the messiah disdaineth not that he should be a bondman of allah , nor do the angels brought near . and whosoever disdaineth serving him and stiff-necked , anon he shall gather them all unto him .
he said ,  they are close upon my tracks , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you be pleased . 
believers , do not advance before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . verily allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
lo ! you are those who have argued for them in the life of this world , but who will argue for them on the day of resurrection against allah , or who will then be their defender ?
wherefor , when ye heard it , said ye not : it is not for us to speak of this . glory be to thee ! this is awful calumny .
god said :  we shall strengthen your arm with your brother , and give you power with our signs and give you authority , so that they will not be able to harm you . both of you and your followers will be victorious . 
were any soul that has done wrong to possess whatever there is on the earth , it would surely offer it for ransom . they will hide their remorse when they sight the punishment ; and judgement will be made between them with justice and they will not be wronged .
and in the tribe of a ’ ad , when we sent a dry windstorm upon them .
if you have any stratagems , try them out against me ! ’
woe unto every slandering traducer ,
a drink will be passed round among them from a flowing spring :
so god makes clear his signs for you ; haply you will understand .
indeed the day of judgement is the tryst ,
and behold , we let loose upon them a tempest which rained stones upon them , except upon lot 's household whom we rescued in the last hours of the night
believers , do not be like those who hurt moses . allah cleared him of what they said . his face is honorable with allah .
o prophet , say to your wives ,  if you seek the life of this world and all its finery then come , i will make provision for you , and release you honourably .
he said , 'no reproach this day shall be on you ; god will forgive you ; he is the most merciful of the merciful .
remember when you killed a man and blamed each other for the deed , god brought to light what you concealed .
and it is sublime and wise with us in the mother book .
indeed , you are of us ever seeing . 
'aad denied the messengers
and when we heard the message of guidance , we believed therein ; and whosoever believeth in his lord , he shall fear neither diminution nor wrong .
that is the day of judgment . we will bring you together with all the ancient peoples .
they will have everything they wish for from their lord . such is the reward of those who do good :
say :  shall we tell you the greatest losers in respect ofdeeds ?
he said :  no reproach on you this day , may allah forgive you , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy !
: 'this is a troop rushing in with you , there is no welcome for them , they shall roast in the fire '
then he turned to their gods and said ,  do you not eat ?
and they all shall appear before allahthen the weak will say to those who were arrogant :  verily , we were following you ; can you avail us anything from allah 's torment ?  they will say :  had allah guided us , we would have guided you . it makes no difference to uswhether we rage , or bearwith patience , there is no place of refuge for us . 
and those who disbelieve say :  why is not the quran revealed to him all at once ?  thus , that we may strengthen your heart thereby . and we have revealed it to you gradually , in stages . .
then we destroyed those who were stronger than these in prowess , and the case of the ancients has gone before ,
save such as repent thereafter and make amends ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
roasting in a scorching fire .
 or thou cause the sky to fall in pieces , as thou sayest , against us ; or thou bring allah and the angels beforeface to face :
when he said to his father , * “ o my father – why do you worship one which neither hears nor sees , and can not benefit you in any way ? ”
god has struck a similitude : a city that was secure , at rest , its provision coming to it easefully from every place , then it was unthankful for the blessings of god ; so god let it taste the garment of hunger and of fear , for the things that they were working .
does he not know that allah sees ?
we tried those who have gone before them . allah knows those who are truthful and those who lie .
nay , but it will come upon them unawares so that it will stupefy them , and they will be unable to repel it , neither will they be reprieved .
the jews say : 'the hand of allah is fettered . it is their own hands which are fettered , and they stand cursed for the evil they have uttered . no ! his hands are outspread ; he spends as he wills . surely the message that has been revealed to you from your lord has increased many of them in their in-surgence and unbelief , and so we have cast enmity and spite among them until the day of resurrection . and as often as they kindle the fire of war , allah extinguishes it ; and they go about trying to spread mischief on earth , whereas allah does not love those who spread mischief .
and is under no one 's obligation to return his favour ,
so by deceit he brought about their fall : when they tasted of the tree , their shame became manifest to them , and they began to sew together the leaves of the garden over their bodies . and their lord called unto them :  did i not forbid you that tree , and tell you that satan was an avowed enemy unto you ? 
in allah 's help to victory . he helpeth to victory whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
say thou : become ye stones or iron .
and a cup overflowing .
but when we removed from them the affliction , at once they broke their word .
and the night when it covers with darkness .
say ,  it is allah who saves you from it and from every distress ; then youassociate others with him . 
why did no one except the people of jonah believeso that they could have benefitted from their faith ? when the people of jonah believed , we saved them from a disgraceful torment in this life and provided them with the means of enjoyment for an appointed time .
will have upon her neck a halter of palm-fibre .
and know that among you is the messenger of allah . if he were to obey you in much of the matter , you would be in difficulty , but allah has endeared to you the faith and has made it pleasing in your hearts and has made hateful to you disbelief , defiance and disobedience . those are theguided .
let not those who disbelieve deem that they have escaped , verily they can not frustrate .
that is because you exulted in the land without justification and because you behaved insolently .
said :  it was she who wanted to seduce me .  and a witness from her family testified :  if the shirt is torn from the front then the woman is speaking the truth , and he is a liar .
and whether we show you part of what we promise them or take you in death , upon you is only thenotification , and upon us is the account .
god wishes to explain things to you and guide you to the ways of those who have gone before you and to turn to you in mercy . god is all knowing and all wise .
you lived in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , even though it was made clear to you how we dealt with them . we also showed you examples . 
heasked : 'how was it then , with the former generations '
darkening and changing the colour of man !
on the day when he will call unto them and say : where are my partners whom ye imagined ?
it is he who has sent his noble messenger with the guidance and the true religion , in order to make it prevail over all other religions ; and allah is sufficient as a witness .
those -- god has set a seal on their hearts , and their hearing , and their eyes , and those -- they are the heedless ones ;
when in their insolence they transgressedprohibitions , we said to them :  be ye apes , despised and rejected . 
those against whom the charge will be proved , will say :  our lord ! these are the ones whom we led astray : we led them astray , as we were astray ourselves : we free ourselvesin thy presence : it was not us they worshipped . 
do those who have been devising evil plansfeel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them up or that chastisement will not come upon them from a direction that they will not even be able to imagine ;
lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , so worship himand be constant and patient in his worship . do you know of any who is similar to him ? . .
and those whomaintain their prayer :
they said ,  our lord knows that we are messengers to you ,
and thou seest those in whose heart is a disease race toward them , saying : we fear lest a change of fortune befall us . and it may happen that allah will vouchsafethe victory , or a commandment from his presence . then will they repent them of their secret thoughts .
even if we had sent angels down to them and the dead had spoken to them , and even if we had assembled before them all the things , face to face , they would still not believe unless it be allah 's will that they believe . most of them behave in utter ignorance .
except the companions of the right .
and when they provoked our wrath , we took retribution from them , and we drowned them all .
are your faithless better than those ? have you immunity in the scriptures ?
 did you do this to our gods , o abraham ?  they enquired .
ah the misery of the bondmen ! there cometh not : unto them an apostle but him they have been mocking .
i ask no recompense of you for it . my reward is due from none but the lord of all the worlds .
leave the town with your family sometime during the night . walk behind them and let no one turn around . proceed as you are commanded . 
and indeed we bestowed upon luqman al-hikmahsaying :  give thanks to allah ,  and whoever gives thanks , he gives thanks forhis ownself . and whoever is unthankful , then verily , allah is all-rich , worthy of all praise .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whomever he wills , and he punishes whomever he wills . god is forgiving and merciful .
we said ,  abraham , avoid asking us such questions . your lord 's decree has already been issued and an inevitable torment will strike these people . 
they question you about the spirit . say : 'the spirit is from the command of my lord . except for a little knowledge you have been given nothing '
look again , once more . your look will return to you humbled and weary .
and the men on al-a'rafwill call unto the men whom they would recognise by their marks , saying :  of what benefit to you were your great numbers , and your arrogance against faith ? 
and thus hath the word of thy lord been justified on those who disbelieve : that they shall be the fellows of the fire .
he said ,  rather , you throw .  and suddenly their ropes and staffs seemed to him from their magic that they were moving .
and i have chosen you for myself :
andwhen we delivered you from fir'aun'speople , who were afflicting you with a horrible torment , killing your sons and sparing your women , and therein was a mighty trial from your lord .
indeed , the record of the disbelievers is in the lowest place , the sijjeen .
or a needy man in desolation ,
yet if you were to ask them : “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will certainly say : “ the all-mighty , the all-knowing has created them . ”
and to him belongs that which reposes by night and by day , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
these ! for them will be a share for that which they have earned . and allah is swift at reckoning .
and he who fears shall remember ,
and they cried loud lies to our signs ;
he has instructed you in the book that , when you hear people deny or ridicule god 's revelations , you must not sit with them unless they engage in other talk , or else you yourselves shall become like them . god will gather all the hypocrites and those who deny the truth together in hell .
—those who split up their religion and became sects : each faction boasting about what it possessed .
then they belied him ; wherefore an earthquake laid hold of them , and they lay in their dwellings , crouching .
surely your lord will decide between them about what they were at variance , on the day of resurrection .
and we had thought that men and jinn would never speak against god a lie .
except his wifewe have decreed that she shall be among those who stay behind . 
i do not seek to acquit myself ; for surely one 's self prompts one to evil except him to whom my lord may show mercy . verily my lord is ever forgiving , most merciful . 
we have made it a reminder ; and an article of use for the travellers .
on the day of judgment they will be punished by the fire
if you work righteousness , you work righteousness for yourselves ; and if you commit evil , you do so against yourselves . then , when the second promise comes true , they will make your faces filled with sorrow , and enter the temple as they entered it the first time , and utterly destroy all that falls into their power .
have you not seen that it is allah who causes the water to descend from the sky ? so with it we have grown various colourful fruits ; and among the mountains are tracks white and red , of different hues , and others dark black .
its shade hovering over them , and its fruit brought low within reach .
those to whom we gave the scripture rejoice in what was revealed to you , while some factions reject parts of it . say , “ i am commanded to worship god , and to never associate anything with him . to him i invite , and to him is my return . ”
o you who have faith ! do not be like those who offended moses , whereat allah cleared him of what they alleged , and he was distinguished in allah ’ s sight .
when heaven is stripped ,
and that you shall serve me ? this is a straight path .
do they not see the earth , how we grow all kinds of noble things upon it ?
andthose who came in after them , who say , ‘ our lord , forgive us and our brethren who were our forerunners in the faith , and do not put any rancour in our hearts toward the faithful . our lord , you are indeed most kind and merciful . ’
but as-saihahovertook them in the early morning .
when thou wentest forth at dawn from thy people to lodge the believers in their pitches for the battle -- god is all-hearing , all-knowing --
say :  spendwillingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you . verily , you are ever a people who are fasiqun . 
also , we showedthe kingdom of the heavens and the earth to strengthen his faith .
so where are you going ?
butwhen the truth has come to them from us , they say : why is he not given the like of what was given to musa ? what ! did they not disbelieve in what musa was given before ? they say : two magicians backing up each other ; and they say : surely we are unbelievers in all .
it was he who turned those people of the book who denied the truth out of their homes in the first banishment . you never thought they would go , and they thought their strongholds would protect them against god . but god came upon them from where they least expected and cast such terror into their hearts that their houses were pulled down by their own hands as well as by the hands of the believers . learn a lesson , then , you who are endowed with insight .
as a mercy from your lord . surely he is all-hearing , all-seeing ,
we ! we recount unto thee the best of stories , by revealing unto thee this our'an , although thou wast before that of the unaware ones .
disgrace has been destined for them – wherever they are they shall not find peace , except by a rope from allah and a rope from men – and they have deserved the wrath of allah , and misery is destined for them ; that is because they used to disbelieve in the signs of allah , and unjustly martyr the prophets ; that was for their disobedience and transgression .
they said : these are most surely two magicians who wish to turn you out from your land by their magic and to take away your best traditions .
and when it is said unto them : expend of that wherewith allah hath provided you , those who disbelieve say unto those who believe : shall we feed those whom god himself would have fed , if he listed ? ye are in naught else than error manifest .
they said , “ o saleh ! you seemed very promising among us , before this – what ! you forbid us from worshipping the deities of our forefathers ? and indeed we have fallen into a deeply intriguing doubt concerning what you call us to . ”
and if any strive , they do so for their own souls : for allah is free of all needs from all creation .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their believing andthey had borne witness that the apostle was true and clear arguments had come to them ; and allah does not guide the unjust people .
see to what they liken you ! but they are lost and can not find the right path .
say ,  the holy spirit has brought it down as truth from your lord , so that he may strengthen those who believe , and also as guidance and as good tidings for those who submit . 
and it is not for a soul to believe except by permission of allah , and he will place defilement upon those who will not use reason .
certainly we gave moses the book and we made aaron , his brother , accompany him as a minister .
say to those who have disbelievedif they cease , what has previously occurred will be forgiven for them . but if they return- then the precedent of the formerpeoples has already taken place .
each we seized for his sin ; and of them against some we loosed a squall of pebbles and some were seized by the cry , and some we made the earth to swallow , and some we drowned ; god would never wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
we have bound their necks with fetters up to their chin , so that their heads are raised and can not be lowered .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in six days ; then settled on the throne . he knows whatever enters the earth and whatever emerges from it and whatever descends from the sky and whatever ascends to it , and he is with you wherever you may be , and allah watches what you do .
but if the right is theirs , they come to him in prompt obedience .
and we gave him his brother aaron , of our mercy , a prophet .
that is the paradise you have been given to inherit for what you used to do .
and you make strong fortresses that perhaps you may
those who love this world 's life more than the hereafter , and turn away from allah 's path and desire to make it crooked ; these are in a great error .
surely the pious shall be in bliss ,
woe will be to those who rejected the truth
let not those of you who possess bounty and plenty swear off giving kinsmen and the poor and those who emigrate in the way of god ; but let them pardon and forgive . do you not wish that god should forgive you ? god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
he thus cuts off a section of those who disbelieved , or subdues them , so they retreat disappointed .
lo ! the hour is surely coming , there is no doubt thereof ; yet most of mankind believe not .
whenever i called them to your forgiveness , they thrust their fingers into their ears , and wrapped themselves in their garments , and insisted , and became more and more arrogant .
even if you were to bring all kinds of authoritative proof to the people of the book , they still would not accept your qibla , nor would you accept theirs , nor would they accept each others . were you to follow their desires after all the knowledge that has come to you , you would certainly have been one of the unjust .
and the disbelievers said , “ shall we show you a man who will tell you that ‘ when you have disintegrated into the smallest pieces , you are to be created again ’ ? ”
when he came to his lord with a free heart ,
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you and the sky a canopy ; and it is he who sends down rain from above for the growth of every kind of food products for your sustenance . so , when you know this , you should not set up equals to rank with allah .
and if you punish , then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted . but if you endure patiently , verily , it is better for as-sabirin .
then she was bidden to enter the palace ; but when she saw it , she thought it was a deep pool of water , and bared her legs . but solomon explained ,  it is just a palace paved with glass ,  and she said ,  my lord , i have wronged myself : now i submit myself along with solomon , to god , the lord of the universe . 
the rebels ' abode ,
whoever hopes for the meeting with allah , then allah 's term is surely coming . and he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
certainly , it is to us that they will return .
hast thou observed him who belieth religion ?
elias was certainly a messenger .
a certain number of days , but if any one of you is ill or on a journey let hima similar number of days later on ; and for those who are unable , there is a ransom the feeding of a needy person . whosoever volunteers good , it is good for him ; but to fast is better for you , if you but knew .
and the secrets of the breasts are made known ,
and do not cause corruption on the earth after its restoration , and supplicate him with fear and hope : indeed allah ’ s mercy is close to the virtuous .
thus the last remnant of the people who did wrong was cut off . and praise be to god , lord of the worlds .
do you have carnal relations with men rather than women ? you are ignorant people  .
they ask you concerning fighting in the sacred months . say ,  fighting therein is a greatbut a greaterwith allah is to prevent mankind from following the way of allah , to disbelieve in him , to prevent access to al-masjid-al-haram , and to drive out its inhabitants , and al-fitnah is worse than killing . and they will never cease fighting you until they turn you back from your religionif they can . and whosoever of you turns back from his religion and dies as a disbeliever , then his deeds will be lost in this life and in the hereafter , and they will be the dwellers of the fire . they will abide therein forever .
we sent down enlightening revelations , and god guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
and yet the unbelieversin rejecting !
then at this statement do you wonder ?
pay heed ! it is they who are mischievous , but they do not have sense .
we have certainly brought the truth to you : but most of you have an aversion for the truth .
verily your endeavour is diverse .
:  verily ! these indeed are but a small band .
seek the gains of the life to come through your wealth without ignoring your share of this life . do favors to others just as god has done favors to you . do not commit evil in the land for god does not love the evil-doers . 
thus we cause thisto enter into the hearts of the sinful .
the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then befitting his majesty , established himself upon the throne ; the most gracious – therefore ask the one who knows , concerning him !
we were promised this before—we and our ancestors—these are nothing but legends of the ancients . ”
those who deny the truth , and die as deniers , on them shall be the curse of god and of angels and of men altogether .
say to believing women that they should lower their gaze and remain chaste and not to reveal their adornments -- save what is normally apparent thereof , and they should fold their shawls over their bosoms . they can only reveal their adornments to their husbands or their fathers or their husbands ' fathers , or their sons or their husbands ' sons or their brothers or their brothers ' sons or their sisters ' sons or maidservants or those whom their right hands possess or their male attendants who have no sexual desire or children who still have no carnal knowledge of women . nor should they swing their legs to draw attention to their hidden ornaments . believers , turn to god , every one of you , so that you may prosper .
and many spoils to take ; and god is ever all-mighty , all-wise .
and of them is he who looketh toward thee . but canst thou guide the blind even though they see not ?
and he it is who giveth life and causeth death , and his is the difference of night and day . have ye then no sense ?
o mary , be devoutly obedient to your lord and prostrate and bow with those who bow . 
they replied ,  we have come to you about the matter which thehave rejected .
but they , that day , are in surrender .
 this in truth is your recompense , and acceptance of your endeavours . 
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers from the suffering of a painful day .
or which army do you have that will help you against the most gracious ? the disbelievers are in nothing except an illusion .
he said , ‘ my lord ! respite me till the day they will be resurrected . ’
and they swear by allah that they are in truth of you , when they are not of you , but they are folk who are afraid .
they who disbelieve say : thou art no messenger . say : allah , and whosoever hath knowledge of the scripture , is sufficient witness between me and you .
and we send the winds fertilizing , then send down water from the cloud so we give it to you to drink of , nor is it you who store it up .
and that heis the lord of sirius ;
have always turned away from the revelations and the evidencethat has been sent to them from time to time .
and we used to sit on placestherein to listen . but he who listeneth now findeth a flame in wait for him ;
none will burn in it except the very wicked .
before this , we used to pray to him . surely , he is the beneficent , the merciful . 
we will show our signs to them in the horizons of the external world and within themselves , until it becomes clear to them that it 's the truth . is your lord not sufficient ? he is a witness over all things .
that is he , the all-knower of the unseen and the seen , the all-mighty , the most merciful .
we would hasten them on in every good ? nay , they do not understand .
he is god : there is no god but him . all praise is due to him in this world and the hereafter . his is the judgement and to him you shall be returned .
neither your relatives nor your children will benefit you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is the all-seer of what you do .
do they not see the birds above them , spreading out their wings and folding them in ? none upholds them except the most beneficent . verily , he is the all-seer of everything .
you worship idols besides god , and you fabricate falsehoods . those you worship , instead of god , can not provide you with livelihood . so seek your livelihood from god , and worship him , and thank him . to him you will be returned . ”
and those who fear the punishment of their lord .
we have indeed , sent down to you the koran , asending ,
then frowned and scowled .
o children of israel , remember my blessing which i bestowed upon you , and fulfill my covenant that i may fulfill your covenant , and be in awe of me .
pleased are they that they should be with the women sitters-at-home , and their hearts are sealed up , so they understand not .
whenever a sura is sent down to thee , some of them say , 'which of you has this increased in belief ? ' as for the believers , them it has increased in belief , and they are joyful .
allah turneth the night and the day over and over ; verily therein is a lesson for men of insight .
fight them . may god punish them by your hands , humiliate them , give you victory over them , delight the hearts of the believers
we gave the book to moses , but there were disputes about it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lordwould have been decided between them . but they are in disquieting doubt about it .
the blast justly struck them and we reduced them to rubble . away with such wicked people !
the lord of strength ; so he attained completion ,
so when the qur'an is recited , listen thereto and keep silence , haply ye may be shewn mercy .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
then see the nature of the consequence of their plotting , for lo ! we destroyed them and their people , every one .
and they said ,  why was this qur'an not sent down upon a great man fromthe two cities ? 
they ask you about the crescents . say , “ they are timetables for people , and for the hajj. ” it is not virtuous that you approach homes from their backs , but virtue is to be pious . so approach homes from their doors , and observe god , that you may succeed .
thosewho wait and watch about you ; if you gain a victory from allah , they say :  were we not with you ,  but if the disbelievers gain a success , they say :  did we not gain mastery over you and did we not protect you from the believers ?  allah will judge between youon the day of resurrection . and never will allah grant to the disbelievers a wayover the believers .
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
“ and put your hand inside your armpit – it will come out shining white , not due to any illness ; a sign among the nine signs towards firaun and his people ; they are indeed a lawless nation . ”
that god may recompense them for their fairest works and give them increase of his bounty ; and god provides whomsoever he will , without reckoning .
who will offer god a generous loan ? he will double it for him and give him a rich reward .
the elite of his people who disbelieved said , “ if you follow shuaib , you will be losers . ”
believe none except those who follow your own religion ' say : 'the true guidance is the guidance of allah that anyone should be given the like of what you have been given , or dispute with you before your lord ' say : 'bounty is in the hand of allah ' he gives it to whomsoever he will . allah is the embracer , the knower .
then indeed , they will have after it a mixture of scalding water .
i shall attack them from all directions and you will not find many of them giving you thanks  .
and when the angels said : o marium ! surely allah has chosen you and purified you and chosen you above the women of the world .
they say , ‘ ‘ do not abandon your gods . do not abandon wadd , nor suwa , nor yaghuth , ya ‘ uq and nasr , ’ ’
and lower unto them the wing of submission through mercy , and say : my lord ! have mercy on them both as they did care for me when i was little .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : their religion hath deluded these . whoso putteth his trust in allahlo ! allah is mighty , wise .
say to my servants that they shouldsay those things that are best : for satan doth sow dissensions among them : for satan is to man an avowed enemy .
for these there is hope that allah will forgive them , and allah is ever oft pardoning , oft-forgiving .
 if any does not hearken to the one who invitesto allah , he can not frustrateon earth , and no protectors can he have besides allah : such menin manifest error . 
we sent down upon them a violent sandstormexcept for the family of lot , whom we saved in the early morning by our favor .
the hour will certainly come ; there is no mystery about it ; but most men do not believe .
so , o you people , adore your lord who created you , as he did those before you , that you could take heed for yourselves and fear him
by the heaven , and by the nightly visitor
and the muslim men and muslim women are the friends of one another ; enjoining right and forbidding wrong , and keeping the prayer established and paying the obligatory charity , obeying allah and his noble messenger ; these are upon whom allah will soon have mercy ; indeed allah is the almighty , the wise .
they say :  shall we go back to our original state
say : ' i do not find , in what is revealed to me , aught forbidden to him who eats thereof except it be carrion , or blood outpoured , or the flesh of swine -- that is an abomination -- or an ungodly thing that has been hallowed to other than god ; yet whoso is constrained , not desiring nor transgressing , surely thy lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
o people who believe ! present yourselves upon the command of allah and his noble messenger , when the noble messenger calls you towards the matter that will bestow you life ; and know that the command of allah becomes a barrier between a man and his heart ’ s intentions , and that you will all be raised towards him .
and close down upon themits shadows , and its fruits shall be made near , being easy to reach .
those who believe say ,  why is not a sura sent down ?  but when a sura of basic or categorical meaning is revealed , and fighting is mentioned therein , thou wilt see those in whose hearts is a disease looking at thee with a look of one in swoon at the approach of death . but more fitting for them-
in a high garden
the devil promiseth you destitution and enjoineth on you lewdness . but allah promiseth you forgiveness from himself with bounty . allah is all-embracing , all-knowing .
say :  tell me ! if thisis from allah , and you deny it , and a witness from among the children of israeltestifies that this quran is from allah ] , so he believedwhile you are too proud .  verily ! allah guides not the people who are zalimun .
for her lord will have inspired her .
so he made beginning with their sacks , before his brother 's sack , then he pulled it out of his brother 's sack . so we contrived for joseph 's sake ; he could not have taken his brother , according to the king 's doom , except that god willed . whomsoever we will , we raise in rank ; over every man of knowledge is one who knows .
they will converse with one another , putting questions to each other ,
it is he who made you vicegerents in the earth . so whoever disbelieves will bear the burden of his unbelief . the unbelievers ' unbelief adds nothing but allah 's wrath against them . the unbelievers ' unbelief adds nothing but their own loss .
your lord is the one who is the only god and he has the knowledge of all things .
your women are a tillage for you ; so come unto your tillage as you wish , and forward for your souls ; and fear god , and know that you shall meet him . give thou good tidings to the believers .
for men and women who have surrendered believing men and women ; obedient men and women ; truthful men and women , patient men and women , humble men and women , men and women who give charity , men and women who fast , men and women who guard their privates , men and women who remember allah in abundance , for them allah has prepared forgiveness and a mighty wage .
i will drive him into saqar .
their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindleth fire , and when it sheddeth its light around him allah taketh away their light and leaveth them in darkness , where they can not see ,
then , when the sorcerers came , moses said to them , 'cast you down what you will cast . '
oneway he followed ,
he is allah , other than whom there is no deity , knower of the unseen and the witnessed . he is the entirely merciful , the especially merciful .
but those who committed evil deeds and then repented afterwards and believed , verily , your lord afterthat is indeed oft-forgiving , most merciful .
the honest spirit came down with it .
do you feel secure that the one in the heavens will not cause you to sink into the earth when it is violently shaking ?
undoubtedly among all mankind who have the best claim to ibrahim are those who followed him , and this prophetand the believers ; and allah is the guardian of the believers .
,  we are indeed left with debts :
to end all argument or to warn .
so they departed . when they boarded a ship , he bored a hole in it . 'what , have you made a hole in it ' he said , 'is it to drown its passengers ? you have done a dreadful thing '
when heaven is split open ,
but the apostle and the faithful who are with him wage jihad with their possessions and persons , and to such belong all the blessings , and it is they who are the felicitous .
allah invites you to the house of peace . he guides whom he will to a straight path
when they saw the garden , they said ,  surely we have lost our way .
so they said :  o moses , you may cast your spell first , or we shall cast ours . 
when he said to his father and his people : what is it that you worship ?
that he may give them in full their rewards and increase for them of his bounty . indeed , he is forgiving and appreciative .
she floats under our eyes : a recompense to one who had been rejected !
but what plea have they that allah should not punish them , when they keep outfrom the sacred mosque - and they are not its guardians ? no men can be its guardians except the righteous ; but most of them do not understand .
such disputes will certainly take place among the dwellers of hell fire .
and why have not armlets of gold been bestowed on him and why is there not a train of angels accompanying him ? 
who give ear to the word and follow the fairest of it . those are they whom god has guided ; those -- they are men possessed of minds .
and from the evil of those who practice sorcery .
at which the heavens almost rupture , and the earth splits , and the mountains fall and crumble .
we did reveal to moses the book after we had destroyed the earlier generations , insight to men , and guidance and mercy , that they might receive admonition .
who hoard their wealth and enjoin avarice on others , and hide that which allah hath bestowed upon them of his bounty . for disbelievers we prepare a shameful doom ;
it will be proclaimed to the faithless : ‘ surely , allah ’ s outrageis greater than your outrage towards yourselves , as you were invited to faith , but you disbelieved . ’
when it is said to them ,  what is it that your lord has revealed ?  they say ,  tales of the ancients ! 
she said , ‘ oelite ! give me your opinion concerning my matter . i do not decide any matter until you are present . ’
and we verily sent unto thamud their brother salih , saying : worship allah . and lo ! they ( then became two parties quarrelling .
by the clear book
when you have finished as-salat , remember allah standing , sitting down , and lying down on your sides , but when you are free from danger , perform as-salat . verily , the prayer is enjoined on the believers at fixed hours .
and he it is who hath sown you broadcast in the earth , and unto him ye will be gathered .
but if they violate their oaths after their covenant , and taunt you for your faith , - fight ye the chiefs of unfaith : for their oaths are nothing to them : that thus they may be restrained .
and give the women their bridal money willingly ; then if they willingly give you a part of it , eatit with joy and fruition .
the unbelievers plotted and god planned , but god is a much better planner ;
those who come to you , , asking to be taken to the battle , but you can not find the necessary means for them , are exempt from the duty of fighting for the cause of god , even though they leave you with their eyes flooded with tears because of not being able to help the cause of god .
something that a very powerful one has imparted to him ,
we are best aware of what they say , and thouart in no wise a compeller over them . but warn by the qur'an him who feareth my threat .
they wish you would disbelieve as they disbelieved so you would be alike . so do not take from among them allies until they emigrate for the cause of allah . but if they turn away , then seize them and kill them wherever you find them and take not from among them any ally or helper .
 we have brought to thee that which is inevitably due , and assuredly we tell the truth .
and they say ,  that indeed would be a losing return . 
god , the everlasting refuge ,
in this wise have those strayed who the signs of allah were away want to gainsay .
we delivered moses and every one with him ,
behold , their brother noah said to them :  will ye not fear ?
even so we recompense the good-doers ;
he set on the , mountains standing firm , high above it , and bestowed blessings on the earth , and measure therein all things to give them nourishment in due proportion , in four days , in accordance withthose who seek .
and those who , when spending , neither exceed the limits nor act miserly , and stay in moderation between the two .
so leave them alone for a while ,
, did we not lay open your breast
verily , manwas created very impatient ;
and drew a curtain , screening herself from people whereupon we sent to her our spirit and he appeared to her as a well-shaped man .
wavering all the time -- not to these , not to those ; and whom god leads astray , thou wilt not find for him a way .
it is we who have placed you with authority on earth , and provided you therein with means for the fulfilment of your life : small are the thanks that ye give !
as for those who reject faith , if they had everything on earth , and twice as much again and offered it to ransom themselves from the torment of the day of resurrection , it shall not be accepted from them -- they will have a painful punishment .
we have appointed for you thecamels as part of allah ’ s sacraments . there is good for you in them . so mention the name of allah over them as they stand . and when they have fallen on their flanks , eat from them , and feed the self-contained needy and the mendicant . thus have we disposed them for your benefit so that you may give thanks .
not a city before them which we destroyed believed ; will they then believe ?
then , from the furthest part of the city , a man came running . he said ,  my people , follow the messengers .
and plead to allah for forgiveness ; indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
in a sublime garden ,
but if you do not find anyone in them , do not enter them until you are given permission . and if you are told : ‘ turn back , ’ then do turn back . that is more decent for you . allah knows best what you do .
they ask you to pronounce laws concerning women , say : 'allah pronounces to you concerning them , and reminds you of the injunctions which were recited to you in the book about female orphans whom you do not give what has been ordained for them and whom you wish to marry ' , and the commandments relating to the children who are weak and helpless . allah directs you to treat the orphans with justice . allah is well aware of whatever good you do .
 has he invented a falsehood against allah , or has a spirithim ?  - nay , it is those who believe not in the hereafter , that are inpenalty , and in farthest error .
but he who desires the hereafter and strives for it in the manner he should , and is a true believer , his striving will come to fruition .
evil is that for which they have bartered away their souls , that they disbelieve what allah has sent down , grudging that allah should send down from his bounty to whom he chooses from his worshipers ! they have incurred wrath over wrath . for the unbelievers there is a humiliating punishment .
messengers before thee , indeed , were mocked , but that whereat they mocked surrounded those who scoffed at them .
and fir'awn proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the dominion of mis and witness yonder rivers flowing underneath me ? see ye not ?
and who is better in speech than he who ,  and then stands straight , and ] invitesto allah 's , and does righteous deeds , and says :  i am one of the muslims . 
go ye twain unto fir'awn , verily he hath waxen exorbitant ,
yet when we bestow our favours on man , he turns away and becomes remote on his side , and when evil seizes him he gives himself up to despair !
had they gone forth among you , they would only have increased your burden , and run to and fro in your midst , seeking to stir up sedition between you ; and some of you would listen to them ; and allah knows the harmdoers .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieved and said of their brethren who went abroad in the land or were fighting in the field : if they had beenwith us they would not have died or been killed : that allah may make it anguish in their hearts . allah giveth life and causeth death ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
which none can touch except the purified .
with respect to marrying widows , if you are afraid of not being able to maintain justice with her children , marry another woman of your choice or two or three or four . if you can not maintain equality with more than one wife , marry only one or your slave-girl . this keeps you from acting against justice .
 the day whereon neither wealth nor sons will avail ,
and when i revealed to the disciples , saying , believe in me and my apostle , they said : we believe and bear witness that we submit .
a reward from your lord – a grossly sufficient bestowal .
but those who believe and do good deeds are people of paradise , and shall live there forever .
most of the unbelievers follow only conjecture which certainly can not serve as a substitute for the truth . god knows well what they do .
whoever has done the smallest particle of good will see it ;
who expend both in joy and tribulation , who suppress their anger and pardon their fellowmen ; and god loves those who are upright and do good ,
and strive for allah with the endeavour which is his right . he hath chosen you and hath not laid upon you in religion any hardship ; the faith of your father abraham . he hath named you muslims of old time and in this , that the messenger may be a witness against you , and that ye may be witnesses against mankind . so establish worship , pay the poor-due , and hold fast to allah . he is your protecting friend . a blessed patron and a blessed helper !
verily this my brother hath nine and ninety ewes while i have one ewe ; and he saith : entrust it to me , and he hath prevailed upon me in speech .
by the night when it darkeneth ,
and they said , “ what is the matter with thismessenger , that he eats food and walks in the markets ? why was not an angel sent down along with him , to give warning along with him ? ”
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or take you , to us is their return . god is witness to everything they do .
but for the grace of god and his mercy upon you , and were not god compassionate and merciful , .
 is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like thereof ?  - yea , indeed ! for he is the creator supreme , of skill and knowledge !
so hudhud did not stay absent for long , and presenting himself submitted , “ i have witnessed a matter that your majesty has not seen , and i have brought definite information to you from the city of saba . ”
and indeed we know that some among you are deniers .
by your lord , we shall most surely gather them and the devils too ; and bring them close to hell on their knees .
 before this , when we were among our families , we were full of fear of god 's displeasure --
he created man from clay likepottery .
it shall not be abated from them and they shall therein be despairing .
allah created the heavens and the earth in true : verily in that is a sign for those who believe .
, 'cast him into the chest and cast it into the river , and the river will throw it onto the bank ; there will take him an enemy to me and an enemy to him . ' and i bestowed upon you love from me that you would be brought up under my eye .
so has god , all-mighty and all-wise , been revealing to you and to others before you .
recite what is revealed to you of the scripture , and perform the prayer . the prayer prevents indecencies and evils . and the remembrance of god is greater . and god knows what you do .
o man ! what has deceived you away from your lord , the most beneficent ?
then he turned to his household and brought a fattened calf ,
and our host -- they are the victors .
but then when we seize the affluent among them , they will cry out for help .
and fromthe night , pray with it as additionalfor you ; it is expected that your lord will resurrect you to a praised station .
what ! have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
‘ enjoy your food and drink , for what you used to do .
say thou : i am but warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the subduer .
as for the heedful and devout , they are not accountable for them , but should give advice : they may haply come to fear god .
by the star when it plunges ,
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it appeared white to the onlookers .
it is he who sent to the unletteredan apostle from among themselves , to recite to them his signs , to purify them , and to teach them the book and wisdom , and earlier they had indeed been in manifest error .
when god said :  o jesus , i will take you to myself and exalt you , and rid you of the infidels , and hold those who follow you above those who disbelieve till the day of resurrection . you have then to come back to me when i will judge between you in what you were at variance . 
god is the provider , the one with power , the strong .
unto him is referredknowledge of the hour . and no fruits burst forth from their sheaths , and no female carrieth or bringeth forth but with his knowledge . and on the day when he calleth unto them : where are now my partners ? they will say : we confess unto thee , not one of us is a witness .
—those who are patient for the sake of their lord ’ s pleasure , maintain the prayer , and spend secretly and openly out of what we have provided them , and repel evilwith good . for such will be the reward of theabode :
who is more wicked than he who invents a lie about allah or belies his verses ? the harmdoers shall never prosper .
they said ,  noah , if you do not desist , you will be stoned . 
in their hearts is disease , so allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because theyused to lie .
there is not upon those who believe and do righteousnessblame concerning what they have eatenif theyfear allah and believe and do righteous deeds , and then fear allah and believe , and then fear allah and do good ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and we have already sent noah and abraham and placed in their descendants prophethood and scripture ; and among them is he who is guided , but many of them are defiantly disobedient .
we did not grant immortality to any human being before you . should you die , are they then the immortal ?
and we called him from the right side of mount , and made him draw near to us , for mystic .
a believing person from the people of the pharaoh who concealed his faith said ,  would you kill a man just because he says god is my lord ? he has brought you illustrious miracles from your lord . if he speaks lies , it will only harm him , but if he speaks the truth , some of his warnings may affect you . god does not guide a transgressing liar .
and then we sent youthe divine revelation that , “ follow the religion of ibrahim , who was free from all falsehood ; and was not a polytheist . ”
therein they shall shout , 'our lord , bring us forth , and we will do righteousness , other than what we have done . ' 'what , did we not give you long life , enough to remember in for him who would remember ? to you the warner came ; taste you now ! the evildoers shall have no helper . '
o believers , do not enter other houses than your own until you have the approval of the inmates and have wished them peace ; this is the best way for you : it is expected that you will observe it .
so when talut left the city along with the armies , he said , “ allah will surely test you with a river ; so whoever drinks its water is not mine – and whoever does not drink is mine – except him who takes it in the hollow of his hand ” ; so they all drank it , except a few of them ; thereafter when talut and the believers with him had crossed the river , they said , “ we do not have power this day to face jalutand his armies ” ; those who were certain of meeting allah said , “ many a times has a smaller group overcome a bigger group by allah ’ s command ; and allah is with the steadfast . ”
we have determined for each community a way of worship which they follow . so they should not contend with you in this matter ; and you should go on calling them to your lord . you are surely on the right path .
then we destroyed the rest .
but as for one who had repented , believed , and done righteousness , it is promised by allah that he will be among the successful .
and if he is one of the rejecters , the erring ones ,
fain would they put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah disdainethsave that he shall perfect his light , however much the disbelievers are averse .
and because of their transgressions they were drowned , and admitted into a fire , for they found not , apart from god , any to help them .
among my servants , there were those who said ,  lord , we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us . you are the best one to show mercy . 
death seize him , how he determined !
among you there is such who lags behind , then if some affliction strikes you , he says : 'indeed allah bestowed his favour upon me that i was not present with them . '
it shall be said , 'enter the gates of gehenna , to dwell therein forever . ' how evil is the lodging of those that are proud !
say ,  i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a terrible day . 
and as for those whose faces have been whitened , in the mercy of allah they dwell for ever .
and children present
and musa 's people made of their ornaments a calf after him , abody , which gave a mooing sound . what ! could they not see that it did not speak to them nor guide them in the way ? they took itand they were unjust .
it is not for the associators that they shall tend allah 's mosques , while giving evidence of infidelity against themselves . those ! vain shall be their works , and in the fire they shall be abiders .
fire suppliedwith fuel ,
and the only food he has is filth
with it will melt or vanish away what is within their bellies , as well asskins .
and do not strut about the land with insolence : surely you can not cleave the earth , nor attain the height of mountains in stature .
then we destroyed the others ,
so we seized him and his hordes and threw them into the sea . behold then how was the end of the wicked !
it may be that if he divorces you his lord will give him , instead , wives better than you : muslim , faithful , obedient , penitent , devout and given to fasting , virgins and non-virgins .
for he was one of our believing servants .
and he said to his servants : put their money into their bags that they may recognize it when they go back to their family , so that they may come back .
but those who believe and do good deeds shall be rewarded with gardens watered by flowing rivers . that is the supreme triumph .
to him belongs absolute control of the heavens and the earth . he spreads the bounties to whomever he wills , or reduces it . he is aware of all things .
o ye who believe ! obey allah , and obey the messenger , and make not vain your deeds !
who gives his wealth in order to be pure .
there is no god but he . he quickeneth and causeth to die : your lord and lord of your forefathers .
the places of worship belong to allah , so do not invoke anyone along with allah .
they said , “ do you marvel at the decree of god ? the mercy and blessings of god are upon you , o people of the house . he is praiseworthy and glorious . ”
the day on which their excuse shall not benefit the unjust , and for them is curse and for them is the evil abode .
ihave been commanded only to worship the lord of this city , him who has sanctified it and his is everything . and i am commanded to be from among the muslims .
but any thathad repented , believed , and worked righteousness , will have hopes to be among those who achieve salvation .
the believing man said ,  i am afraid that you will face aday like that of the groups :
and lo ! thou art of a tremendous nature .
purify your inner self ,
whoever will come to allah with a good deed shall have ten times as much , and whoever will come to allah with an evil deed , shall be requited with no more than the like of it . they shall not be wronged .
believers , the idolaters are unclean . do not let them approach the sacred mosque after this year . if you fear poverty , allah , if he wills , will enrich you through his bounty . he is knowing , wise .
laughing and joyous
to respect the symbols of god is the sign of a pious heart .
when there happeneth event .
by the wise quran .
and if an entry were made upon them from the outlying parts of it , then they were asked to wage war , they would certainly have done it , and they would not have stayed in it but a little while .
they know only the outside appearance of the life of the world , and they are heedless of the hereafter .
do not take life which god has made inviolate -- except by right . if anyone is killed wrongfully , we have given authority to his heirs to demand retribution , but let them not transgress the prescribed limits in exacting retribution ; for then he will be assisted .
it is these upon whom allah has bestowed favour among the prophets , from the descendants of adam ; and from those whom we boarded along with nooh ; and from the descendants of ibrahim and israel ; and from those whom we guided and chose ; when the verses of the most gracious were recited to them , they fell down , prostrating and weeping .
in order to produce grain and plants with it .
,  and take in your hand a bunchand strike with it and do not break your oath .  indeed , we found him patient , an excellent servant . indeed , he was one repeatedly turning back .
save him who hath created me , and then he would guide me .
and neglect the hereafter .
then he reduces it in gradual steps .
had we sent this as a qur'another than arabic , they would have said :  why are not its verses explained in detail ? what ! not in arabic and : they arebeing called from a place far distant ! 
who are humble in their service ,
lord of the heavens and the earth and that which is betwixt the twain ; so him worship thou , and endure patiently in his worship ; knowest thou any as his compeer ? * chapter : 19
those who honour god in meditation , standing or sitting or lying on their sides , who reflect and contemplate on the creation of the heavens and the earth ,  not in vain have you made them . all praise be to you , o lord , preserve us from the torment of hell .
have we not made the earth a receptacle ,
ask them thou : are they stronger in structure or those others whom we have created ? verily we ! we have created them of a sticky clay .
when he said to his people , ‘ will you not be godwary ?
and we bestowed upon him isaac and jacob ; each of them we guided ; and noah did we guide aforetime ; and of his seeddavid and solomon and job and joseph and moses and aaron . thus do we reward the good .
and when it is said to him ,  fear allah ,  pride in the sin takes hold of him . sufficient for him is hellfire , and how wretched is the resting place .
and we gave them manifest precepts . but they did not differ except after knowledge had come to them , out of envy among themselves . indeed your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they used to differ .
and that upon himis another bringing forth ;
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of allah ; to him belongs the kingdom , and to him is duepraise , and he has power over all things .
surely the apostles have been mocked before you ; but what they had mocked rebounded on the mockers themselves .
and they were followed in this world by a curse , and so will they be on the judgment day . lo ! verily 'aad disbelieved in thy lord . lo ! away with 'aad , the people of hud .
and we will turn their hearts and their sights , even as they did not believe in it the first time , and we will leave them in their inordinacy , blindly wandering on .
it will be on the day when they will be roasted in the fire .
and said ,  this is not but magic imitated .
when abraham had controlled his fear and received the glad news , he started to plead with us for the people of lot ;
and recite to them the story of adam 's two sons , in truth , when they both offered a sacrifice , and it was accepted from one of them but was not accepted from the other . said ,  i will surely kill you .  said ,  indeed , allah only accepts from the righteous .
lo ! those on whom ye call beside allah are slaves like unto you . call on them now , and let them answer you , if ye are truthful !
except the slaves of allah , whom he choses .
remember when allah said , “ o eisa ! i will keep you alive till your full age , and raise you towards me , and cleanse you of the disbelievers and give your followers dominance over the disbelievers until the day of resurrection ; then you will all return to me , so i shall judge between you concerning the matter in which you dispute . ”
but as for one who comes to you , eagerly
and recall when we commanded the angels that , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated , except iblis ; he was of the jinn , he therefore rebelled against his lord ’ s command ; “ what ! you choose him and his offspring as your friends instead of me , whereas they are your enemies ? ” and what an evil alternative did the unjust get .
if , however . one apprehends genuinely that the testator had intentionally or unintentionally done some injustice , and then alters the will to set things right between the parties concerned , in that case he does not incur any sin . allah is forgiving and merciful .
seeking only the face of his lord , the most high ,
it was only one shout and they were silent , still .
when they came before david , he was frightened of them .  do not be afraid ,  they said .  the two of us are disputing the wrong one has done the other . so judge between us with equity , and do not be unjust , and guide us to the right path .
the faithless say , ‘ shall we show you a man who will inform youwhen you have been totally rent to pieces you will indeed have a new creation ?
and when you , , do not bring them a sign , they say ,  why have you not contrived it ?  say ,  i only follow what is revealed to me from my lord . thisis enlightenment from your lord and guidance and mercy for a people who believe . 
and whosoever obeys allah and his messenger , fears allah , and keeps his duty , such are the successful ones .
surely those who live in awe of their lord ,
postponementis only an excess of disbelief whereby those who disbelieve are misled ; they allow it one year and forbid ityear , that they may make up the number of the months which allah hath hallowed , so that they allow that which allah hath forbidden . the evil of their deeds is made fairseeming unto them . allah guideth not the disbelieving folk .
or like the manifold darkness in a deep sea , covered by billow upon billow , overcast by clouds ; manifolddarkness , one on top of another : when he brings out his hand , he can hardly see it . one whom allah has not granted any light has no light .
and remove the rage of their hearts ; and allah turnsto whom he pleases , and allah is knowing , wise .
by those who publishfar and wide ,
as well as his wife and children .
we have given you enlightening authority . only the wicked sinners deny it .
but those among them who did wrong changed the word that had been told to them . so we sent on them a torment from heaven in return for their wrong-doings .
they enquire of you if this will really happen . tell them ,  yes , by my lord . most certainly it will happen , and you can not avert it . 
o you who have faith ! when you converse secretly , do not hold private conversationswith sin and aggression and disobedience to the apostle , but converse inpiety and godfearing , and be wary of allah toward whom you will be gathered .
only they are turned away thus who deny the signs of god .
believers , do not come close to prayer when you are drunk , until you know what you are saying , nor when you are in a state of impurity , unless you are crossing through the wayuntil you have bathed yourselves . if you are ill or on a journey , or if any of you comes from the toilet or you have touchedwomen , and you can not find water , so touch pure dust and wipe your faces and your hands . allah is the pardoner , the forgiver .
preferring the present life ,
“ what ! now ? * whereas you were disobedient from the start and you were mischievous ! ”
do they not see that allah enlarges the provision for whom he wills and straitens . verily , in that are indeed signs for a people who believe .
god has now lightened your burden , knowing that there is weakness in you . if there are a hundred steadfast among you , they will defeat two hundred ; and if there are a thousand of you , they will defeat two thousand by god ’ s leave . god is with the steadfast .
none will eat except the khati'un .
kiramankatibin writing down .
but god prohibits you from befriending those who fought against you over your religion , and expelled you from your homes , and aided in your expulsion . whoever takes them for friends—these are the wrongdoers .
they will emerge before god , altogether . the weak will say to those who were proud , “ we were your followers , can you protect us at all against god ’ s punishment ? ” they will say , “ had god guided us , we would have guided you . it is the same for us ; whether we mourn , or are patient ; there is no asylum for us . ”
upright , to warn of a severe punishment from him , and to give good news to the faithful who do righteous deeds , that there shall be for them a good reward ,
so leave them plunging into false discourses and sporting until they meet their day which they are threatened with .
he is the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if only you would have strong faith .
and when they meet those who believe they say : we believe ; and when some of them are alone with some others they say speak ye unto them of that which god hath opened unto you so that they may argue therewith against you before your lord ? understand then ye not ?
when the souls shall be coupled ,
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and whatever of goodyou send forth for yourselves before you , you shall find it with allah . certainly , allah is all-seer of what you do .
and we destroyed the rest .
he said : verily i am of those who abhor your work .
then hasten on from the place from which the people hasten on and ask the forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
had they gone forth with you , they would not have increased you except in confusion , and they would have been active among you , seekingyou fitnah . and among you are avid listeners to them . and allah is knowing of the wrongdoers .
and whether you speak softly or proclaim it aloud ; he indeed knows what lies within the hearts !
but we see it to be very near .
and gleaming silver goblets which have been filled to the exact measure ,
and we rained upon them a rain ; consider then what was the end of the guilty .
so that allah might question the truthful about their truthfulness . but for the unbelievers he has prepared a painful punishment .
say : 'go about journeying the earth , and behold the end of those who gave the lie . '
the only reason for our sending the messengers is to give the human being the glad news of our mercy and to warn him about our wrath . the disbelievers argue by false means to refute the truth . they mock my miracles and warnings .
.. surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of night and day and the ship that runs in the sea with profit to men , and the water god sends down from heaven therewith reviving the earth after it is dead and his scattering abroad in it all manner of crawling thing , and the turning about of the winds and the clouds compelled between heaven and earth -- surely there are signs for a people having understanding .
as reward for what they used to do .
thosewho , if we give them power in the land , order for iqamat-as-salat . ] , to pay the zakat and they enjoin al-ma'ruf , and forbid al-munkar . and with allah rests the end ofmatters .
unquestionably , the allies of allah there will be no fear concerning them , nor will they grieve
is not the time yet come unto those who believe , that their hearts should humble themselves to the admonition of allah and to the truth which hath come down , and that they become not as those who were vouchsafed the book aforetime , and the time become extended unto them , and so their hearts became hard ? and many of them are transgressors
or do they say :  we are a great multitude , and we shall be victorious ? 
then the twain found a bondman from our bondmen , him we had vouchsafed a mercy from before us , and him we had taught from our presence a knowledge .
do they not observe the camel , how it has been created ?
and leave those who take their religion as amusement and diversion and whom the worldly life has deluded . but remind with the qur'an , lest a soul be given up to destruction for what it earned ; it will have other than allah no protector and no intercessor . and if it should offer every compensation , it would not be taken from it . those are the ones who are given to destruction for what they have earned . for them will be a drink of scalding water and a painful punishment because they used to disbelieve .
indeed in yusuf and his brothers are signs * for those who enquire * * .
then they are restored to god their protector , the true . surely his is the judgment ; he is the swiftest of reckoners .
shrink ye at your offering the alms before your whispering ! then , when ye could do it not , and allah relented toward you , establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey allah and his apostle . and allah is aware of that which ye work .
see how we prefer one above anotherand verily , the hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in preference .
the likeness of the two parties is as one who is blind and deaf , and one that sees and hears , are they equally alike , will you not remember ?
they said , “ are you the one who did this to our gods , o abraham ? ”
we know that they say a mere mortal has taught itto him . the language of the person whom they think has taught it to him is not arabic . thisis in illustrious arabic .
he it is who sendeth down water from the sky , whence ye have drink , and whence are trees on which ye send your beasts to pasture .
as a provision for our bondmen ; and therewith we have quickened a dead land . even so will be the coming forth .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; and unto him all matters are returned .
pharaoh said , ‘ do you profess faith in him before i may permit you ? it is indeed a plot you have devised in the city to expel its people from it . soon you will know !
o you who believe ! if an evil-doer comes to you with a report , look carefully into it , lest you harm a people in ignorance , then be sorry for what you have done .
we rehearse to thee some of the story of moses and pharaoh in truth , for people who believe .
we have sent it down with truth , and with truth hascome down . and we have sent you only to give good news and to warn .
the unbelievers say :  we shall neither believe in this scripture nor inthatbefore it .  couldst thou but see when the wrong-doers will be made to stand before their lord , throwing back the wordon one another ! those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones :  had it not been for you , we should certainly have been believers ! 
pharaoh led his people astray and did not guide them .
i have turned my face to him who has created the heavens and the earth , uprightly , and i am not among the idolaters '
even though theirbrothers would like them to continue in error , and would not desist .
to allah belongs whatever there is in the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
when moses came back to his people , angry and grieved , he said :  evil it is that ye have done in my place in my absence : did ye make haste to bring on the judgment of your lord ?  he put down the tablets , seized his brother byhis head , and dragged him to him . aaron said :  son of my mother ! the people did indeed reckon me as naught , and went near to slaying me ! make not the enemies rejoice over my misfortune , nor count thou me amongst the people of sin . 
he is indeed successful who causeth it to grow ,
there is certainly a good exemplar for you in the apostle of allah—for those who look forward to allah and the last day , and remember allah much .
and the dwellers of the garden cry unto the dwellers of the fire : we have found that which our lord promised usthe truth . have yefound that which your lord promised the truth ? they say : yea , verily . and a crier in between them crieth : the curse of allah is on evil-doers ,
so we delivered him and the inmates of the ark , and made it a sign to the nations .
he is indeed one of our high ranking , firmly believing bondmen .
when you have divorced your wives and they have completed the fixed term , do not stop them from marrying other men if it is agreed between them honourably . this warning is for those among you who believe in god and the last day . this is both proper and right for you , for god knows and you do not know .
but those who repent thereafter , and make amends -- god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
so they both proceeded , till , when they embarked the ship , hescuttled it . musasaid :  have you scuttled it in order to drown its people ? verily , you have committed a thing  imra  . 
then when our decree came to pass we delivered saleh and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the humiliation of that day . verily thy lord ! he is the strong , the mighty .
god cites the example of a bonded slave , who has no power over anything ; and someone to whom we have given plentiful provision , from which he gives secretly and openly . are they equal in comparison ? all praise belongs to god , but most of them do not know .
and they say : we will by no means believe in you until you cause a fountain to gush forth from the earth for us .
the while you are helplessly watching that he is on the verge of death ,
he says , “ i destroyed vast wealth . ”
fast for a specified number of days , but if any one among you is ill or on a journey , let him fast the same number of days later . for those who can fast only with extreme difficulty , there is a way to compensate -- the feeding of a needy person . but he who does good of his own accord shall be well rewarded ; but to fast is better for you , if you only knew .
those who reject faith will not cease to be in doubt concerninguntil the hourcomes suddenly upon them , or there comes to them the penalty of a day of disaster .
the near event draws nigh .
he said , “ o nooh , he is not of your family ; his deeds are most improper ; therefore do not ask me a thing of which you do not have knowledge ; i advise you not to be unwise . ”
you have uttered a grievous thing
they will receive the same thing that the muslims will ? do they have any witness to such an agreement ? let them bring out such witness , if they are truthful .
: take him and fetter him
and every builder and diver from the demons ,
and we delivered moses and his companions , all of them ,
when you said to him whom allah had blessed , and whom youhad blessed , ‘ retain your wife for yourself , and be wary of allah , ’ and you had hidden in your heart what allah was to divulge , and you feared the people though allah is worthier that you should fear him , so when zayd had got through with her , we wedded her to you , so that there may be no blame on the faithful in respect of the wives of their adopted sons , when the latter have got through with them , and allah ’ s command is bound to be fulfilled .
are they those , of whom you swore that allah would never show them mercy . :  enter paradise , no fear shall be on you , nor shall you grieve . 
not a flippant jest .
when he approached it , a voice called out :
so they belied him , so we destroyed them . surely , in that there is a sign ; yet most of them do not believe .
the messengers will say ,  lord , my people had abandoned this quran . 
then thereafter there shall come a year wherein the people will be succoured and press in season .
and listen for the day when the caller will call out from a place quiet near , -
and bewore a day whereon we will raise up from each community a witness , then those who have disbelieved will not be given leave , nor they will be permitted to please allah .
on that day , no human and no jinn will be asked about his sins .
and those who strive against our signs to void them -- those shall be arraigned into the chastisement .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be paid in full for what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
would that they were content with what allah and his messenger gave them , and were to say :  allah suffices for us , and allah will give us out of his bounty and so will his messenger . it is to allah alone that we turn with hope . 
surely thereligion with allah is islam , and those to whom the book had been given did not show opposition but after knowledge had come to them , out of envy among themselves ; and whoever disbelieves in the communications of allah then surely allah is quick in reckoning .
whenthe son of mary is held up as an example , your people raise an outcry on this ,
those who try to challenge our miracles will be the dwellers of hell . 
but before that , what actually happened was , i used to think about it as , you could take care of your health , or you could take care of obligations , and one always came at the cost of the other .
so you start to hear these abusive voices , but you do n't hear one abusive voice , you hear about a thousand -- 100,000 abusive voices , like if the devil had tourette 's , that 's what it would sound like . but we all know in here , you know , there is no devil , there are no voices in your head . you know that when you have those abusive voices , all those little neurons get together and in that little gap you get a real toxic  i want to kill myself  kind of chemical , and if you have that over and over again on a loop tape ,
came back just since we knew already where to look for to find out if there was still something left . well , we were confined though , limited , i should rather say , for several reasons that it 's not worth explaining , to endoscopy only , of the many other options we had , and with a 4mm camera attached to it , we were successful in documenting and taking some fragments of what it turns out to be a reddish color , black color , and there is some beige fragments that later on we ran a much more sophisticated exams , xrf , x-ray diffraction , and the results are very positive
now often , a result of capgras syndrome is tragic . people have murdered those that they loved , believing that they were murdering an imposter . but there 's at least one case where capgras syndrome had a happy ending . this was recorded in 1931 .  research described a woman with capgras syndrome who complained about her poorly endowed and sexually inadequate lover .  but that was before she got capgras syndrome . after she got it ,  she was happy to report that she has discovered that he possessed a double who was rich , virile , handsome and aristocratic .  of course , it was the same man ,
and then here 's a shocker : even america 's most sexiest man alive , the sexiest man alive gets romantically played these days in a movie . and then on the female side , you have the opposite , in which you have these crazy superhero women . you 've got lady gaga . you 've got our new james bond , who 's angelina jolie . and it 's not just for the young , right ? even helen mirren can hold a gun these days . and so it feels like we have to move from this place where we 've got these uber-exaggerated images into something that feels a little more normal . so for a long time in the economic sphere ,
and in particular , the people who made this expensive solution were very upset because they thought ,  how can we hope to compete with something that 's essentially free ? we would lose all of our market .  and people were very angry , and they called him horrible names .
well , since i 'm a scientist , i 'd like to try to resolve this debate with some data , and in particular i 'd like to present some data to you from three questions that i ask with track your happiness . remember , this is from sort of moment-to-moment experience in people 's real lives . there are three questions . the first one is a happiness question : how do you feel , on a scale ranging from very bad to very good ? second , an activity question : what are you doing , on a list of 22 different activities
there 's two traits that i want you to also look out for that we do n't kind of get out of their system . do n't medicate kids for attention deficit disorder unless it is really , really freaking bad . the same with the whole things on mania and stress and depression , unless it is so clinically brutal , man . bipolar disorder is nicknamed the ceo disease . when steve jurvetson and jim clark and jim barksdale have all got it , and they built netscape -- imagine if they were given ritalin . we would n't have have that stuff , right ? al gore really would have had to invented the internet .
the only kitchen tools my staff had was a box cutter . the only working piece of equipment in my kitchen was a can crusher , because if it did n't come in a can , it came frozen in a box . the usda allows this . the usda allows all of this stuff . in case you ca n't tell , that 's , like , pink danish and some kind of cupcakes . chicken nuggets , tater tots , chocolate milk with high fructose , canned fruit cocktail -- a reimbursable meal . that 's what the government says is okay to feed our kids . it ai n't okay . you know what ? it is not okay . and we , all of us ,
this is our thousand-core supercomputer . we 're kind of software guys , and so nearly any problem that you pose , we like to try to solve with some software . one of the problems that you have if you 're trying to eradicate malaria or reduce it is you do n't know what 's the most effective thing to do . okay , we heard about bed nets earlier . you spend a certain amount per bed net . or you could spray . you can give drug administration . there 's all these different interventions but they have different kinds of effectiveness . how can you tell ? so we 've created , using our supercomputer , the world 's best computer model of malaria ,
it 's a really lucky demographic to work with . i keep getting older and older and they 're always the same age , and it 's just a crazy delightful job . i want to thank you for inviting me here . it 's a big treat for me to get to come to this conference . thanks . so it was about four years ago , five years ago , i was sitting on a stage in philadelphia , i think it was , with a bag similar to this . and i was pulling a molecule out of this bag . and i was saying , you do n't know this molecule really well ,
who at that point was opening a new factory on the war 's former front lines in sarajevo . she had started her business squatting in an abandoned garage , sewing sheets and pillow cases she would take to markets all around the city so that she could support the 12 or 13 family members who were counting on her for survival . by the time we met , she had 20 employees , most of them women , who were sending their boys and their girls to school . and she was just the start . i met women running essential oils businesses , wineries and even the country 's largest advertising agency .
that the human eye can not perceive .
we say ,  name a time you spent money on somebody else . 
you do n't get any money from that . you actually lose money because it does n't motivate them to perform any better . but when you give them 15 euro to spend on their teammates , they do so much better on their teams that you actually get a huge win on investing this kind of money . and i realize that you 're probably thinking to yourselves , this is all fine , but there 's a context that 's incredibly important for public policy and i ca n't imagine it would work there .
yet not sharing the same intrauterine environment . and when you look at those concordance ratios , one of the striking things that you will see is that in identical twins , that concordance rate is 77 percent . remarkably , though , it 's not 100 percent . it is not that genes account for all of the risk for autism , but yet they account for a lot of that risk , because when you look at fraternal twins , that concordance rate is only 31 percent . on the other hand , there is a difference between those fraternal twins and the siblings , suggesting that there are common exposures for those fraternal twins
this is even worse now :  then i 'd have a picture taken and dozens of glossies made . anyone begging for money or trying to extort from me would receive a copy of the picture and nothing else . 
and i 'm trying to play possum . this thing is very , very impressive . ok. so , that 's the first night . and this one is now 67 , and that 's not a good score . and this tells you , of course , how much you had in rem sleep , in deep sleep , and all this sort of thing . this was really fascinating because this gave that quantitation about all the different phases of sleep . so , it also then tells you how you do compared to your age group . it 's like a managed competition of sleep . and really interesting stuff . look at this thing and say ,  well , i did n't think i was a very good sleeper ,
and being able to do this on a very large scale , screen infants , screen children for autism , through something very robust , very reliable , is going to be very helpful to us in terms of being able to intervene at an early stage when we can have the greatest impact . how are we going to intervene ? it 's probably going to be a combination of factors . in part , in some individuals , we 're going to try and use medications . and so in fact , identifying the genes for autism is important for us to identify drug targets , to identify things that we might be able to impact
and it was because of scenes like this . in this scene , people are living in an iron lung . these are people who were perfectly healthy two or three days before , and then two days later , they can no longer breathe , and this polio virus has paralyzed not only their arms and their legs , but also their breathing muscles . and they were going to spend the rest of their lives , usually , in this iron lung to breathe for them . this disease was terrifying . there was no cure , and there was no vaccine . the disease was so terrifying that the president of the united states
so in 1965 , i went to what was called the worst bihar famine in india , and i saw starvation , death , people dying of hunger , for the first time . it changed my life . i came back home , told my mother ,  i 'd like to live and work in a village .  mother went into a coma .  what is this ? the whole world is laid out for you , the best jobs are laid out for you , and you want to go and work in a village ? i mean , is there something wrong with you ?  i said ,  no , i 've got the best eduction . it made me think .
if i wanted to make a difference , i already had the perfect instrument to do it , that music was the bridge that connected my world and his . there 's a beautiful quote by the romantic german composer robert schumann , who said ,  to send light into the darkness of men 's hearts , such is the duty of the artist .  and this is a particularly poignant quote because schumann himself suffered from schizophrenia and died in asylum . and inspired by what i learned from nathaniel , i started an organization on skid row of musicians called street symphony , bringing the light of music into the very darkest places , performing
experts say the research has actually been around for more than a decade , and more long-term studies need to be done . christina now swears by it . cs : it 's been the most wonderful thing for my migraine . ss : researchers are hoping to present their studies to the fda this summer . robert fischell : and that is the invention to treat migraines . you see , the problem is , 30 million americans have migraine headaches , and we need a means to treat it , and i think that we now have it . and this is the first device that we did , and i 'm going to talk about my second wish ,
and i always felt that the grandmother had kind of demanded , and insisted , that the villagers treat hyun-sook with the same respect they treated her . hyun-sook stayed at father keene 's , and her uncle agreed to let her stay there until the adoption went through . he actually agreed to the adoption . and i went off on assignment and came back a week later , and father keene said ,  i 've got to talk to you about hyun-sook .  i kind of said ,  oh god , now what ?  and he takes me into this room , and he closes the door , and he says ,  i have 75 children here in the orphanage , and it 's total bedlam . 
do we find a flourishing civil society , a vigorous rule of law and good security ? no . what we find in afghanistan is a judiciary that is weak and corrupt , a very limited civil society which is largely ineffective , a media which is beginning to get onto its feet but a government that 's deeply unpopular , perceived as being deeply corrupt , and security that is shocking , security that 's terrible . in pakistan , in lots of sub-saharan africa , again you can see democracy and elections are compatible with corrupt governments , with states that are unstable and dangerous . and when i have conversations with people , i remember
with a pathogenic bacterium -- a multi-drug-resistant pathogenic bacterium -- in the same time we give our anti-quorum sensing molecule , in fact , the animal lives . we think that this is the next generation of antibiotics and it 's going to get us around , at least initially , this big problem of resistance . what i hope you think , is that bacteria can talk to each other , they use chemicals as their words , they have an incredibly complicated chemical lexicon that we 're just now starting to learn about . of course what that allows bacteria to do is to be multicellular . so in the spirit of ted they 're doing things together
and here i am going to share with you only three of them . the first one is the school extension , of course . how do you explain drawings and engineering to people who are neither able to read nor write ? i started to build a prototype like that . the innovation was to build a clay vault . so then , i jumped on the top like that , with my team , and it works . the community is looking . it still works . so we can build . and we kept building , and that is the result . the kids are happy , and they love it . the community is very proud . we made it .
when i left the children 's home i had two things that i wanted to do . one was to find my family , and the other was to write poetry . in creativity i saw light . in the imagination i saw the endless possibility of life , the endless truth , the permanent creation of reality , the place where anger was an expression in the search for love , a place where dysfunction is a true reaction to untruth . i 've just got to say it to you all : i found all of my family in my adult life . i spent all of my adult life finding them ,
you read about it in your newspapers . you hear about it on your television sets .
and so , she really just completely ignored me most of the time . i noticed that at recess , she was the girl who picked the other girls to be on her team . it was very obvious , from the very beginning , that she was a leader . this is on the way home . and that 's north korea up along the hill . this is up along the dmz . they would actually cover the windows every night , so that light could n't be seen , because the south korean government has said for years that the north koreans may invade at any time . so there 's always this -- the closer you were to north korea , the more terrifying it was .
will die poor .  after two weeks of working in that village , it was time to go back . the mother came to me , knelt down , and said ,  leymah , take my daughter . i wish for her to be a nurse .  dirt poor , living in the home with my parents , i could n't afford to . with tears in my eyes , i said ,  no .  two months later , i go to another village on the same assignment and they asked me to live with the village chief . the women 's chief of the village has this little girl , fair color like me , totally dirty . and all day she walked around
to the most clear , joyful , playful image that you have , whether it 's with a toy , on a birthday or on a vacation . and begin to build to build from the emotion of that into how that connects with your life now . and you 'll find , you may change jobs -- which has happened to a number people when i 've had them do this -- in order to be more empowered through their play . or you 'll be able to enrich your life by prioritizing it and paying attention to it . most of us work with groups , and i put this up because the d.school , the design school at stanford ,
that i received my first deck of cards , and ever since that day , i have traveled around the world performing magic for boys and girls , men and women , husbands and wives , even kings and queens . voice : and who are these ? mt : ah , mischief-makers . watch . wake up . joker : whoa.mt : are you ready for your party piece ? joker : ready ! mt : let me see what you 've got . joker : presenting my pogo stick.mt : ah . watch out . joker : whoa , whoa , whoa , oh ! mt : but today , i am performing for a different kind of audience . i 'm performing for you . voice : signed card detected.mt : well , sometimes people ask me
you can bring your friends , or your colleagues , or your babysitter to walk along with you . and husbands can drag their wives across , if their wives do n't feel ready . but the point about the high bridge is that you have to have the confidence to know that you deserve to be on that bridge , that you have all the skills and experience you need in order to walk across the high bridge , but you just have to make the decision to take the first step and do it . thanks very much . it 's a great pleasure to be here . it 's a great pleasure to speak after
they know what they 're looking for . others are very uneasy . it 's an intimidating place . they feel that the institution is elitist . i 'm working to try and break down that sense of that elitism . i want to put people in a contemplative frame of mind , where they 're prepared to be a little bit lost , to explore , to see the unfamiliar in the familiar , or to try the unknown . because for us , it 's all about bringing them face to face with great works of art , capturing them at that moment of discomfort , when the inclination is kind of to reach for your iphone ,
i grew up with hippie parents in a log cabin . i started a site called treehugger -- i care about this stuff . i knew that eating a mere hamburger a day can increase my risk of dying by a third . cruelty : i knew that the 10 billion animals we raise each year for meat are raised in factory farm conditions that we , hypocritically , would n't even consider for our own cats , dogs and other pets .
and in the process , they 've enjoyed themselves thoroughly . they did all of this in four hours after seeing the computer for the first time . in another south indian village , these boys here had assembled a video camera and were trying to take the photograph of a bumble bee . they downloaded it from disney.com , or one of these websites , 14 days after putting the computer in their village . so at the end of it , we concluded that groups of children can learn to use computers and the internet on their own , irrespective of who or where they were . at that point , i became a little more ambitious
this is a guy called juanderson . at the age of 14 , in common with many 14-year-olds in the brazilian education system , he dropped out of school . it was boring . and juanderson , instead , went into what provided kind of opportunity and hope in the place that he lived , which was the drugs trade . and by the age of 16 , with rapid promotion , he was running the drugs trade in 10 favelas . he was turning over 200,000 dollars a week . he employed 200 people . he was going to be dead by the age of 25. and luckily , he met this guy , who is rodrigo baggio ,
and so we 're starting to see the establishment of men centers and men studies to think about how do we engage men in their experiences in the university . if you talk to faculty , they may say ,  ugh . yeah , well , they 're playing video games , and they 're gambling online all night long , and they 're playing world of warcraft , and that 's affecting their academic achievement .  guess what ? video games are not the cause . video games are a symptom . they were turned off a long time before they got here . so let 's talk about why they got turned off when they were between the ages of three and 13 .
we 've asked , well maybe older people are just trying to put a positive spin on an otherwise depressing existence .
apart from my work . so i 've decided to get a grip and sort it out . so i joined a gym .  now i do n't mean to mock , but being a fit 10-hour-a-day office rat is n't more balanced ; it 's more fit . lovely though physical exercise may be , there are other parts to life -- there 's the intellectual side ; there 's the emotional side ; there 's the spiritual side . and to be balanced , i believe we have to attend to all of those areas -- not just do 50 stomach crunches . now that can be daunting . because people say ,  bloody hell mate , i have n't got time to get fit .
because of the way that we collect , and because we require consent , we actually have a lot more male brains than female brains . males are much more likely to die an accidental death in the prime of their life . and men are much more likely to have their significant other , spouse , give consent than the other way around . so the first thing that we do at the site of collection is we collect what 's called an mr. this is magnetic resonance imaging -- mri . it 's a standard template by which we 're going to hang the rest of this data . so we collect this mr .
this is hermann goering . goering was hitler 's second in command in world war ii , his designated successor . and like hitler , goering fancied himself a collector of art . he went through europe , through world war ii , stealing , extorting and occasionally buying various paintings for his collection . and what he really wanted was something by vermeer . hitler had two of them , and he did n't have any . so he finally found an art dealer , a dutch art dealer named han van meegeren , who sold him a wonderful vermeer for the cost of what would now be 10 million dollars . and it was his favorite artwork ever .
you see them just throw away their lunch so they can run outside . and then , at one in the afternoon , they 're totally crashing . these are your children and grandchildren that are totally melting down when you pick them up , because they have n't had lunch . so if the only thing they 'd have to do after lunch is go to class , believe me , they 're going to sit there and eat their lunch . we need to --
this is the word that it talks with . so then we started to look at other bacteria , and these are just a smattering of the molecules that we 've discovered . what i hope you can see is that the molecules are related . the left-hand part of the molecule is identical in every single species of bacteria . but the right-hand part of the molecule is a little bit different in every single species . what that does is to confer exquisite species specificities to these languages . each molecule fits into its partner receptor and no other . so these are private , secret conversations . these conversations are for intraspecies communication .
that they wanted to start training the local entrepreneurs , giving them small loans . they set them up as what they called micro-distribution centers , and those local entrepreneurs then hire sales people , who go out with bicycles and pushcarts and wheelbarrows to sell the product . there are now some 3,000 of these centers employing about 15,000 people in africa . in tanzania and uganda , they represent 90 percent of coke 's sales . let 's look at the development side . what is it that governments and ngos can learn from coke ? governments and ngos need to tap into that local entrepreneurial talent as well , because the locals know how to reach
come together , and they would produce together a monumental set of diverse opinions that did n't pollute each other 's ideas -- but at the same time came together and resolved the problems . hopefully , really understand the customer at its heart , where the customer is , live with them in america . so -- sent the team off , and actually something different happened . they went other places .
and i photographed them , and told them how famous they were going to be when this book was done . and four months later , the adoption papers came through . this is saying goodbye to everybody at the orphanage . this is father keene with natasha at the bus stop . her great aunt at the airport . i had a wonderful deal with cathay pacific airlines for many years , where they gave me free passes on all their airlines in return for photography . it was like the ultimate perk . and the pilot , i actually knew -- because they used to let me sit in the jump seat , to tell you how long ago this was .
take it away eric . eric johanson : what we have here is a tank on the other side of the stage . and we have ... this computer screen can actually see the mosquitoes as they fly around . and pablos , if he stirs up our mosquitoes a little bit we can see them flying around . now , that 's a fairly straightforward image processing routine , and let me show you how it works . here you can see that the insects are being tracked as they 're flying around , which is kind of fun . next we can actually light them up with a laser . now , this is a low powered laser ,
so if you look at that data -- it 's right up on the national highway transportation safety administration 's website -- you can just look at the raw data , and begin to get a sense of the limited amount of evidence that 's in favor of car seats for children aged two and up .
it 's brilliant . now , we may laugh , but chris here is actually making up to 5,000 dollars a month running errands around his life . and 70 percent of this new labor force were previously unemployed or underemployed . i think taskrabbit and other examples of collaborative consumption are like lemonade stands on steroids . they 're just brilliant . now , when you think about it , it 's amazing , right , that over the past 20 years , we 've evolved from trusting people online to share information to trusting to handing over our credit card information , and now we 're entering the third trust wave : connecting trustworthy strangers to create all kinds
i went and got golf balls from golf courses . but everybody else was looking in the bush and looking in the ditches for golf balls . i 'm like , screw that . they 're all in the pond and nobody 's going into the pond . so i would go into the ponds and crawl around and pick them up with my toes . you just pick them up with both feet . you ca n't do it on stage . you get the golf balls , and you just throw them in your bathing suit trunks and when you 're done you 've got a couple hundred of them . but the problem is that people all did n't want all the golf balls .
and no one can get more than $ 100 a month .
as you 're going through this process . ca : i mean , you 're talking to different people around the world about the possibilities here . where is there most interest in actually doing something with this ? bg : well , we have n't picked a particular place , and there 's all these interesting disclosure rules about anything that 's called  nuclear ,  so we 've got a lot of interest , that people from the company have been in russia , india , china -- i 've been back seeing the secretary of energy here , talking about how this fits into the energy agenda . so i 'm optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have done some work .
it 's not to do with electricity or water . it 's the mobile phone . if you want to design from scratch virtually any service in africa , you would start now with the mobile phone . or you could go to places like this . this is a place called the madangiri settlement colony , which is a very developed slum about 25 minutes outside new delhi , where i met these characters who showed me around for the day . the remarkable thing about these girls , and the sign of the kind of social revolution sweeping through the developing world is that these girls are not married . ten years ago , they certainly would have been married .
of chucking a tapestry in the back of a car . they have to be wound on huge rollers , shipped in oversized freighters . some of them are so big we had , to get them into the museum , we had to take them up the great steps at the front . we thought very hard about how to present this unknown subject to a modern audience : the dark colors to set off the colors that remained in objects that were often faded ; the placing of lights to bring out the silk and the gold thread ; the labeling . you know , we live in an age where we are so used
those sweets were a bribe from a contractor who was trying to get my father to award him a government contract .
launched an extraordinary national effort to find a way to stop it . twenty years later , they succeeded and developed the polio vaccine . it was hailed as a scientific miracle in the late 1950s . finally , a vaccine that could stop this awful disease , and here in the united states it had an incredible impact . as you can see , the virus stopped , and it stopped very , very fast . but this was n't the case everywhere in the world . and it happened so fast in the united states , however , that even just last month jon stewart said this : jon stewart : where is polio still active ?
this is the second shift : open aid .
and all of this because of cumulative cultural adaptation . the chairs you 're sitting in , the lights in this auditorium , my microphone , the ipads and ipods that you carry around with you -- all are a result of cumulative cultural adaptation . now to many commentators , cumulative cultural adaptation , or social learning , is job done , end of story . our species can make stuff , therefore we prospered in a way that no other species has . in fact , we can even make the  stuff of life  -- as i just said , all the stuff around us . but in fact , it turns out that some time around 200,000 years ago ,
so we 've asked all sorts of questions to see if we could undo this finding .
girl 6 : like , if you were a girl and you were really adventurous and a real big tomboy , you would think that girls ' games were kinda sissy . girl 7 : i run track , i played soccer , i play basketball , and i love a lot of things to do .
but let me be very clear : vaccines do not cause autism .
so you can control for the basic things , like how hard the crash was , what seat the child was sitting in , etc. , the age of the child . and that 's that middle set of bars .
and so we said , right , we 'd redefined charity . we need to redefine the way these guys operate . how do we do that ? so what we did was , we created a global action plan , and we 're taking 10 percent of what 's raised in each country now and putting it into a global fund , and we 've got the best prostate cancer scientific minds in the world that look after that fund , and they come together each year and identify the number one priority , and that , last year , was getting a better screening test .
we literally fund hundreds if not thousands of institutions and researchers around the world , and when we looked at this more recently , we realized there 's a real lack of collaboration going on even within institutions , let alone nationally , let alone globally , and this is not unique to prostate cancer . this is cancer research the world over .
there are fewer male teachers . anybody who 's over 15 does n't know what this means , because in the last 10 years , the number of elementary school classroom teachers has been cut in half . we went from 14 percent to seven percent . that means that 93 percent of the teachers that our young men get in elementary classrooms are women . now what 's the problem with this ? women are great . yep , absolutely . but male role models for boys that say it 's all right to be smart -- they 've got dads , they 've got pastors , they 've got cub scout leaders , but ultimately , six hours a day , five days a week
on a scale that has been held constant to accommodate for inflation , has more than doubled , almost tripled , in that period . but you find essentially the same results , namely , that after a certain basic point -- which corresponds more or less to just a few 1,000 dollars above the minimum poverty level -- increases in material well-being do n't seem to affect how happy people are .
so now i do that tuesday morning jump , but it 's not any jump -- that was september 11th , 2001. and when we took off from the airfield , america was at peace . when we landed on the drop-zone , everything had changed . and what we thought about the possibility of those young soldiers going into combat as being theoretical was now very , very real -- and leadership seemed important . but things had changed ; i was a 46-year-old brigadier general . i 'd been successful , but things changed so much that i was going to have to make some significant changes , and on that morning , i did n't know it .
and then you can fire at me . all right . i think i ’ m going to take these off now , because i can ’ t see a damn thing when i ’ ve -- all right , ok. so , ah , that was fun . all right , good . so , ok , so why ? so we have the finger blasters . other people have dinosaurs , you know . why do we have them ? well , as i said , we have them because we think maybe playfulness is important . but why is it important ? we use it in a pretty pragmatic way , to be honest . we think playfulness helps us get to better creative solutions .
as much as the people that i 'm working with , but the ones who really get it done , they 're not out there talking about safety first . they know that other things come first -- the business of doing the work comes first , the business of getting it done . and i 'll never forget , up in the bering sea , i was on a crab boat with the  deadliest catch  guys -- which i also work on -- in the first season . we 're about 100 miles off the coast of russia : 50-foot seas , big waves , green water coming over the wheelhouse , right ? most hazardous environment i 'd ever seen ,
a variable that i think turns out to be fairly important in the equation for happiness . my hope is that over time , by tracking people 's moment-to-moment happiness and their experiences in daily life , we 'll be able to uncover a lot of important causes of happiness , and then in the end , a scientific understanding of happiness will help us create a future that 's not only richer and healthier , but happier as well . thank you . i would like to show you how architecture has helped to change the life of my community and has opened opportunities to hope . i am a native of burkina faso .
about 150,000 years ago , when language came online , we started to put words to this constant emergency , so it was n't just ,  oh my god , there 's a saber-toothed tiger ,  which could be , it was suddenly ,  oh my god , i did n't send the email . oh my god , my thighs are too fat . oh my god , everybody can see i 'm stupid . i did n't get invited to the christmas party !  so you 've got this nagging loop tape that goes over and over again that drives you insane , so , you see what the problem is ? what once made you safe now drives you insane . i 'm sorry to be the bearer of bad news , but somebody has to be .
so here 's a food web , or a map of feeding links between species that live in alpine lakes in the mountains of california .
the message seems to be that the readers are most likely to want to eat , maybe read a book , maybe see a movie , but not be engaged in their community . and you might think this is a small thing , but i think it 's important because it sets a tone and it reinforces the dangerous idea that politics is a spectator sport .
you may not know this word , but it should be your biological first name and last name . because neoteny means the retention of immature qualities into adulthood . and we are , by physical anthropologists , by many , many studies , the most neotenous , the most youthful , the most flexible , the most plastic of all creatures . and therefore , the most playful . and this gives us a leg up on adaptability . now , there is a way of looking at play that i also want to emphasize here , which is the play history . your own personal play history is unique , and often is not something we think about particularly .
and i felt that my english has improved a lot going there and chatting with friends . there they met children who are with a different standard and a different mindset , a totally different society . i mingled with almost everyone . they were very friendly . i had very good friends there , who are from delhi , who are from mumbai . even now we are in touch through facebook . after this ahmedabad trip i 've been like a totally different mingling with people and all of those . before that i feel like i was n't like this . i do n't even mingle , or start speaking with someone so quickly .
how do we stop people who 've behaved badly in one community doing so under a different guise ? in a similar way that companies often use some kind of credit rating to decide whether to give you a mobile plan , or the rate of a mortgage , marketplaces that depend on transactions between relative strangers need some kind of device to let you know that sebastian and chris are good eggs , and that device is reputation . reputation is the measurement of how much a community trusts you . let 's just take a look at chris . you can see that over 200 people have given him
after this , we noticed a couple of interesting things , which you 'll see . but i repeated this all over india and then through a large part of the world and noticed that children will learn to do what they want to learn to do . this is the first experiment that we did -- eight year-old boy on your right teaching his student , a six year-old girl , and he was teaching her how to browse . this boy here in the middle of central india -- this is in a rajasthan village , where the children recorded their own music and then played it back to each other
is i had to reach out to try to rebuild the trust of that force , rebuild their confidence -- me and them , and them and me , and our seniors and us as a force -- all without the ability to put a hand on a shoulder . entirely new requirement . also , the people had changed . you probably think that the force that i led was all steely-eyed commandos with big knuckle fists carrying exotic weapons . in reality , much of the force i led looked exactly like you . it was men , women , young , old -- not just from military ; from different organizations , many of them detailed to us just from a handshake .
whether it 's nature or the exercise itself , it certainly works .
20 years ago , there were three and a half million . and we 've seen a new disease , not like the 30 novel emerging communicable diseases . this disease is called sudden wealth syndrome . it 's an amazing phenomenon . all throughout the technology world , we 're seeing young people bitten by this disease of sudden wealth syndrome . but they 're using their wealth in a way that their forefathers never did . they 're not waiting until they die to create foundations . they 're actively guiding their money , their resources , their hearts , their commitments , to make the world a better place . certainly , nothing can give you more optimism than that .
we could tell you you 're having a heart attack so early it could save your life and prevent congestive heart failure . and then he did it again . we filled the balloon again a few minutes later and here you see , even after 10 seconds , a great rise in this piece , which we can have computers inside , under your chest like a pacemaker , with a wire into your heart like a pacemaker . and computers do n't go to sleep . we have a little battery and on this little battery that computer will run for five years without needing replacement . what does the system look like ?
but the important idea is that everything ’ s at hand , everything ’ s around . so when designers are working on ideas , they can start building stuff whenever they want . they don ’ t necessarily even have to go into some kind of formal workshop to do it . and we think that ’ s pretty important . and then the sad thing is , although preschools are full of this kind of stuff , as kids go through the school system it all gets taken away . they lose this stuff that facilitates this sort of playful and building mode of thinking . and of course , by the time you get to the average workplace ,
speaking of cool technology -- these little devices , little gis trackers like this , which they put into the vaccine carriers of their vaccinators . and then they can track them , and at the end of the day , they look and see , did these guys get every single street , every single house . this is the kind of commitment now we 're seeing to try and reach all of the children we 've been missing . and in afghanistan , we 're trying new approaches -- access negotiators . we 're working closely with the international committee of the red cross to ensure that we can reach every child . but as we tried these extraordinary things ,
we stop ourselves from doing things . we self-edit as we ’ re having ideas . and in some cases , our desire to be original is actually a form of editing . and that actually isn ’ t necessarily really playful . so that ability just to go for it and explore lots of things , even if they don ’ t seem that different from each other , is actually something that kids do well , and it is a form of play . so now , bob mckim did another version of this test in a rather famous experiment that was done in the 1960s . anybody know what this is ? it ’ s the peyote cactus .
which we 'll show you now . we picked madagascar . we have every road , every village , every , almost , square inch of madagascar . we have all of the precipitation data and the temperature data . that 's very important because the humidity and precipitation tell you whether you 've got standing pools of water for the mosquitoes to breed . so that sets the stage on which you do this . you then have to introduce the mosquitoes , and you have to model that and how they come and go . ultimately , it gives you this . this is malaria spreading across madagascar . and this is this latter part of the rainy season .
i mean , think about it : the care we take in selecting sunglasses , or jewelry , or accessories is really important , so if it is n't beautiful , it really does n't belong on your face . and this is what we 're pursuing here . but how we work on jawbone is really unique . i want to point at something here , on the left . this is the board , this is one of the things that goes inside that makes this technology work . but this is the design process : there 's somebody changing the board , putting tracers on the board , changing the location of the ics , as the designers on the other side are doing the work .
after all , aging is not a piece of cake .
according to the world bank , burkina faso is one of the poorest countries in the world , but what does it look like to grow up in a place like that ? i am an example of that . i was born in a little village called gando . in gando , there was no electricity , no access to clean drinking water , and no school . but my father wanted me to learn how to read and write . for this reason , i had to leave my family when i was seven and to stay in a city far away from my village with no contact with my family .
start below the safety threshold of circuit breakers . hmmm ... so we considered all of this . and we realized that electrical appliances must be able to communicate directly with the power receptacle itself . any electrical device -- an appliance , an extension cord , whatever -- must be able to tell the power outlet ,  hey , power outlet , i 'm drawing too much current . shut me off now , before i start a fire .  and the power outlet needs to be smart enough to do it . so here is what we did . we put a 10-cent digital transponder , a data tag , in the appliance plug . and we put an inexpensive , wireless data reader inside the receptacle
now , i was thinking about that and i said , you know , we 've got this immune response to this ridiculous molecule that we do n't make , and we see it a lot in other animals and stuff . but i said we ca n't get rid of it , because all the people who tried to transplant heart valves found out you ca n't get rid of that immunity . and i said , why do n't you use that ? what if i could stick this molecule , slap it onto a bacteria that was pathogenic to me , that had just invaded my lungs ? i mean i could immediately tap into
and that makes movember now the biggest funder of prostate cancer research and support programs in the world .
so now , my friends , if that is true , and it is true , what is the point ?  a complicated question . and so , you know , i talk to my friends and i go to plays where they 're singing russian songs . oh my god , you know what ? could we have -- no , we do n't have time . i taped my aunt . i taped my aunt singing a song in russian from the --
just as autism is a spectrum , there 's a spectrum of etiologies , a spectrum of causes . based on epidemiological data , we know that one of the causes , or one of the associations , i should say , is advanced paternal age , that is , increasing age of the father at the time of conception . in addition , another vulnerable and critical period in terms of development is when the mother is pregnant . during that period , while the fetal brain is developing , we know that exposure to certain agents can actually increase the risk of autism . in particular , there 's a medication , valproic acid , which mothers with epilepsy sometimes take ,
yet , everyone knows what is a chinese restaurant .
and the university of florence , to start probing the murals decorated by vasari on the long walls of the hall of the 500 searching for the lost leonardo . unfortunately , at that time we did not know that that was not exactly where we should be looking , because we had to go much deeper in , and so the research came to a halt , and it was only taken up in 2000 thanks to the interest and the enthusiasm of the guinness family . well , this time , we focused on trying to reconstruct the way the hall of the 500 was before the remodeling ,
they went to those who were running for seats to ask them ,  what is it that you will give the girls of this community when you win ?  and one of the guys who already had a seat was very -- because liberia has one of the strongest rape laws , and he was one of those really fighting in parliament to overturn that law because he called it barbaric . rape is not barbaric , but the law , he said , was barbaric . and when the girls started engaging him , he was very hostile towards them . these little girls turned to him and said ,  we will vote you out of office . 
tied to her knees . my mother was completely absorbent . and she would crawl around behind me going ,  who brings footprints into a building ? !  so that was kind of a clue that things were n't right . so before i start , i would like to thank the makers of lamotrigine , sertraline , and reboxetine , because without those few simple chemicals , i would not be vertical today . so how did it start ? my mental illness -- well , i 'm not even going to talk about my mental illness . what am i going to talk about ? okay . i always dreamt that , when i had my final breakdown ,
and i got these postcards of niagara falls , and pretty soon they 're in new york , and i do n't know where else . and i 'm telling myself ,  this is going to be a great car , they 're doing research that i 've never even thought about before .  right ? and they decided that instead of , like , having a studio , and six or seven apartments , it was cheaper to rent elizabeth taylor 's ex-house in malibu .
almost all of that growth will be in the developed world . almost all of that growth will be in places like monkey hill . this is where you 'll find the fastest growing young populations of the world . so if you want recipes to work -- for virtually anything -- health , education , government politics and education -- you have to go to these places . and if you go to these places , you meet people like this .
of secondary education . that name should tell you that the kenyan education system borrows almost everything from britain , circa 1950 , but has managed to make it even worse . so there are schools in slums like this . they 're places like this . that 's where maureen went to school . they 're private schools . there are no state schools in slums .
this is a woman from canada .
and caused a lot of losses , and we also have this new phenomenon , which i talked about last year , colony collapse disorder . and here we see a picture on top of a hill in central valley last december . and below , you can see all these out yards , or temporary yards , where the colonies are brought in until february , and then they 're shipped out to the almonds . and one documentary writer , who was here and looked at this two months after i was here , described this not as beehives but as a graveyard , with these empty white boxes with no bees left in them .
the first key shift is open knowledge .
and a few more beers , i said ,  there has to be some stuff that has n't come back .  then one more beer and it was , whatever happened to the mustache ? why has n't that made a comeback ? so then there was a lot more beers , and then the day ended with a challenge to bring the mustache back . so in australia ,  mo  is slang for mustache , so we renamed the month of november  movember  and created some pretty basic rules , which still stand today . and they are : start the month clean-shaven , rock a mustache -- not a beard , not a goatee , a mustache --
this is my passport from 2004. you 're not allowed to appear on u.k. passports with electronic equipment , but i insisted to the passport office that what they were seeing was actually a new part of my body , an extension of my brain , and they finally accepted me to appear with the passport photo .
he suffered a series of psychotic episodes in his early 20s , was treated with thorazine at bellevue , and ended up living homeless on the streets of skid row in downtown los angeles 30 years later . nathaniel 's story has become a beacon for homelessness and mental health advocacy throughout the united states , as told through the book and the movie  the soloist ,  but i became his friend , and i became his violin teacher , and i told him that wherever he had his violin , and wherever i had mine , i would play a lesson with him . and on the many times i saw nathaniel on skid row ,
ag : okay , there 's his fifth hypothesis . now that is a particularly -- that is a particularly adorable and articulate little boy , but what cristine discovered is this is actually quite typical . if you look at the way children play , when you ask them to explain something , what they really do is do a series of experiments . this is actually pretty typical of four year-olds . well , what 's it like to be this kind of creature ? what 's it like to be one of these brilliant butterflies who can test five hypotheses in two minutes ? well , if you go back to those psychologists and philosophers ,
because it was when that happened with this walk-and-talk idea that things became doable and sustainable and viable .
[ ... innovators ... ] [ ... until they came up with the name ... ] [ ... entrepreneurs ! ] [ they change the way we think about what is possible . ] [ they have a clear vision of how life can be better ] [ for all of us , even when times are tough . ] [ right now , it 's hard to see ... ] [ ... when our view is cluttered with obstacles . ] [ but turbulence creates opportunities ] [ for success , achievement , and pushes us ... ] [ to discover new ways of doing things ] [ so what opportunities will you go after and why ? ] [ if you 're an entrepreneur ] [ you know that risk is n't the reward . ] [ no . the rewards are driving innovation ... ]
if we were playing the game , that 's what we 'd do . if at any time during the game we want to learn more about the characters , we can go into this hidden hallway , and i 'll quickly just show you the interface . we can , for example , go find miko 's locker and get some more information about her . oops , i turned the wrong way .
so this simple mashup reveals that donors have not financed any schools in the areas
this seemingly natural tendency we have , towards isolation , towards keeping to ourselves , crashes head first into our modern world . this remarkable image is not a map of the world . in fact , it 's a map of facebook friendship links . and when you plot those friendship links by their latitude and longitude , it literally draws a map of the world . our modern world is communicating with itself and with each other more than it has at any time in its past . and that communication , that connectivity around the world , that globalization now raises a burden . because these different languages impose a barrier , as we 've just seen ,
in six months , how do we train these women ? sign language . you do n't choose the written word . you do n't choose the spoken word . you use sign language . and in six months they can become solar engineers . they go back and solar-electrify their own village . this woman went back and solar-electrified the first village , set up a workshop -- the first village ever to be solar-electrified in afghanistan [ was ] by the three women .
epilepsy can best be treated by responsive electrical stimulation . now , why do we use -- add on , nearly , an epileptic focus ? now , unfortunately , us technical people , unlike mr. bono , have to get into all these technical words . well ,  responsive electrical stimulation  means that we sense , at a place in your brain which is called an  epileptic focus ,  which is where the epileptic seizure begins -- we sense there , that it 's going to happen , and then we respond by applying an electrical energy at that spot , which erases the errant signal so that you do n't get the clinical manifestations of the migraine headache .
any guesses ? 1816. and what i can say is , in 2016 , doctors are n't going to be walking around with stethoscopes . there 's a whole lot better technology coming , and that 's part of the change in medicine . what has changed our society has been wireless devices . but the future are digital medical wireless devices , ok ? so , let me give you some examples of this to kind of make this much more concrete . this is the first one . this is an electrocardiogram . and , as a cardiologist , to think that you could see in real time a patient , an individual , anywhere in the world on your smartphone ,
fast-forward , 2004 : in the peak of our activism , the minister of gender liberia called me and said ,  leymah , i have a nine-year-old for you . i want you to bring her home because we do n't have safe homes .  the story of this little girl : she had been raped by her paternal grandfather every day for six months . she came to me bloated , very pale . every night i 'd come from work and lie on the cold floor . she 'd lie beside me and say ,  auntie , i wish to be well . i wish to go to school .  2010 : a young woman stands before president sirleaf
and just looking at the thing that 's important . that 's the kind of attention , the kind of consciousness , that we might expect from those butterflies who are designed to learn . well if we want to think about a way of getting a taste of that kind of baby consciousness as adults , i think the best thing is think about cases where we 're put in a new situation that we 've never been in before -- when we fall in love with someone new , or when we 're in a new city for the first time . and what happens then is not that our consciousness contracts ,
of  rockett 's tricky decision ,  which went gold two days ago . let 's hope it 's really stable . this is the second day in rockett 's life . the reason i 'm showing you this is i 'm hoping that the scene that i 'm going to show you will look familiar and sound familiar , now that you 've listened to some girls ' voices . and you can see how we 've tried to incorporate the issues that matter to them in the game that we 've created .
so we went to afghanistan for the first time , and we picked three women and said ,  we want to take them to india .  they said ,  impossible . they do n't even go out of their rooms , and you want to take them to india . 
he made 32 dollars . not bad . it 's also not good . apparently to really enjoy the music of joshua bell , you have to know you 're listening to joshua bell . he actually made 20 dollars more than that , but he did n't count it . because this woman comes up -- you see at the end of the video -- she comes up . she had heard him at the library of congress a few weeks before at this extravagant black-tie affair . so she 's stunned that he 's standing in a subway station . so she 's struck with pity . she reaches into her purse and hands him a 20 .
not just stuff .
so from that day forward , my life has become about a mustache .
on how well we behave or misbehave . now , capturing and correlating the trails of information that we leave in different places is a massive challenge , but one we 're being asked to figure out . what the likes of sebastian are starting to rightfully ask is , should n't they own their reputation data ? should n't the reputation that he 's personally invested on building on airbnb mean that it should travel with him from one community to another ? what i mean by this is , say he started selling second-hand books on amazon . why should he have to start from scratch ? it 's a bit like when i moved from new york to sydney .
so now we 're funding them to the tune of about five or six million dollars to collaborate and bringing them together , and that 's a unique thing in the cancer world , and we know , through that collaboration , it will accelerate outcomes . and that 's how we 're redefining the research world .
he 's probably the most remarkable social entrepreneur in education in the world . his name is madhav chavan , and he created something called pratham . and pratham runs preschool play groups for , now , 21 million children in india . it 's the largest ngo in education in the world . and it also supports working-class kids going into indian schools . he 's a complete revolutionary . he 's actually a trade union organizer by background , and that 's how he learned the skills to build his organization .
a little break . a little break . the first secret of shame for a woman for being a woman ,  a little break .  the adoption process took , like , a matter of months , so it was a closed shop , you know , sealed deal , an industrious , utilitarian solution : the government , the farmer , the adopting parents , the consumer , the mother , the earth , and the child , the crop . it 's kind of easy to patronize the past , to forego our responsibilities in the present . what happened then is a direct reflection of what is happening now . everybody believed themselves to be doing the right thing by god and by the state
it 'll generate electric currents , and the electric current in the brain can erase a migraine headache . that 's what we have discovered . so here 's a picture of what we 're doing . the patients who have a migraine preceded by an aura have a band of excited neurons -- that 's shown in red -- that moves at three to five millimeters a minute towards the mid-brain . and when it hits the mid-brain , that 's when the headache begins . there 's this migraine that is preceded by a visual aura , and this visual aura , by the way -- and i 'll show you a picture -- but it sort of begins with little dancing lights ,
so , for example , if i have , like —
things like breast cancer and colon cancer are directly tied to our lack of physical [ activity ] , ten percent in fact , on both of those .
but he did n't let go of art . he moved to new york city , and he put together a list of verbs — to roll , to crease , to fold — more than a hundred of them , and as he said , he just started playing around . he did these things to all kinds of material . he would take a huge sheet of lead and roll it up and unroll it . he would do the same thing to rubber , and when he got to the direction  to lift ,  he created this , which is in the museum of modern art . richard serra had to let go of painting
of course they will . but they ’ ll also ask ,  what can i do with it ?  might get to a really interesting example . and this openness is the beginning of exploratory play . any parents of young kids in the audience ? there must be some . yeah , thought so . so we ’ ve all seen it , haven ’ t we ? we ’ ve all told stories about how , on christmas morning , our kids end up playing with the boxes far more than they play with the toys that are inside them . and you know , from an exploration perspective , this behavior makes complete sense . because you can do a lot more with boxes than you can do with a toy .
but curiosity , exploration , are part of the play scene . if you want to belong , you need social play . and social play is part of what we 're about here today , and is a byproduct of the play scene . rough and tumble play . these lionesses , seen from a distance , looked like they were fighting . but if you look closely , they 're kind of like the polar bear and husky : no claws , flat fur , soft eyes , open mouth with no fangs , balletic movements , curvilinear movements -- all specific to play . and rough-and-tumble play is a great learning medium for all of us . preschool kids , for example , should be allowed to dive , hit , whistle ,
for everything , called eudaemonia . and then he breathed his last , with loved ones around him , and i know that he had chicken soup also , as his last meal .  i happen to know it for a fact . and then he died , and there was no more spinoza . extinct . and then , we do n't have a stuffed spinoza , but we do have a stuffed pavlov 's dog , and i visited him in the museum of hygiene in st. petersburg , in russia . and there he is , with this horrible electrical box on his rump in this fantastic , decrepit palace .  and i think it must have been a very , very dark day
because it worked . but every once in a while , there was still a patient convinced that he was sick , and he 'd come back . and my dad had a third jar of pills . and the jar of pills he had , he said , were the tiniest little pills he could find , so small you could barely see them . and he would say , listen , i know i gave you that huge pill , that complicated , hard-to-swallow pill before , but now i 've got one that 's so potent , that is really tiny and small and almost invisible . it 's almost like this thing here , which you ca n't even see . 
and that explains , in part , why we see such a broad spectrum in terms of its effects . although there are that many genes , there is some method to the madness . it 's not simply random 200 , 400 different genes , but in fact they fit together . they fit together in a pathway . they fit together in a network that 's starting to make sense now in terms of how the brain functions . we 're starting to have a bottom-up approach where we 're identifying those genes , those proteins , those molecules , understanding how they interact together to make that neuron work , understanding how those neurons interact together
now , what i 've talked about are physiologic metrics . but what i want to get to , the next frontier , very quickly , and why the stethoscope is on its way out , is because we can transcend listening to the valve sounds , and the breath sounds , because now , introduced by g.e . is a handheld ultra-sound . why is this important ? because this is so much more sensitive . here is an example of an abdominal ultrasound , and also a cardiac echo , which can be sent wireless , and then there 's an example of fetal monitoring on your smartphone .
who are really willing to work to go into schools . schools are underfunded . most schools in america spend less than 7,500 dollars a year teaching a child . that comes down to under five dollars an hour . most of you spend 10 , 15 dollars an hour for babysitters when you have them . so we 're spending less than 5 dollars an hour on the educational system . and if we 're going to change it , and change how we feed kids , we really have to rethink that . so , public and private partnerships , advocacy groups , working with foundations . in our school district , the way we afford this
now jpl , nasa and boeing , before they will hire a research and development problem solver -- even if they 're summa cum laude from harvard or cal tech -- if they have n't fixed cars , have n't done stuff with their hands early in life , played with their hands , they ca n't problem-solve as well . so play is practical , and it 's very important . now one of the things about play is that it is born by curiosity and exploration . but it has to be safe exploration . this happens to be ok -- he 's an anatomically interested little boy and that 's his mom . other situations would n't be quite so good .
restaurants and the food industry in general are pretty much the most wasteful industry in the world . for every calorie of food that we consume here in britain today , 10 calories are taken to produce it . that 's a lot . i want to take something rather humble to discuss . i found this in the farmers ' market today , and if anybody wants to take it home and mash it later , you 're very welcome to . the humble potato -- and i 've spent a long time , 25 years , preparing these . and it pretty much goes through eight different forms in its lifetime . first of all , it 's planted , and that takes energy .
and he gives play as a transformative force over his entire life . now there 's another play history that i think is a work in progress . those of you who remember al gore , during the first term and then during his successful but unelected run for the presidency , may remember him as being kind of wooden and not entirely his own person , at least in public . and looking at his history , which is common in the press , it seems to me , at least -- looking at it from a shrink 's point of view -- that a lot of his life was programmed .
who graduates from high school in kansas city , missouri . he joins the army . the army gives him a rifle . they send him to iraq . every day he leaves the wire with a mission . that mission is to defend the freedom of the family that he left at home . it 's to keep the men around him alive . it 's to pacify the village that he works in . he 's got a purpose . but he comes home [ to ] kansas city , missouri , maybe he goes to college , maybe he 's got a job , but he does n't have that same sense of purpose . you give him a chainsaw . you send him to joplin , missouri
 it 's just not something you want to say to a mother that 's having a baby for the first time .  rg : and of course , we think it 's precisely what you really should be saying to mothers who have kids for the first time . and that this , of course , one of the themes for us is that we think that candor and brutal honesty is critical to us collectively being great parents . and it 's hard not to think that part of what leads to this sense of isolation is our modern world . so alisa 's experience is not isolated . so your 58 percent of mothers surveyed
despite the fact that when i was in iraq , we did an opinion poll in 2003 and asked people what political systems they preferred , and the answer came back that seven percent wanted the united states , five percent wanted france , three percent wanted britain , and nearly 40 percent wanted dubai , which is , after all , not a democratic state at all but a relatively prosperous minor monarchy , democracy is a thing of value for which we should be fighting . but in order to do so we need to get away from instrumental arguments . we need to get away from saying democracy matters
i hope now that i was able to make my community proud through this work , and i hope i was able to prove you the power of community , and to show you that architecture can be inspiring for communities to shape their own future . merci beaucoup . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . on my desk in my office , i keep a small clay pot that i made in college . it 's raku , which is a kind of pottery that began in japan centuries ago as a way of making bowls for the japanese tea ceremony .
and we 're the caterpillars who are inching along our narrow , grownup , adult path . if this is true , if these babies are designed to learn -- and this evolutionary story would say children are for learning , that 's what they 're for -- we might expect that they would have really powerful learning mechanisms . and in fact , the baby 's brain seems to be the most powerful learning computer on the planet . but real computers are actually getting to be a lot better . and there 's been a revolution in our understanding of machine learning recently . and it all depends on the ideas of this guy ,
just below that to the right is rwanda though , which is amazingly green .
that knew me for longer than a year . see , that 's what family does . it gives you reference points . i 'm not defining a good family from a bad family . i 'm just saying that you know when your birthday is by virtue of the fact that somebody tells you when your birthday is , a mother , a father , a sister , a brother , an aunt , an uncle , a cousin , a grandparent . it matters to someone , and therefore it matters to you . understand , i was 14 years old , tucked away in myself , into myself , and i was n't touched either , physically touched . i 'm reporting back . i 'm reporting back simply to say that
one thing that 's interesting : if you look at frontal-impact crashes -- when the car crashes , the front hits into something -- indeed , what you see is that the car seats look a little bit better .
but i kept writing bad poetry , and he did n't blow up the math building , but he went to cuba . but i gave him the money , because i was from riverdale so i had more money than he did . and that was a good thing to help , you know , the cause . but , then he came back , and things happened , and i decided i really hated my writing , that it was awful , awful , purple prose . and i decided that i wanted to tell --
great people have made commitments -- we will protect our children from want and from fear . the u.n. has the convention on the rights of the child . countries like america , we 've heard things like no child left behind . other countries come with different things . there is a millennium development called three that focuses on girls . all of these great works by great people aimed at getting young people to where we want to get them globally , i think , has failed . in liberia , for example , the teenage pregnancy rate is three to every 10 girls . teen prostitution is at its peak . in one community , we 're told ,
but what 's interesting is the government telling us to use them is not actually based on very much .
what will happen to societies that are top-heavy with older people ? the outcome .
i said ,  i 'll make a concession . i 'll take the husbands along as well .  so i took the husbands along .
and just as these north-to-south transfers are opening up , so too are the development institutions that channeled these transfers .
it was a landscape with figures , semi-dressed , drinking wine . there was a nude woman in the lower foreground , and on the hillside in the back , there was a figure of the mythological god bacchus , and he said ,  what is this ?  and i -- no one else did , so i put up my hand , and i said ,  it 's a bacchanal by titian .  he said ,  it 's a what ?  i thought maybe i 'd pronounced it wrong .  it 's a bacchanal by titian .  he said ,  it 's a what ?  i said ,  it 's a bacchanal by titian .  he said ,  you boneless bookworm ! it 's a fucking orgy ! 
when you go into a football game you can get booze in for free , everybody bought them . supply , demand , big opportunity . i also branded it , so i sold them for five times the normal cost . it had our university logo on it . you know we teach our kids and we buy them games , but why do n't we get them games , if they 're entrepreneurial kids , that kind of nurture the traits that you need to be entrepreneurs ? why do n't you teach them not to waste money ? i remember being told to walk out in the middle of a street in banff , alberta
perhaps none of us do . so i leave you with this third question . can technology alter the acquisition of values ? finally , self-organizing systems , about which , again , i wo n't say too much because you 've been hearing all about it . natural systems are all self-organizing : galaxies , molecules , cells , organisms , societies -- except for the debate about an intelligent designer . but at this point in time , as far as science goes , it 's self-organization . but other examples are traffic jams , stock market , society and disaster recovery , terrorism and insurgency . and you know about the internet-based self-organizing systems . so here are my four sentences then . remoteness affects the quality of education .
i also knew that i 'm not alone . we as a society are eating twice as much meat as we did in the 50s . so what was once the special little side treat now is the main , much more regular . so really , any of these angles should have been enough to convince me to go vegetarian . yet , there i was -- chk , chk , chk -- tucking into a big old steak . so why was i stalling ? i realized that what i was being pitched was a binary solution .
these are the lonely warriors like my father and many , many others , and a key frontier of development work is to help these lonely warriors join hands so they can together overcome the odds .
i would like you to approve it for selling ,  then they would say ,  this is a fantastic new car seat , it works great . it only got a 500 , it could have gotten as high up as a 1,000 .  and this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors into being approved as a car seat . so , in some sense , what this is suggesting is that it 's not just that people are setting up their car seats wrong , the car seats are n't doing much . so here 's the crash . so these are timed at the same time , so you can see that it takes much longer with the car seat --
i want to introduce you to some of those entrepreneurs i 've met and share with you some of what they 've taught me over the years . i went to afghanistan in 2005 to work on a financial times piece , and there i met kamila , a young women who told me she had just turned down a job with the international community that would have paid her nearly $ 2,000 a month -- an astronomical sum in that context . and she had turned it down , she said , because she was going to start her next business , an entrepreneurship consultancy that would teach business skills
so , we 're not just talking about physiologic metrics -- the key measurements of vital signs , and all those things in physiology -- but also all the imaging that one could look at in your smartphone . now , this is an example of another obsolete technology , soon to be buried : the holter monitor . twenty-four hour recording , lots of wires . this is now a little tiny patch . you can put it on for two weeks and send it in the mail . now , how does this work ? well , there is these smart band-aids or these sensors that one would put on , on a shoe or on the wrist .
but let 's take a look . first , we 've got population . the world today has 6.8 billion people . that 's headed up to about nine billion . now , if we do a really great job on new vaccines , health care , reproductive health services , we could lower that by , perhaps , 10 or 15 percent , but there we see an increase of about 1.3. the second factor is the services we use . this encompasses everything : the food we eat , clothing , tv , heating . these are very good things : getting rid of poverty means providing these services to almost everyone on the planet . and it 's a great thing for this number to go up .
and with wonderful results like that flight . and we 're working on a bigger plane -- 220-foot span -- and an intermediate-size , one with a regenerative fuel cell that can store excess energy during the day , feed it back at night , and stay up 65,000 feet for months at a time . ray morgan 's voice will come in here . there he 's the project manager . anything they do is certainly a team effort . he ran this program . here 's ... some things he showed as a celebration at the very end . ray morgan : we 'd just ended a seven-month deployment of hawaii . for those who live on the mainland , it was tough being away from home .
harvest palms , smoke . harvest witness , smoke . resolutions , smoke . salvation , smoke . redemption , smoke . breathe . do not fear what has blown up . if you must , fear the unexploded . thank you . i 'm going to talk today about energy and climate . and that might seem a bit surprising because my full-time work at the foundation is mostly about vaccines and seeds , about the things that we need to invent and deliver to help the poorest two billion live better lives . but energy and climate are extremely important to these people --
on a specific area of one of the two walls . well , we also learned that vasari , who was commissioned to remodel the hall of the 500 between 1560 and 1574 by the grand duke cosimo i of the medici family , we have at least two instances when he saved masterpieces specifically by placing a brick wall in front of it and leaving a small air gap . one that we [ see ] here , masaccio , the church of santa maria novella in florence , so we just said , well maybe , visari has done something like that in the case of this great work of art by leonardo ,
while we 're still in the womb . now i 'm a science reporter . i write books and magazine articles . and i 'm also a mother . and those two roles came together for me in a book that i wrote called  origins .   origins  is a report from the front lines of an exciting new field called fetal origins . fetal origins is a scientific discipline that emerged just about two decades ago , and it 's based on the theory that our health and well-being throughout our lives is crucially affected by the nine months we spend in the womb . now this theory was of more than just intellectual interest to me .
and i was back with a guy , lashing the pots down . so , i 'm 40 feet off the deck , which is like looking down at the top of your shoe , you know , and it 's doing this in the ocean . unspeakably dangerous . i scamper down , i go into the wheelhouse and i say , with some level of incredulity ,  captain , osha .  and he says ,  osha ? ocean .  and he points out there . but in that moment , what he said next ca n't be repeated in the lower 48. it ca n't be repeated on any factory floor or any construction site . but he looked at me , and he said ,  son  --
the united states did . in 1935 , there were 150,000 cases a year of malaria in the united states , but ddt and a massive public health effort managed to squelch it . so we thought ,  well , we 've done all these things that are focused on the plasmodium , the parasite involved . what can we do to the mosquito ? well , let 's try to kill it with consumer electronics .  now , that sounds silly , but each of these devices has something interesting in it that maybe you could use . your blu-ray player has a very cheap blue laser . your laser printer has a mirror galvanometer that 's used to steer a laser beam very accurately ;
a section of the tissue and transfer it to a microscope slide . we 're going to then apply one of those stains to it , and we scan it . and then what we get is our first mapping . so this is where experts come in and they make basic anatomic assignments . you could consider this state boundaries , if you will , those pretty broad outlines . from this , we 're able to then fragment that brain into further pieces , which then we can put on a smaller cryostat . and this is just showing this here -- this frozen tissue , and it 's being cut . this is 20 microns thin , so this is about a baby hair 's width .
and almost universally , amongst all the kids , they were really psychologically damaged by having been made fun of , ridiculed , picked on and been rejected . and korea was probably the place i found to be the worst for these kids . and what struck me immediately in meeting hyun-sook was how confident she appeared to be , how happy she seemed to be in her own skin . and remember this picture , because i 'm going to show you another picture later , but you can see how much she looks like her grandmother , although she looks so western . i decided to follow her to school . this is the first morning i stayed with her .
it 's not ancient history . when you read the biblical plague of boils , that was smallpox . pharaoh ramses the fifth , whose picture is here , died of smallpox . to eradicate smallpox , we had to gather the largest united nations army in history . we visited every house in india , searching for smallpox -- 120 million houses , once every month , for nearly two years . in a cruel reversal , after we had almost conquered smallpox -- and this is what you must learn as a social entrepreneur , the realm of the final inch . when we had almost eradicated smallpox , it came back again , because the company town of tatanagar drew laborers ,
to people we think of as our peers , to those around us . and this fear is what causes us to be conservative in our thinking . so we might have a wild idea , but we ’ re afraid to share it with anybody else . ok , so if you try the same exercise with kids , they have no embarrassment at all . they just quite happily show their masterpiece to whoever wants to look at it . but as they learn to become adults , they become much more sensitive to the opinions of others , and they lose that freedom and they do start to become embarrassed . and in studies of kids playing , it ’ s been shown
 difficult husband ; not possible .  called the husband , the husband came , swaggering , politician , mobile in his hand .  not possible .   why not ?   the woman , look how beautiful she is .  i said ,  yeah , she is very beautiful .   what happens if she runs off with an indian man ?  that was his biggest fear . i said ,  she 'll be happy . she 'll ring you up on the mobile .  she went like a grandmother and came back like a tiger .
the new vaccine had twice the impact on these last couple of viruses as the old vaccine had , and we immediately started using this . well , in a couple of months we had to get it out of production . and it started rolling off the production lines and into the mouths of children around the world . and we did n't start with the easy places . the first place this vaccine was used was in southern afghanistan , because it 's in places like that where kids are going to benefit the most from technologies like this . now here at ted , over the last couple of days ,
and they never get any press for that . but they get a lot of press because they do a lot of terrible things as well . so , there 's all kinds of bacteria on the earth that have no business being in you or on you at any time , and if they are , they make you incredibly sick . and so , the question for my lab is whether you want to think about all the good things that bacteria do , or all the bad things that bacteria do . the question we had is how could they do anything at all ? i mean they 're incredibly small ,
because in botswana , with good economy and governance , they can manage to treat people . and if people who are infected are treated , they do n't die of aids . these percentages wo n't come down because people can survive 10 to 20 years . so there 's some problem with these metrics now . but the poorer countries in africa , the low-income countries down here , there the rates fall faster , of the percentage infected , because people still die . in spite of pepfar , the generous pepfar , all people are not reached by treatment , and of those who are reached by treatment in the poor countries , only 60 percent are left on treatment after two years .
these examples give new hope , new possibility to the problems i witnessed in uganda or that my father confronted in bihar .
now i 'm in charge of all the cooking classes and all the gardening classes in our school district . so this is a typical menu . this is what we 're serving this week at the schools . and you see these recipes on the side ? those are the recipes that the kids learn in my cooking classes . they do tastings of these ingredients in the gardening classes . they also may be growing them . and we serve them in the cafeterias . if we 're going to change children 's relationship to food , it 's delicious , nutritious food in the cafeterias , hands-on experience -- you 're looking in cooking and gardening classes --
in fact , you could be in a bottle with a cap on top , and you would not die at all , and you would not need any fresh air . we have tried these plants at our own building in delhi , which is a 50,000-square-feet , 20-year-old building . and it has close to 1,200 such plants for 300 occupants . our studies have found that there is a 42 percent probability of one 's blood oxygen going up by one percent if one stays indoors in this building for 10 hours . the government of india has discovered or published a study to show that this is the healthiest building in new delhi .
tied up in a little penned-in area , and i said ,  well , when do they go in ?  and she said ,  probably never .  and as i walked away from that , i had this crystallization , probably from the blow , because it was an insult in a way . i thought ,  oh , if there 's no pictures , then there 'll be no record . we need a record .  and i thought ,  i 'm gon na make that record . i 'll find a way to get in , because i do n't want to see this history disappear .  jb : he did . he pulled in every favor he could , and got a pass into the world trade center site ,
now it 's good to be a grownup . i do n't want to say too much about how wonderful babies are . it 's good to be a grownup . we can do things like tie our shoelaces and cross the street by ourselves . and it makes sense that we put a lot of effort into making babies think like adults do . but if what we want is to be like those butterflies , to have open-mindedness , open learning , imagination , creativity , innovation , maybe at least some of the time we should be getting the adults to start thinking more like children . so , here we go : a flyby of play .
you know that what you need to do is possible to do , even though difficult , and sense of time disappears , you forget yourself , you feel part of something larger . and once the conditions are present , what you are doing becomes worth doing for its own sake .
for the apple lisa and the macintosh . so , they learned their way to that by building prototypes . another example is a group of designers who were working on a surgical instrument with some surgeons . they were meeting with them ; they were talking to the surgeons about what it was they needed with this device . and one of the designers ran out of the room and grabbed a white board marker and a film canister -- which is now becoming a very precious prototyping medium -- and a clothespin . he taped them all together , ran back into the room and said ,  you mean , something like this ? 
on fast food . we spend 100 billion dollars a year on diet aids . we spend 50 billion dollars on vegetables , which is why we need all the diet aids . we spend 200 billion dollars a year on diet-related illness today , with nine percent of our kids having type 2 diabetes . 200 billion . so you know what , when we talk about needing 8 billion more , it 's not a lot . that 8 billion comes down to two dollars and 49 cents -- that 's what the government allocates for lunch . most school districts spend two thirds of that on payroll and overhead . that means we spend less than a dollar a day
and i immediately wrote a letter to my best friends in atlanta , georgia , who had an 11-year-old son . and my best friend had mistakenly one day said something about wishing he had another child . so here my friends gene and gail had not heard from me in about a year , and suddenly i was calling , saying  i 'm in korea , and i 've met this extraordinary girl .  and i said ,  the grandmother thinks she 's sick , but i think maybe we would have to bring the grandmother over also .  and i said ,  i 'll pay for the ...  i mean , i had this whole sort of picture .
for a general audience . and that , to me , today , is now the challenge and the fun of my job , supporting the vision of my curators , whether it 's an exhibition of samurai swords , early byzantine artifacts , renaissance portraits , or the show we heard mentioned earlier , the mcqueen show , with which we enjoyed so much success last summer . that was an interesting case . in the late spring , early summer of 2010 , shortly after mcqueen 's suicide , our curator of costume , andrew bolton , came to see me , and said ,  i 've been thinking of doing a show on mcqueen , and now is the moment . we have to , we have to do it fast . 
just plain fun . photographer paul nicklin traveled to antarctica to shoot a story on leopard seals . they have been rarely photographed , partly because they are considered one of the most dangerous predators in the ocean . in fact , a year earlier , a researcher had been grabbed by one and pulled down to depth and killed . so you can imagine paul was maybe a little bit hesitant about getting into the water . now , what leopard seals do mostly is , they eat penguins . you know of  the march of the penguins .  this is sort of the munch of the penguins . here a penguin goes up to the edge and looks out
what 's going to happen ? well , the cdc has gone further to say that those children born in the year 2000 could be the first generation in our country 's history to die at a younger age than their parents . and it 's because of what we feed them . because eight-year-olds do n't get to decide -- and if they do , you should be in therapy . you know , we are responsible for what kids eat . but oops , maybe they 're responsible for what kids eat . big companies spend 20 billion dollars a year marketing non-nutrient foods to kids . 20 billion dollars a year . 10,000 ads most kids see .
100,000 dollars . it costs 50 dollars . we can probably make it for 50 cents , if we put our mind to it . why does n't somebody do it ? and the answer is ,  how do you make a profit in a capitalist system , doing that ?  interesting problem . so , let me finish by saying that we 've thought about this as a kind of engineering problem . and we 've asked : what is the scientific unifying idea here ? and we 've decided that we should think about this not so much in terms of cost , but in terms of simplicity . simplicity is a neat word . and you 've got to think about
is a high school project . i would like to share with you this . the innovation in this project is to cast mud like you cast concrete . how do you cast mud ? we start making a lot of mortars , like you can see , and when everything is ready , when you know what is the best recipe and the best form , you start working with the community . and sometimes i can leave .
world war ii came to an end , and goering was captured , tried at nuremberg and ultimately sentenced to death . then the allied forces went through his collections and found the paintings and went after the people who sold it to him . and at some point the dutch police came into amsterdam and arrested van meegeren . van meegeren was charged with the crime of treason , which is itself punishable by death . six weeks into his prison sentence , van meegeren confessed . but he did n't confess to treason . he said ,  i did not sell a great masterpiece to that nazi . i painted it myself ; i 'm a forger . 
and i 'd like to talk very briefly about three new inventions that will change the lives of many people . at the present time , it takes an average of three hours after the first symptoms of a heart attack are recognized by the patient , before that patient arrives at an emergency room . and people with silent ischemia -- which , translated into english , means they do n't have any symptoms -- it takes even longer for them to get to the hospital . the ami , acute myocardial infarction , which is a doctor 's big word so they can charge you more money -- -- means a heart attack . annual incidence : 1.2 million americans .
where the percentage of illiteracy is very high , we use puppetry . puppets is the way we communicate . you have jokhim chacha who is 300 years old . he is my psychoanalyst . he is my teacher . he actually raises money , solves my disputes . he solves my problems in the village . if there 's tension in the village , if attendance at the schools goes down and there 's a friction between the teacher and the parent , the puppet calls the teacher and the parent in front of the whole village and says ,  shake hands . the attendance must not drop . 
if we can figure them out in these sort of primitive organisms , the hope is that they will be applied to other human diseases and human behaviors as well . i hope that what you 've learned is that bacteria can distinguish self from other . by using these two molecules they can say  me  and they can say  you .  again of course that 's what we do , both in a molecular way , and also in an outward way , but i think about the molecular stuff . this is exactly what happens in your body . it 's not like your heart cells and your kidney cells get all mixed up every day ,
and then finally , the last set of bars , which are really controlling for everything you could possibly imagine about the crash , 50 , 75 , 100 different characteristics of the crash .
this is from lahaina , and when we 're walking along a beach , we 're actually walking along millions of years of biological and geological history . we do n't realize it , but it 's actually a record of that entire ecology . so here we see , for example , a sponge spicule , two bits of coral here , that 's a sea urchin spine . really some amazing stuff . so when i first looked at this , i was -- i thought , gee , this is like a little treasure trove here . i could n't believe it , and i 'd go around dissecting the little bits out and making photographs of them . here 's what most of the sand in our world looks like .
other people , in the morning , got a slip of paper that said ,  by 5:00 pm today , spend this money on somebody else . 
so once he gets to that point of beginning to create , like jennifer did in her improvisation , a new reality -- that is , a moment of ecstasy -- he enters that different reality . now he says also that this is so intense an experience that it feels almost as if he did n't exist .
and you put on the t-10 parachute . and you 're very careful how you put the straps , particularly the leg straps because they go between your legs . and then you put on your reserve , and then you put on your heavy rucksack . and then a jumpmaster comes , and he 's an experienced nco in parachute operations . he checks you out , he grabs your adjusting straps and he tightens everything so that your chest is crushed , your shoulders are crushed down , and , of course , he 's tightened so your voice goes up a couple octaves as well . then you sit down , and you wait a little while ,
in terms of fuel , this really solves the problem . i 've got a picture here of a place in kentucky . this is the leftover , the 99 percent , where they 've taken out the part they burn now , so it 's called depleted uranium . that would power the u.s. for hundreds of years . and , simply by filtering seawater in an inexpensive process , you 'd have enough fuel for the entire lifetime of the rest of the planet . so , you know , it 's got lots of challenges ahead , but it is an example of the many hundreds and hundreds of ideas that we need to move forward . so let 's think : how should we measure ourselves ?
at rebound , it takes a lot longer -- but there 's just a lot less movement for child who 's in the seatbelt . so , i 'll show you the six-year-old crashes as well . the six-year-old is in a car seat , and it turns out that looks terrible , but that 's great . that 's like a 400 , ok ? so that kid would do fine in the crash . nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all . and then here 's the six-year-old in the seatbelt , and in fact , they get exactly within , you know , within one or two points of the same . so really , for the six-year-old ,
performance company called lone twin . lone twin had come to minto and worked with the residents , and they had created these dances . this australian-indian girl , she came out and started to dance on her front lawn , and her father peered out the window to see what all the noise and commotion was about , and he soon joined her . and he was followed by her little sister . and soon they were all dancing this joyous , exuberant dance right there on their lawn . and as i walked through the neighborhood , i was amazed and i was moved by the incredible sense of ownership this community clearly felt
so , here is the data . here i have , among two- to six-year-olds -- anyone above six , basically no one uses car seats , so you ca n't compare -- 29.3 percent of the children who are unrestrained
in 17 countries . it reminds me of a song that i remember from my childhood ,  i 'd like to teach the world to sing ,  that also went number one on the pop charts . both songs have something in common : that same appeal of celebration and unity . so how does health and development market ? well , it 's based on avoidance , not aspirations . i 'm sure you 've heard some of these messages .  use a condom , do n't get aids .   wash you hands , you might not get diarrhea .  it does n't sound anything like  wavin ' flag  to me . and i think we make a fundamental mistake -- we make an assumption ,
we go on blind dates . you know , after all , if it does n't work out , there 's always tomorrow . people over 50 do n't go on blind dates .
i 've seen people challenging the audience again and again to believe in the impossible . so this morning at about seven o'clock , i decided that we 'd try to drive chris and the production crew here berserk by downloading all of our data from india again , so that you could see something that 's just unfolding today , which proves that the impossible is possible . and only two years ago , people were saying that this is impossible . now remember , northern india is the perfect storm when it comes to polio . over 500,000 children are born in the two states that have never stopped polio --
do n't even worry .
and it turns out that as we called around to the independent crash test companies around the country , none of them wanted to do our crash test because they said , some explicitly , some not so explicitly ,  all of our business comes from car seat manufacturers .
for my first day down under . i mean , i 'd thought about the harbour bridge or bondi beach , but minto ? but still , i 'm a producer , and the lure of a site-specific theater project was more than i could resist . so , off i went into friday afternoon traffic , and i 'll never forget what i saw when i got there . for the performance , the audience walked around the neighborhood from house to house , and the residents , who were the performers , they came out of their houses , and they performed these autobiographical dances on their lawns , on their driveways . the show is a collaboration with a u.k.-based