a vehicle with four wheels drawn by two or more horses
come to a close
a complex mental state involving beliefs and feelings and values and dispositions to act in certain ways
make fast ; tie or secure , with or as if with a rope
the event of something burning
the line along which opposing armies face each other
a pack of ٥٢ playing cards
a naturally enclosed space
continue a certain state , condition , or activity
become settled or established and stable in one 's residence or life style
be distinguished or eminent
denote or connote
go one 's own away ; move apart
a decimal unit of measurement of the metric system
add as part of something else ; put in as part of a set , group , or category
the ripened reproductive body of a seed plant
a linear sequence of words as spoken or written
the social act of assembling for some common purpose
the creation of something in the mind
practice intended to polish performance or refresh the memory
acting the part of a character on stage ; dramaticially representing the character by speech and action and gesture
have offspring or young
the act of rolling something
activity intended to achieve a particular sensory result
exhaust or tire through overuse or great strain or stress
begin to deal with
an offensive against an enemy
project through the air
have a craving , appetite , or great desire for
a group of ships of similar type
let have
bring to a highly developed , finished , or refined state
become cheerful
attain success or reach a desired goal
stop sleeping
the system of production and distribution and consumption
a general concept that marks divisions or coordinations in a conceptual scheme
place temporarily
of little importance or influence or power ; of minor status
the goal intended to be attained
a collection of objects laid on top of each other
a group of organisms forming a subdivision of a larger category
natural objects visible in the sky
something that serves as a means of transportation
the child of your aunt or uncle
serve oneself to , or consume regularly
a judgment of the qualities of something or somebody
a condition requiring relief
undertake a journey or trip
motor that converts thermal energy to mechanical work
young sheep
a conveyance that transports mail
a group of persons together in one place
act so as to bring into existence
kill by firing a missile
a strong drive for success
a duty that you are assigned to perform
an adult male person
a strong positive emotion of regard and affection
the male of species equus caballus
prevent deliberatelyfrom inheriting
the act of cancelling ; calling off some arrangement
a person who loves or is loved
kill intentionally and with premeditation
formal systematic questioning
the quality of being difficult to detect or analyze
try to locate or discover , or try to establish the existence of
any of a number of hoofed mammals superficially similar but not necessarily closely related taxonomically
the electrical discharge that travels along a nerve fiber
an appellation signifying nobility
a body of people who settle far from home but maintain ties with their homeland ; inhabitants remain nationals of their home state but are not literally under the home state 's system of government
one of the twelve divisions of the calendar year
an imaginary line around the earth forming the great circle that is equidistant from the north and south poles
an actor 's portrayal of someone in a play
an institution dedicated to education
the precise location of something ; a spatially limited location
the state of actually existing objectively
the physical magnitude of something
a positive feeling of liking
activity that releases or expresses creative energy or emotion
any of a variety of plants usually grown especially in a flower or herb garden
an event that does not accomplish its intended purpose
the act of traveling by foot
pass through the esophagus as part of eating or drinking
a person engaged in one of the learned professions
a state of deep and often prolonged unconsciousness ; usually the result of disease or injury
the act of putting something in a certain place or location
the act of running ; traveling on foot at a fast pace
earnest and conscientious activity intended to do or accomplish something
influence decisively
cause to go on or to be engaged or set in operation
fail to keep or to maintain ; cease to have , either physically or in an abstract sense
the point of intersection of coordinate axes ; where the values of the coordinates are all zero
the quality of being something that holds you back
instrumentality that combines interrelated interacting artifacts designed to work as a coherent entity
the metal or paper medium of exchange that is presently used
be in accord ; be in agreement
the territory occupied by a nation
something added to foods to make them taste sweeter
destroy microorganisms or pathogens by cleansing
the act of indicating or pointing out by name
a systematic means of communicating by the use of sounds or conventional symbols
the status of belonging to a particular nation by birth or naturalization
older brother or sister
cognitive processes that presuppose the availability of knowledge and put it to use
an animal such as a mule or burro or horse used to carry loads
saline fluid secreted by lacrimal glands ; lubricates the surface of the eyeball
copy down as is
a customary way of operation or behavior
change in physical make-up
the part of the earth 's surface covered with water
subject to a search
an opportunity to state your case and be heard
the act of soiling something
any severe mental disorder in which contact with reality is lost or highly distorted
a division of an ocean or a large body of salt water partially enclosed by land
relinquish possession or control over
an assemblyto conduct judicial business
feel physical pain
the act of walking somewhere
space for one line of printused to measure advertising
a compound formed by replacing hydrogen in an acid by a metal
run or move very quickly or hastily
unwillingness to recognize and respect differences in opinions or beliefs
a longrod of wood or metal or plastic
be engaged in a fight ; carry on a fight
the deepest and most remote part
getdone
the quality of being unlike or dissimilar
an abrupt failure of function or health
accepted or habitual practice
grow worse
turn up , loosen , or remove earth
any of various cud-chewing hoofed mammals having a stomach divided into fourcompartments
an almost pleasurable sensation of fright
any of various domesticated animals
a situation treated as an observable object
remove oneself from an association with or participation in
span an interval of distance , space or time
communication by means of transmitted signals
someone who plays a musical instrument
put into an upright position
an enclosure for animals
take off weight
a short musical composition with words
device that bursts with sudden violence from internal energy
a creation that is a visual or tangible rendering of someone or something
give false or misleading information to
a fixed reference point on the concave side of a conic section
an event that is a beginning ; a first part or stage of subsequent events
give out or allot
state characterized by emotions ranging from mild discontentment to deep grief
crew of a ship including the officers ; the whole force or personnel of a ship
causing to move repeatedly from side to side
make level or straight
perform a function
any hollow cylindrical body structure
the verbal act of offering
a person appointed to a high office in the government
be worth or be capable of buying
any entity that causes events to happen
people who perform a particular kind of skilled work
move very fast
the act of transporting something from one location to another
a category of words having the same grammatical properties
a stock or supply of foods
cause to be alert and energetic
an organized group of workmen
make a pretence of
institution to express belief in a divine power
a person who rules or commands
goods carried by a large vehicle
a piece of furniture with a writing surface and usually drawers or other compartments
either of the two large fleshy masses of muscular tissue that form the human rump
the state of being without clothing or covering of any kind
any compound of oxygen with another element or a radical
a natural father or mother
an abrupt transition
praise , glorify , or honor
mean or intend to express or convey
devise or invent
a skilled worker who practices some trade or handicraft
a human limb ; commonly used to refer to a whole limb but technically only the part between the knee and ankle
an animal that produces gametesthat can fertilize female gametes
a person who livesnear another
a unifying idea that is a recurrent element in a literary or artistic work
fasten with a lock
liquid food especially of meat or fish or vegetable stock often containing pieces of solid food
the time at which something is supposed to begin
the beginning or duration or completion or repetition of the action of a verb
the celebration of the eucharist
a military unit that is part of the airforce
be cognizant or aware of a fact or a specific piece of information ; possess knowledge or information about
a person who is unusual
the activity of worshipping
wealth reckoned in terms of money
a level of existence or development
articles of the same kind or material ; usually used in combination : silverware ; software
any of the small solid extraterrestrial bodies that hits the earth 's atmosphere
have in mind as a purpose
undergarment worn next to the skin and under the outer garments
a hiding place ; usually a remote place used by outlaws
a white nutritious liquid secreted by mammals and used as food by human beings
the abode of satan and the forces of evil ; where sinners suffer eternal punishment
accept
freedom from doubt ; belief in yourself and your abilities
the act of examining something closely
make by combining materials and parts
someone of something wonderful
come upon or take unawares
two people who are married to each other
the exterior covering of a bird 's egg
the trait of judging wisely and objectively
a small round container that is open at the top for holding tobacco
fruit with red or yellow or green skin and sweet to tart crisp whitish flesh
give as a present ; make a gift of
guess correctly ; solve by guessing
seating on the main floor in a theater
changing to a lower state
deprive somebody of something by deceit
cut the surface of ; wear away the surface of
causing something without any direct or apparent effort
leave or give by will after one 's death
the creation of beautiful or significant things
the act of making a proposal
the time during which a school holds classes
the posterior part of a humanbody from the neck to the end of the spine
perceive to be the same
assets in the form of money
the scientific study of language
a person who represents others
relation by which any position with respect to any other position is established
have a great affection or liking for
the continuum of experience in which events pass from the future through the present to the past
take in liquids
an artificial crown fitted over a broken or decayed tooth
an alkaloid narcotic drug extracted from opium ; a powerful , habit-forming narcotic used to relieve pain
an abundant nonmetallic tetravalent element occurring in three allotropic forms : amorphous carbon and graphite and diamond ; occurs in all organic compounds
the act of passing from one state or place to the next
the name used to identify the members of a family
the remainsof a plant or animal that existed in a past geological age and that has been excavated from the soil
the hard ridge that forms the upper part of the nose
the activity or result of distributing or disposing persons or things properly or methodically
the social force that binds you to your obligations and the courses of action demanded by that force
refuse to accept or acknowledge
a way of entering or leaving
the process of thinking
an act of aggression
an open fabric of string or rope or wire woven together at regular intervals
a diversion that holds the attention
a time in lifeat which some particular qualification or power arises
a group of people living together in a camp
inspire with confidence ; give hope or courage to
activity that transgresses moral or civil law
get from the earth by excavation
the act of grinding to a powder or dust
a superficial aspect as opposed to the real nature of something
the act of raising something
dense vegetation consisting of stunted trees or bushes
change clothes ; put on different clothes
form or compose
informal terms for money
put to the test , as for its quality , or give experimental use to
oval reproductive body of a fowlused as food
the path followed by an object moving through space
the act of changing something into something different in essential characteristics
feel or handle with the fingers
a substance prepared according to a formula
the time after sunset and before sunrise while it is dark outside
make or cause to be or to become
a car that is old and unreliable
body of a dead animal or person
a mature sexual reproductive cell having a single set of unpaired chromosomes
a linguistic relation established by grammar
useless or profitless activity ; using or expending or consuming thoughtlessly or carelessly
a general vicinity
a system of units used to measure areas
a presentation to the mind in the form of an idea or image
a vehicle that takes people to and from hospitals
a soft bag filled with air or a mass of padding such as feathers or foam rubber etc .
a pliable sheet of tissue that covers or lines or connects organs or cells of animals
touch lightly and with affection , with brushing motions
request the participation or presence of
people engaged in a particular occupation
process or manner of functioning or operating
a writer for newspapers and magazines
the positive integer that is equivalent to one in the next higher counting place
have ownership or possession of
a radio or television show
an act that is regarded by theologians as a transgression of god 's will
the act of giving temporary assistance
a unit with political responsibilities
a youthful person
an informal term for a person 's role
single thickness of usually some homogeneous substance
the act of concealing the identity of something by modifying its appearance
the feeling of a hostile person
a polyhedron having a polygonal base and triangular sides with a common vertex
the property possessed by the curving of a line or surface
bring to an end ; settle conclusively
a point located with respect to surface features of some region
written works
notify of danger , potential harm , or risk
a reportabout the behavior of other people
teach and supervise ; act as a trainer or coach , as in sports
restraint that attaches to something or holds something in place
a spherical object used as a plaything
something that is certain
a vertical surface of a building or cliff
the content of direct observation or participation in an event
information reported in a newspaper or news magazine
a state in which you are unable to function normally and without pain
heal or recover
a sponsor who books and stages public entertainments
come to terms or deal successfully with
the expression on a person 's face
a substance used as a coating to protect or decorate a surface ; dries to form a hard coating
the sound of a bell ringing
the general feeling that some desire will be fulfilled
a sheet of any written or printed material
an unknown and unpredictable phenomenon that causes an event to result one way rather than another
be teeming , be abuzz
a building with glass walls and roof ; for the cultivation and exhibition of plants under controlled conditions
an amount of a product
turning or twisting around
a line of text serving to indicate what the passage below it is about
a line traced by a point traveling in a constant direction ; a line of zero curvature
the trait of being resolute ; firmness of purpose
spur on
housing structures collectively ; structures in which people are housed
air movingfrom an area of high pressure to an area of low pressure
the act of stopping something
the action of attacking an enemy
uninterrupted connection or union
form an opinion of or pass judgment on
the cognitive process of reaching a decision
information known only to a special group
a man of refinement
make it possible through a specific action or lack of action for something to happen
measure the time or duration of an event or action or the person who performs an action in a certain period of time
the period of time that is happening now ; any continuous stretch of time including the moment of speech
a person who communicates with others
a taxonomic group containing one or more genera
a publication containing a variety of works
a specific piece of work required to be done as a duty or for a specific fee
the body of people who lead a group
a curve generated by the intersection of a plane and a circular cone
be in the right place or situation
an occupation requiring special education
chew
the state of being confined
a prolonged disorder of eating due to loss of appetite
come to pass
walk leisurely and with no apparent aim
any of various games played with a ballin which two teams try to kick or carry or propel the ball into each other 's goal
the arts of drawing or painting or printmaking
the cards held in a card game by a given player at any given time
remove by or as if by cutting
speak with others about ; talkover in detail ; have a discussion
the act of decreasing or reducing something
a person who exercises control over workers
power to influence or coerce
demand payment
a theatrical performer
attach something somewhere by means of nails
physical energy or intensity
something proposed
a plane curve formed by the intersection of a right circular cone and a plane parallel to an element of the curve
the contestant you hope to defeat
the act of changing one thing for another thing
preparing or putting through a prescribed procedure
the human act of creating
to go stealthily or furtively
endure
the region that is outside of something
use one 's feet to advance ; advance by steps
a row of unravelled stitches
the particular portion of space occupied by a physical object
be in charge of , act on , or dispose of
take upon oneself ; act presumptuously , without permission
in law ; the territory within which power can be exercised
a sequence of instructions that a computer can interpret and execute
dry coloring matter
give entirely to a specific person , activity , or cause
a religious ceremony in which something is made holy
biconvex transparent body situated behind the iris in the eye ; it focuses light waves on the retina
a object firmly fixed in place
the quantity contained in a bottle
a white crystalline carbohydrate used as a sweetener and preservative
make sense of ; assign a meaning to
make one 's home or live in
once thought to be one of four elements composing the universe
an unshakable belief in something without need for proof or evidence
becoming aware of something via the senses
low-lying wet land with grassy vegetation ; usually is a transition zone between land and water
an enclosure for confining livestock
property that is leased or rented out or let
a natural object resembling a machine in structure or function
an abnormal condition
a jumbled collection or mass
the distinct personality of an individual regarded as a persisting entity
preoccupation with something to the exclusion of all else
a large number of people united for some specific purpose
a small pouch inside a garment for carrying small articles
have life , be alive
the ground on which people and animals move about
a process that alters the energy or structure or composition of atomic nuclei
cover with whitewash
kill as a means of socially sanctioned punishment
any group of human beingscollectively
a group of birds
take hold of ; grab
be in debt
either of two lines that connect a horse 's harness to a wagon or other vehicle or to a whiffletree
battle or contend against in or as if in a battle
changing location rapidly
unfasten or release from or as if from a hitch
give over ; surrender or relinquish to the physical control of another
impose a penalty on ; inflict punishment on
or a little more ; and recite the qur'an in slow , measured rhythmic tones .
and they inquire of you , “ is it true ? ” say , “ yes , by my lord , it is true , and you can not evade it . ”
for them is good tidings in the present life and in the world to come . there is no changing the words of god ; that is the mighty triumph .
as for the youth , his parents were believers and we feared that he would trouble them by rebellion and denial of truth .
therefore , for their breaking their covenant and their disbelief in the communications of allah and their killing the prophets wrongfully and their saying : our hearts are covered ; nay ! allah set a seal upon them owing to their unbelief , so they shall not believe except a few .
upon the world and the hereafter . and they question thee concerning orphans . say : to improve their lot is best . and if ye mingle your affairs with theirs , thenyour brothers . allah knoweth him who spoileth from him who improveth . had allah willed he could have overburdened you . allah is mighty , wise .
they said ,  postponehim and his brother and send among the cities gatherers
and the poets -the deviators follow them ;
but allah bears witness by what he has revealed to you that he has revealed it with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness ; and allah is sufficient as a witness .
when it seeth them from afar , they hear the crackling and the roar thereof .
then pharaoh pursued them with his forces , but the waters completely overwhelmed them and covered them up .
and those who disbelieved willsay ,  our lord , show us those who misled us of the jinn and menwe may put them under our feet that they will be among the lowest . 
and untie the knot from my tongue
remember how those who bent on denying the truth plotted against you to imprison you or kill you or expel you : they schemed -- but god also schemed . god is the best of schemers .
surely pure religion is for allah only . and those who choose protecting friends beside him : we worship them only that they may bring us near unto allah . lo ! allah will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ . lo ! allah guideth not him who is a liar , an ingrate .
except the servants of god , sincere and devoted .
alif . lam . mim .
the people of noah also rejected the messengers .
and indeed the retribution will surely come to pass !
men are the maintainers of women for that allah has preferred in bounty one of them over another , and for that they have spent of their wealth . righteous women are obedient , guarding in secret that which allah has guarded . those from whom you fear rebelliousness , admonish them and desert them in the bed and smack them . then , if they obey you , do not look for any way against them . allah is high , great .
they shall keep going back and forth between it and the extremely hot boiling water .
for that they used not to fear any account ,
so let there be a body among you who may call to the good , enjoin what is esteemed and forbid what is odious . they are those who will be successful .
those who , for the love of him , feed the needy , and the orphan , and the captive ,
whomever we grant old age , we reverse his development . do they not understand ?
let him who will take heed :
he said , “ my lord ! determine a sign for me ” ; he said , “ the sign is that you shall not be able to speak to mankind for three days except by signs ; and remember your lord profusely , and proclaim his purity before sunset and at dawn . ”
verily , allah ! unto him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth , he gives life and he causes death . and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
that is how we deal with evil-doers .
one who commits sins has committed them against his own soul . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
so that youmay believe in god and his messenger , help , and respect god and glorify him in the morning and the evening .
it is he who created you of clay , then determined a term and a term is stated with him ; yet thereafter you doubt .
and wherefore was there not a town which should believe so that their belief should have profited them but the people of yunus ? when they believed , we removed from them the chastisement of disgrace in this world 's life and we gave them provision till a time .
and if it had been our will , we could have transformed themin their places . then they should have been unable to go forwardnor they could have turned back . .
powerful and eminent with the lord of the throne ,
where believers are concerned , they respect no tie of kinship or treaty . they are people who overstep the limits .
that it is a recitation honourable .
in fact , he had brought them the truth and had acknowledged the messengers .
are those who seek god 's pleasure equal to those who incur his wrath and whose dwelling will be hell , the terrible destination ?
and he pulled out his hand , and it was white to the onlookers .
nor will they be blamed who came to you for transport , to whom you said :  i can not find any means of conveyance for you ,  and they went away in tears , grieving that they lacked the means to spend .
he said , “ o my people , i am not in error , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds . ”
a sign for them is the night . from it we withdraw the day and they are in darkness .
how god has produced you from the earth and caused you to grow ,
did he not put their scheme into ruin ?
and let not those who hoard up that which allah hath bestowed upon them of his bounty think that it is better for them . nay , it is worse for them . that which they hoard will be their collar on the day of resurrection . allah 's is the heritage of the heavens and the earth , and allah is informed of what ye do .
and assuredly we have destroyed the cities round about you . and we have variously propounded our signs , that haply they might return .
then should we turn the message away , disregarding you , because you are a transgressing people ?
what is your opinion – regarding him who forbids –
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit lewdness no people anywhere have ever committed before you ? ”
do you not see how god compares a good word to a good tree ? its root is firm and its branches are in the sky ,
and their purpose was to tempt thee away from that which we had revealed unto thee , to substitute in our name something quite different ; , behold ! they would certainly have made theefriend !
have ye taken security from him who is in the heaven that he will not cause the earth to swallow you when lo ! it is convulsed ?
o people who believe ! if you obey the disbelievers , they will make you turn back on your heels , so you will then turn back as losers .
these are revelations of allah ; we rehearse them unto thee with truth , and allah intendeth not wrong unto the worlds .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
and his wife , standing by laughed when we gave her good tidingsof isaac , and , after isaac , of jacob .
if you sought a verdict , the verdict has certainly come to you ; and if you cease , it is better for you , but if you resume , weshall return and your troops will never avail you though they should be ever so many , andthat allah is with the faithful .
when they had passed over , he said to his page , 'bring us our breakfast ; indeed , we have encountered weariness from this our journey . '
and we have assigned unto them some companions who made fairseeming unto them that which was before them and that which was behind them justified upon them was the word pronounced on the communities of the jinn and mankind who passed away before them ; verily they were the losers .
and will not say that the book was revealed only to two groups of people before you , or that you were ignorant of its knowledge ,
and verily , iliyaswas one of the messengers .
but seek , through that which allah has given you , the home of the hereafter ; and , do not forget your share of the world . and do good as allah has done good to you . and desire not corruption in the land . indeed , allah does not like corrupters . 
you pass by their desolate habitations in the morning
and who guard their prayers .
and those who readfor a reminder ,
when our messengers came to abraham with good news , they said :  we have to destroy this city as its inhabitants have become sinful . 
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you , and fulfillmy covenantso that i fulfillyour covenant , and fear none but me .
and , 'take in thy hand a bundle of rushes , and strike therewith , and do not fail in thy oath . ' surely we found him a steadfast man . how excellent a servant he was ! he was a penitent .
they said , “ if he steals , then indeed his brother has stolen before ” ; so yusuf kept this in his heart and did not reveal it to them ; he replied within himself , “ in fact , you are in a worse position ; and allah well knows the matters you fabricate . ”
and other faces , on that day , with dust upon them ,
can the dead to whom we have given life and light so that they may walk among the people , be considered equal to those who can never come out of darkness ? the deeds of the unbelievers are made to seem attractive to them .
they will be asked :  how long did you live on the earth in terms of years ? 
by inspiration we told moses :  travel by night with my servants ; for surely ye shall be pursued . 
indeed the hour is bound to come ; there is no doubt in it . but most people do not believe .
and of them there is he who saith : give me leave , and tempt me not . lo ! into temptation they are already fallen , and verily the hell is the encompasser of the infidels .
and they say :  what sort of a messenger is this , who eats food , and walks through the streets ? why has not an angel been sent down to him to give admonition with him ?
but those who are rightly guided will be given greater guidance by him , and they will have their intrinsic piety .
our messengers came to abraham with glad news . they said ,  peace be with you .  he replied similarly . after a short time he presented them with a roasted calf
and they say , “ if we follow the guidance along with you , people would snatch us away from our land ” ; did we not establish them in a safe sacred land , towards which are brought fruits of all kinds – the sustenance from us ? but most of them do not know .
the parable of those who spend their property in the way of allah is as the parable of a grain growing seven earsa hundred grains in every ear ; and allah multiplies for whom he pleases ; and allah is ample-giving , knowing
the people of 'ad , too , rejected the messengers .
allah – there is no worship except for him ; his only are the best names .
your lord did not destroy the people of the towns without first sending a messenger to the mother town who would recite his revelations to them . we did not want to destroy the towns if the people therein were not unjust .
we inspired moses to throw his staff , and suddenly it began to swallow-up all that the magicians hadinvented .
those who hide the book sent down by allah and exchange it for an abject price – they only fill their bellies with fire and allah will not speak to them on the day of resurrection nor will he purify them ; and for them is a painful punishment .
then let him call upon his henchmen !
they said :  our lord ! verily ! we fear lest he should hasten to punish us or lest he should transgress . 
and they say : 'the merciful has taken a son '
indeed , the religion in the sight of allah is islam . and those who were given the scripture did not differ except after knowledge had come to them - out of jealous animosity between themselves . and whoever disbelieves in the verses of allah , then indeed , allah is swift inaccount .
and your lord would never destroy the towns wrongfully , while their people were right-doers .
 but those who reject faith and belie our signs , they shall be companions of the fire ; they shall abide therein . 
and keep your duty unto him who created you and the generations of the men of old .
therefore be careful ofallah as much as you can , and hear and obey and spend , it is better for your souls ; and whoever is saved from the greediness of his soul , these it is that are the successful .
and had allah known in them any good he would surely have made them hearken ; and even if he made them hear , they would surely turn away as backsliders .
o believers , any one of you who turns back on his faiththat god could verily bringanother people whom he would love as they would love him , gentle with believers , unbending with infidels , who would strive in the way of god , unafraid of blame by any slanderer . such is the favour of god which he bestows on whomsoever he will . god is infinite and all-knowing .
and showed them the right path .
and what is in the breasts is made apparent ?
and anguish will be heaped upon anguish :
to advise ; and we never oppress .
and in perpetually flowing water .
now when they saw no hope of his , they held a conference in private . the leader among them said :  know ye not that your father did take an oath from you in allah 's name , and how , before this , ye did fail in your duty with joseph ? therefore will i not leave this land until my father permits me , or allah commands me ; and he is the best to command .
andthese examples , we set them forth for men , and none understand them but the learned .
how many generations have we destroyed since noah ! your lord suffices as one who is aware of and sees the sins of his worshipers .
say , “ if the most gracious had a son , i would be the first to worship . ”
that he may question the truthful of their truth . and for the infidels he hath gotten ready a torment afflictive .
how we pour down rain in abundance ,
truly there is a lesson in this for those who fear .
allah was certainly pleased with the faithful when they swore allegiance to you under the tree . he knew what was in their hearts , so he sent down composure on them , and requited them with a victory near at hand
so call on god with exclusive obedience , howsoever the unbelievers may dislike it .
indeed , this is the great attainment .
and when you see those who enter into false discourses about our communications , withdraw from them until they enter into some other discourse , and if the shaitan causes you to forget , then do not sit after recollection with the unjust people .
and it did not beseem your lord to have destroyed the towns tyrannously , while their people acted well .
he it is who created you of clay and then decreed a term - and a term determined is with him - yet ye waver .
for they were two of our believing servants .
as for him who says to his parents , ‘ fie on you ! do you promise me that i shall be raisedwhen generations have passed away before me ? ’ and they invoke allah ’ s help : ‘ woe to you ! believe ! indeed allah ’ s promise is true. ’ but he says , ‘ these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ’
, whether we make you see a part of the punishment that we have threatened them with come to pass during your life-time , or we take you away before that happens , your duty is no more than to convey the message , and it is for us to make a reckoning .
while you dwelt in the dwellings of those who had wronged themselves , and it had been made clear to you how we had dealt with them , and we hadcited examples for you ? ’
they will enter perennial gardens with streams of water and all they wish . thus will the pious and devout be rewarded .
and we desired that we should be gracious unto those who were weakened in the land , and we should make them leaders and we should make them the inheritors .
and by oath of the night when it recedes
the decree of god will surely come ; so do not try to hasten it : too glorious and high is he for what they associate with him .
these are the limitsallah . whoso obeyeth allah and his messenger , he will make him enter gardens underneath which rivers flow , where such will dwell for ever . that will be the great success .
on that day they will follow their caller without deviation . their voices will be low in the presence of the beneficent god . you will hear nothing but the tread of the marching feet .
and when one among of them receives the glad tidings of a daughter , his face turns black for the day , and he remains seething .
and build the ark under our eyes and our direction . and do not supplicate me concerning those who have engaged in wrong-doing . they are doomed to be drowned .
say ,  shall i tell you of something better than all of these ? for the god-fearing , there are gardens in nearness to their god with rivers flowing through them where they shall live forever with pure spouses and the goodwill of god . god is watching his servants --
who move straight and stop .
messengers , eat what is wholesome and do good deeds : i am well aware of what you do .
this is the argument we gave to abraham against his people . we exalt whosoever we please in rank by degrees . your lord is wise and all-knowing .
what prevents the acceptance of their contributions is nothing but the fact that they disbelieved in god and his messenger , and that they do not approach the prayer except lazily , and that they do not spend except grudgingly .
and of their fathers , and of their seed , and of their brethren ; and we elected them , and we guided them to a straight path .
he who thinks that god will not help him in this world and the next should stretch a rope to the sky then cut it off and see if his mind is relievedby this stratagem .
joseph , ignore this . and , , ask forgiveness for your sin . indeed , you were of the sinful . 
it is he who subjected to you the sea , so that you may eat its fresh seafood and bring forth from it ornaments to wear . you see the ships cleaving through it . all this , so that you may seek his bounty and feel grateful .
say , “ indeed my lord eases the sustenance for whomever he wills among his bondmen , and restricts it for whomever he wills ; and whatever you spend in allah 's cause , he will restore it ; and he is the best sustainer . ”
that is so ! whoever retaliates similarly to the affliction he was made to suffer , and then he is wronged again , god will definitely assist him . god is pardoning and forgiving .
and fruits as they desire .
it is he who has fed them when they were hungry
and when they opened their baggage , they found their money restored to them . they said , ‘ father , whatdo we want ? ! this is our money , restored to us ! we will get provisions for our family and take care of our brother , and add another camel-load of rations . these are meagre rations . ’
he who has obligated the koran will bring you to an appointment . say : 'my lord knows well who comes with guidance , and who is in clear error '
and a ban is laid on every townwhich we have destroyed that they shall not return .
upon us is its collection and its recitation .
neither cool nor refreshing .
it is he who gathers you in at night and knows all that you do by day ; then he raises you up during the day so that an appointed term may be completed . then to him you shall return and he will declare to you all that you used to do .
and know that , among you there is the messenger of allah . if he were to obey youin much of the matter , you would surely be in trouble , but allah has endeared the faith to you and has beautified it in your hearts , and has made disbelief , wickedness and disobediencehateful to you . these ! they are the rightly guided ones ,
but if we had so willed , we could have sent down to them a sign from the heavens so that their heads would be bowed down before it in utter humility .
and because the hour is coming , no doubt of it , and god shall raise up whosoever is within the tombs .
say :  of no use will be the acceptance of belief to unbelievers on the day of decision , nor will they be granted respite .
then , if they turn away , your dutyis only to conveyin a clear way .
we will certainly help our messengers and those who believe , in this world , and on the day the witnesses take their stand ,
they said : put him off- him and his brother - and send into the cities summoners ,
 so peace is on me the day i was born , the day that i die , and the day that i shall be raised up to life  !
as for those who turn their back and disbelieve ,
and strain not thine eyes after that which we have given classes of them to enjoy : the splendour of the life of the world , that we might try them therein ; and the provision of thy lord is the best and most lasting .
everything we created is precisely measured .
or he conjoineth them males and females ; and he maketh barren whomsoever he will ; verily he is knower , petent .
this is naught else than a reminder unto creation ,
and to establish prayer and fear him .  and it is he to whom you will be gathered .
and when our command came , we saved shu'ayb and those who believed with him , by mercy from us . and the shriek seized those who had wronged , and they became within their homesfallen prone
so let them fight in the way of god who sell the present life for the world to come ; and whosoever fights in the way of god and is slain , or conquers , we shall bring him a mighty wage .
thus it is . and whosoever suspecteth the sacred ordinances of allah , it shall be better for him with his lord . and allowed unto you are the cattle , save that which hath been rehearsed unto you ; so avoid the pollution of the idols , and avoid the word of falsehood .
ya , seen .
or say they : a poet for whom we wait some adverse turn of fortune !
and said :  webelieve in the lord of all the worlds ,
ta . ha .
and it is he who has created you from a single soul – then you have to stop over * in one place and stay entrusted * * in another ; indeed we have explained our verses in detail for people of understanding .
so , the angels - all of them - fell down in prostration ,
and he who believed said : o my people . verily i fear for you a fate like the day of the confederates .
indulging in pleasantries ?
we carried him in a well built , watertight vessel made from planks
o people who believe ! if any miscreant brings you some tidings , verify it , lest you unknowingly cause suffering to some people , and then remain repenting for what you did .
and he sent against them birds in flocks ,
indeed , he would well-nigh have led us astray from our deities , had we not beensteadfastly attached to them !  when they behold the punishment , they shall realize who strayed furthest from the right path .
in which you are now living
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a manifest authority
it is only a reminder to all mankind .
then we developed the seed into a clot . then we developed the clot into a lump . then we developed the lump into bones . then we clothed the bones with flesh . then we produced it into another creature . most blessed is god , the best of creators .
and gatheredand proclaimed ,
and it is he who merged the two seas ; this one fresh and sweet , and that one salty and bitter ; and he placed between them a barrier , and an impassable boundary .
they also said , “ if only this quran was sent down to a man of importance from the two cities . ”
is he who knows that what was revealed to your from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those who reason will remember .
say : 'people of the book , why do you disbelieve the verses of allah ? surely , allah is witness to all that you do '
if we had not kept you constant you had almost leaned towards them .
so whatever thing you are given , that is only a provision of this world 's life , and what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and rely on their lord .
say ,  indeed , my lord extends provision for whom he wills of his servants and restrictsfor him . but whatever thing you spend- he will compensate it ; and he is the best of providers . 
who whispereth in the hearts of mankind ,
hath he not been told of that which is in the writs of musa .
and al-mu'tafikah he destroyed
and recall what time we said to the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam . they fell prostrate , but iblis did not ; he refused .
so none believed moses except a few of his nation because they feared that pharaoh and their council would persecute them . pharaoh was mighty in theland , and one of the evildoers .
and leave the outside of sin and the inside thereof ; verily those who earn sin , anon will they be requited for that which they were wont to do .
then , when they entered into his presence , they said , “ mighty governor , adversity has befallen us , and our family . we have brought scant merchandise . but give us full measure , and be charitable towards us—god rewards the charitable . ”
most surely the punishment of your lord will come to pass ;
or do they say : he has forged it ? nay ! it is the truth from your lord that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you , that they may follow the right direction .
they said ,  should we believe in two mere mortals who are like ourselves and whose people are our slaves ? 
and made them virgins .
nor do i believe that the hour of resurrection will ever come to pass . and even if i am returned to my lord , i shall find a better place than this . 
but to no soul will allah grant respite when the time appointedhas come ; and allah is well acquainted withthat ye do .
or in the morning the water of it will be sunk into the earth , so that thou wilt not be able to seek it out . '
we have revealed the quran to you so that you could tell the people what has been revealed to them and so that perhaps they will think .
have you not seen how allah sends down water from the sky and threaded it as springs in the earth ? then , he brings forth plants of various colors , after which they wither , and you see them turning yellow , and then he makes them into broken stubble . surely , in this there is a reminder for those of understanding .
and if their backsliding is hard unto thee , then seek out , if thou canst , an opening into the earth or a ladder to the heaven that thou mayst bring unto them a sign . and had allah willed , he would have assembled them unto the guidance ; wherefore be not thou of the ignorant .
those that were before them also cried lies ; then how was my horror !
we will show them our signs in the universe , and in their ownselves , until it becomes manifest to them that thisis the truth . is it not sufficient in regard to your lord that he is a witness over all things ?
and recall when a party of them said : 'why do you admonish a people whom allah is about to destroy or punish severely ? ' they said : 'we admonish them in order to be able to offer an excuse before your lord , and in the hope that they will guard against disobedience . '
but when good came to them , they said ,  this is ours .  and if a badstruck them , they saw an evil omen in moses and those with him . unquestionably , their fortune is with allah , but most of them do not know .
that he may make what satan casts a trial for those in whose hearts is sickness , and those whose hearts are hard ; and surely the evildoers are in wide schism ;
verily , among mankind who have the best claim to ibrahimare those who followed him , and this prophetand those who have believed . and allah is the waliof the believers .
so they sought to outwit him , but we made them the lowermost .
it is not proper for the prophet and those who believe to seek forgiveness for polytheists , even though they are close relatives , after it has become clear to them that they have earned the punishment of hell .
we send downin the qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe : to the unjust it causes nothing but loss after loss .
say to the faithful to forgive those who do not expect allah ’ s days , that he mayrequite every people for what they used to earn .
indeed , they are astonished that a warner should have come to them from among themselves . so these deniers of the truth say ,  this is indeed a strange thing ,
so heneither believednor prayed !
who are under a cover of heedlessness ,
shall be gathered to the appointed time of a known day .
and he who obeys allah and the messenger -they shall be with those whom allah has favoured -the prophets , those steadfast in truthfulness , the martyrs , and the righteous .  how excellent will they be for companions !
verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and the ships that course upon the sea laden with that which profiteth mankind , and that which allah sendeth down of water from the heaven and quickenoth the earth thereby after the death thereof ; and scattereth therein of all kinds of moving creatures , and in the veering of the winds and the cloud subjected for service betwixt heaven and earth . are signs unto a people who understand .
these our people have taken gods besides him ; why do they not produce any clear authority in their support ? who is then more unjust than he who forges a lie against allah ?
'he is the lord of the east and the west ' said he , 'and all that is between them , if you could understand '
say to those who disbelieve : if they desist , their past will be forgiven . but if they persist—the practice of the ancients has passed away .
and their eyes shall be downcast with dread .
allah , who is in need of none and of whom all are in need ;
those who believe in god and his apostles are true of word and deed ; and by their lord are considered testifiers of the truth . they have their guerdon and their light . as for those who do not believe and reject our revelations , are the people of hell .
when they entered upon him and said ,  peace .  said ,  indeed , we are fearful of you . 
now by thy lord , we shall surely question them all together
let not their riches or their children excite your admiration . through these allah seeks to chastise them in this world , and that their lives will depart them while they are unbelievers .
and he said : my sons ! enter not by one gate but enter by different gates ; and i can not avail you against allah at all : judgment is but allah 's ; on him i rely , and on him let the relying rely .
 no reward do i ask of you for it , my reward is only from the lord of the 'alamin .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and he revives the earth after its death ; and this how you will be raised .
said ,  do ye then worship , besides allah , things that can neither be of any good to you nor do you harm ?
for god is sufficient as witness between us and you we were not aware of your worship . 
satan ’ s power is only over those who make friendship with him and ascribe him as a partner .
we assigned to them companions who made their doings appear fair to them . but the same decreeproved true against them , which had proved true against nations of jinn and mankind who passed away before them . surely they were the losers .
and when the souls are paired
they said , “ o zul-qarnain , the gog and magog are spreading chaos in the land . can we pay you , to build between us and them a wall ? ”
ha , there you are ; you have disputed on their behalf in the present life ; but who will dispute with god on their behalf on the resurrection day , or who will be a guardian for them ?
the life of this world is but playing and an amusement . surely , the everlasting home is better for the cautious . will you not understand ?
and certainly we created man , and we know what his mind suggests to him , and we are nearer to him than his life-vein .
“ o my father , i fear that a punishment from the most gracious may reach you , so you would become a companion of the devil . ”
so they were not able to stand , nor could they help themselves .
are they awaiting the hour of doom to come upon them suddenly ? its signs have already come . but of what avail will their admonition be to them when it has actually come upon them ?
he shall call for perdition ,
they said , “ we did not renege on our promise to you on our own will , but we were made to carry the burdens of ornaments of the people , so we cast them – and similarly did samri cast . ”
thereupon they will say , “ to allah ” ; proclaim , “ therefore why do you not ponder ? ”
when if we show you them suffering our retribution or you die before their suffering , they will all return to us . god bears witness to whatever they do .
to each of them we gave warnings and each of them we destroyed completely .
say , ‘ tell me about those you invoke besides allah . show me whatof the earth have they created . do they have any share in the heavens ? bring me a scripturebefore this , or some vestige ofknowledge , if you are truthful . ’
remember the name of the lord , and pray to him .
they say : why hath not an angel been sent down unto him ? if we sent down an angel , then the matter would be judged ; no further time would be allowed them .
and the day when it shines in brightness ,
so we listened to him : we removed the distress that was on him , and we restored his people to him , and doubled their number , - as a grace from ourselves , and a thing for commemoration , for all who serve us .
they ascribe to allah what they themselves dislike . their tongues utter falsehoodsthe finest of wages shall be theirs . without doubt , the fire shall be theirs and they will be hastened to it .
say , “ shall i choose as a supporter someone other than allah , who is the originator of the heavens and the earth and who feeds and does not need to eat ? ” say , “ i have been ordered to be the first to submit myself , and o people , do not be of the polytheists . ”
andthe jews and the christians say :  we are the children of allah and his loved ones .  say :  why then does he punish you for your sins ?  nay , you are but human beings , of those he has created , he forgives whom he wills and he punishes whom he wills . and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and to him is the return .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah that , “ if he gives us by his munificence , we will surely give charity and surely become righteous . ”
call to mind when we assigned to abraham the site of the house , directing him :  do not associate aught with me  and  keep my house pure for those who walk around it , and for those who stand and who bow down and who prostrate themselves ,
and they serve besides allah that which neither profits them nor causes them harm ; and the unbeliever is a partisan against his lord .
and if they quarrel with you , say , “ allah well knows your evil deeds . ”
and in musa . when we sent him to fir'aunwith a manifest authority .
have they feet wherewith they walk , or have they hands wherewith they hold , or have they eyes wherewith they see , or have they ears wherewith they hear ? say : call upon yourpartners , and then contrive against me , spare me not !
they said while approaching them ,  what is it you are missing ? 
blessed is he who placed constellations in the sky , and placed in it a lamp , and an illuminating moon .
he said , “ you will not be able to endure with me .
who can see whether you stand up
in hot wind and boiling water ,
we have adorned the lower heaven with the adornment of the planets ,
and it is he who has sent down water from the heavens , and thereby we have brought vegetation of every kind , and out of this we have brought forth green foliage and then from it close-packed ears of corn , and out of the palm-tree from the sheath of it - thick clustered dates , hanging down with heaviness , and gardens of vines , and the olive tree , and the pomegranate - all resembling one another and yet so different . behold their fruit when they bear fruit and ripen ! surely , in all this there are signs for those who believe .
does the human being think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
: this is the fire which ye were wont to deny .
he said ,  disguise her throne . we shall see whether or not she will recognize it . 
scorner , going about with malicious gossip -
and those who had envied his position the day before began to say on the morrow :  ah ! it is indeed allah who enlarges the provision or restricts it , to any of his servants he pleases ! had it not been that allah was gracious to us , he could have caused the earth to swallow us up ! ah ! those who reject allah will assuredly never prosper . 
which of you has been afflicted by insanity .
and when the earth throws out its burdens ,
and taken off from you your burden ,
and verily the hour will come : there can be no doubt about it , or aboutthat allah will raise up all who are in the graves .
a fitting requital .
exalted is he who put constellations in the heavens , a radiant lamp and an illuminating moon --
there they will cry for help :  o lord , get us out that we may do the right , and not what we used to do .  did we not give you a long enough span of life so that he who remembered may reflect ? and did not the warner come to you ? so now taste . the iniquitous will have none to help them .
you call me to disbelieve in allah and to associate with him that of which i know nothing ; while i call you to the almighty , the forgiving .
 and ask forgiveness of your lord and turn unto him in repentance . verily , my lord is most merciful , most loving . 
and we had certainly given moses the scripture , but it came under disagreement . and if not for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been judged between them . and indeed they are , concerning the qur'an , in disquieting doubt .
and away from it shall be kept the one who guards most ,
however , if people are too proud to prostrate before god , let them know that god 's other creatures glorify him both day and night without fatigue .
our lord , and make us submissive to you , and from our descendants a community submissive to you . and show us our rites , and accept our repentance . you are the acceptor of repentance , the merciful .
noah said ,  my lord , help me ! for they have rejected me , 
therefore eat of what allah has given you , lawful and good , and give thanks for allah 's favor if him do you serve .
saying : go early to your tilth if you would cut .
and so will our fathers ? 
other than those polytheists with whom you had a treaty , and they have not diminished anything from your treaty nor supported anyone against you – therefore fulfil their treaty up to the appointed term ; indeed allah befriends the pious .
:  verily , this is a reward for you , and your endeavour has been accepted . 
they will wish to come out of the fire , but they will not . theirs will be a long-lasting chastisement .
and the earth we spread out , and placed therein firm mountains , and caused to grow therein all kinds of things in due proportion .
and we exalted him to a lofty position .
and they estimated not allah with an estimation due unto him whereas the whole earth shall be his handful on the day of judgment , and the heavens shall be rolled in his right hand . hallowed be he and exalted above that which they associate .
and we granted him his family and a likewith them as mercy from us and a reminder for those of understanding .
and they say : whenthis promise , if ye are truthful ?
go to the pharaoh and tell him : 'we bring a message from the lord of all the worlds
and verily thy lord will give unto thee so that thou wilt be content .
they shall every one of them be arraigned before us .
and similarly , whenever we sent a herald of warning before youinto any town , its wealthy people said , “ we found our forefathers upon a religion , and we are behind their footsteps . ”
and not one of you could have withheld us from him .
o messenger ! let not those who hurry to fall into disbelief grieve you , of such who say :  we believe  with their mouths but their hearts have no faith . and of the jews are men who listen much and eagerly to lies - listen to others who have not come to you . they change the words from their places ; they say ,  if you are given this , take it , but if you are not given this , then beware !  and whomsoever allah wants to put in al-fitnah , you can do nothing for him against allah . those are the ones whose hearts allah does not want to purify ; for them there is a disgrace in this world , and in the hereafter a great torment .
surely if you die or are slain , it is unto god you shall be mustered .
therefore allah saved him from the evils of their scheming , and an evil punishment enveloped the people of firaun . –
we did not send before you except men , whom we inspired , from the people of the towns . have they not roamed the earth and seen the consequences for those before them ? the home of the hereafter is better for those who are righteous . do you not understand ?
proclaim , “ if the sea became ink for the words of my lord , the sea would indeed be used up and the words of my lord would never – even if we bring another like it for help . ”
 nor to suffer from thirst , nor from the sun 's heat . 
whenever our messages are conveyed to such a person , he turns away in his arrogance , as though he had not heard them -- as though his ears were sealed : give him , then , the tidings of grievous suffering .
if only they were content with what god and his messenger have given them , and said , “ god is sufficient for us ; god will give us of his bounty , and so will his messenger ; to god we eagerly turn . ”
allah verily made good his promise unto you when ye routed them by his leave , untilwhen your courage failed you , and ye disagreed about the order and ye disobeyed , after he had shown you that for which ye long . some of you desired the world , and some of you desired the hereafter . therefore he made you flee from them , that he might try you . yet now he hath forgiven you . allah is a lord of kindness to believers .
cry not for succor this day ; surely you shall not be given help from us .
and from whatsoever place you come forth , turn your face towards the sacred mosque ; and wherever you are turn your faces towards it , so that people shall have no accusation against you , except such of them as are unjust ; so do not fear them , and fear me , that i may complete my favor on you and that you may walk on the right course .
when he said to his father , 'father , why worshippest thou that which neither hears nor sees , nor avails thee anything ?
everything in the heavens and the earth glorifies god the sovereign , the holy , the almighty , the wise .
but woe to them who fake the scriptures and say :  this is from god ,  so that they might earn some profit thereby ; and woe to them for what they fake , and woe to them for what they earn from it !
but we saved him , together with the company of the ark , and we made it a sign for all peoples .
they fight not against you even together , except in fortified townships , or from behind walls . their enmity among themselves is very great . you would think they were united , but their hearts are divided , that is because they are a people who understand not .
but it shall avert the punishmentfrom her , if she bears witness four times by allah , that heis telling a lie .
whoever disbelieves - upon him ishis disbelief . and whoever does righteousness - they are for themselves preparing ,
and we gave moses the book and sent after him a train of messengers in succession . then we sent jesus , son of mary , with clear signs and supported him with the holy spirit . then how is it that whenever a messenger came to you wish that which did not suit your lusts , you grew rebellious against him , and repudiated some and slew others .
or do you think that most of them do hear or understand ? they are nothing but as cattle ; nay , they are straying farther off from the path .
so fir'aunwithdrew , devised his plot and then came back .
if god had pleased he would surely have made you a single community of belief ; but he leads whosoever he wills astray , and guides whosoever he please . but you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
if they come upon you , they will be your enemies , and stretch out their hands and tongues to do evil to you . they wish that you would disbelieve .
do they still wait for further interpretations ? on the daywhen its interpretations will be revealed , those who had ignored its guidance will confess , saying ,  the messengers of our lord had certainly come to us with the truth . will anyone intercede for us or send us backso that we would be able to act in a different manner to that which we had done before ?  these people have certainly lost their souls and their evil inventionswill vanish .
when moses had fulfilled the term and was journeying with his family , he noticed a fire on the side of the mountain .  wait here ,  he said to his family ;  i have seen a fire . i may haply bring some news from there , or an ember that you may warm yourselves . 
and the earth ! he hath lain it out for the creatures .
and allah puts forwardexample of two men , one of them dumb , who has no power over anything , and he is a burden to his master , whichever way he directs him , he brings no good . is such a man equal to onewho commands justice , and is himself on a straight path ?
naught of disaster befalleth in the earth or in yourselves but it is in a book before we bring it into being - lo ! that is easy for allah -
and he destroyed the overthrown cities .
before them , the people of nooh had denied , and the tribe of a ’ ad , and firaun who used to crucify .
she said : ' i take refuge in the merciful from you ! if you are fearful '
indeed , we thus reward the doers of good .
then why do ye notwhenreaches the throat , -
and our word has already preceded for our servants , the messengers ,
he had almost led us astray from our gods , had we not remained firm in our faith with regard to them.  the time is not far when they will see the torment and realize who had strayed far from the truth .
those who reject faith and deny our signs will be companions of hell-fire .
say ,  o disbelievers ,
and i shall not worship that which ye worship .
for every people we have prescribed a way of worship which they follow . so , , let them not dispute with you concerning this , and call them to your lord . you are certainly on the straight way .
corruption has appeared in land and sea because of the doings of the people ’ s hands , that he may make them taste something of what they have done , so that they may come back .
then we shall turn to what they had done and render it vain like scattered dust .
and when it overtakes you , is it then that you will believe in it , now , when you already try to hasten it !
and we bestowed on him is-haq and y'aqub , and we placed among his posterity prophethood and the book , and we vouchsafed unto him his hire in the world , and verily in the hereafter he shall be of the righteous .
theyare the ones who supplicate , seeking a recourse to their lord , whoever is nearer , expecting his mercy and fearing his punishment. ’ indeed your lord ’ s punishment is a thing to beware of .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion to make it prevail over all other religions . god is a sufficient witness to this truth  .
that nothing belongs to man except what he strives for ,
and his wife was standing . she laughed . then we gave her the glad tidings of is'haq , and after is'haq , ya'qub .
musa said : begone thou ! verily it shall be thine in life to say no contact ; and verily thine is an appointment which thou shalt by no means fail . and look at thy god to which thou hast been assidauous ; we shall surely burn it , and we shall scatter it into the sea a wide scattering .
but they hamstrung her , and then were penitent .
and worship your lord in order to attain certainty .
they said , “ lord , we fear he may persecute us , or become violent . ”
we certainly have the power to show you what they have been warned about .
“ put your hand inside your armpit – it will come out shining white , not due to any illness ; and put your hand on your chest to remove the fear – so these are two proofs from your lord to firaun and his court members ; indeed they are a lawless people . ”
but when they had gone farther , he said to his servant : bring to us our morning meal , certainly we have met with fatigue from this our journey .
surely the state of triumph awaits the god-fearing :
we have offered every kind of example here in this qur'an to men . even then if you bring a verse to them , those who disbelieve say :  you are nothing but a liar . 
and so , when they went away with him , they decided to cast him into the dark depths of a well . then we revealed to him our will ,  you shalltell them of this deed of theirs , when they do not realize who you are . 
it was not worthy of the people of madina , and the arabs of the desert around them , to abandon the prophet of god , and to care more for themselves than for him ; for there is no hardship or thirst or hunger that they know in the service of god , and no place they walk on where walking provokes the unbelievers , and no harm they receive from the enemy , but is put down as a good deed in their favour . surely god does not let the recompense of those who do good to go waste .
they say , 'obedience ' but as soon as they leave you , a party of them hide other than what they said . allah writes down what they hide . so turn away from them , and rely on allah . allah is sufficient for a guardian .
and we ordained that he refused to suck any foster mother before , so she said : shall i point out to you the people of a house who will take care of him for you , and they will be benevolent to him ?
they ask you about menstruation . say ,  it is an impurity , so keep away from women during it and do not approach them until they are cleansed ; when they are cleansed you may approach them as god has ordained . god loves those who turn to him in penitence and he loves those who keep themselves clean .
or dost thouask a fee from them so that they are heavily taxed ?
and he of the two who was released , andat length remembered , said : i am going to announce unto you the interpretation , therefore send me forth .
and we wrote for him on the tablets of everything an admonition , and a distinguishing of everything : 'so take it forcefully , and command thy people to take the fairest of it . i shall show you the habitation of the ungodly .
say thou : is it other than allah that ye command me to worship ! o ye pagans
o mankind ! verily there hath come to you a convincing proof from your lord : for we have sent unto you a lightmanifest .
the evil-doers are victims of error and madness .
faint not nor grieve , for ye will overcome them if ye arebelievers .
and from the evil of the envious ones .
those who are concerned about the welfare of their own children after their death , should have fear of godand guide them properly .
but as for those who believed and did righteous deeds , he will give them in full their rewards , and allah does not like the wrongdoers .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared he would overwhelm them with oppression and disbelief .
all their deeds are recorded in the scrolls ;
have you not seen that all those who are in the heavens and the earth praise allah , and the birds with their wings spread ? each one has learnt its prayers and its words of praise ; and allah knows their deeds .
andwhen abraham said ,  my lord , make this a secure city and provide its people with fruits - whoever of them believes in allah and the last day.  said .  and whoever disbelieves - i will grant him enjoyment for a little ; then i will force him to the punishment of the fire , and wretched is the destination . 
those who are near to thy lord , disdain not to do him worship : they celebrate his praises , and prostrate before him .
if allah desire to take a son to himself , he will surely choose those he pleases from what he has created . glory be to him : he is allah , the one , the subduer .
“ o david , we made you a ruler in the land , so judge between the people with justice , and do not follow desire , lest it diverts you from god ’ s path . those who stray from god ’ s path will have a painful punishment , for having ignored the day of account . ”
o ye who believe ! take not for friends and protectors those who take your religion for a mockery or sport , - whether among those who received the scripture before you , or among those who reject faith ; but fear ye allah , if ye have faith .
thus , for thy lord would not destroy for their wrong-doing men 's habitations whilst their occupants were unwarned .
no ! do not obey him . but prostrate and draw near .
so when i have proportioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , then fall down in prostration before him . ’
their raiment of pitch , and the fire covering their faces ,
how can you disbelieve while unto you are recited the revelations of allah , and in your midst is his apostle ! and whosoever holdeth fast to allah , he is of a surety guided unto a straight path .
give to the believers the glad tidings that with allah there is for them a great bounty .
to bring better people than they in their place ; and they will not be able to thwart us .
verily , it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of hell-fire ,
and how many a township did i suffer long though it was sinful ! then i grasped it . unto me is the return .
on that day we shall resurrect from every nation a group of those who denied our signs , and they will be held in check .
and when they reach the end of their term , then either honourably retain themor honourably part with them , and call two persons of known probity as witnesses from among yourselves , andgive upright testimony for the sake of allah . that is to what all those that believe in allah and the last day are exhorted . allah will find a way out for him who fears allah ,
do you eat , and pasture your cattle ! surely in that are signs for men possessing reason .
the oppressors will say ,  rather , youwere not believers ,
even though they entered the town as their father had told them , it would not have been of any avail to them against the decree of god . it only served to satisfy jacob 's desire and judgment . he was certainly well versed by our instruction , but most people do not know .
goblets placed ,
he said :  o my lord ! prison is more to my liking than that to which they invite me . unless you turn away their plot from me , i will feel inclined towards them and be oneof the ignorants . 
or their case is like that of heavy rain pouring down from the clouds , accompanied by darkness , thunder and lightning ; they thrust their fingers in their ears at the sound of thunderclaps for fear of death . god thus encompasses those who deny the truth .
and indeed we sent several noble messengers before you , to their nations – so they came to them with clear signs – we therefore took revenge from the guilty ; and it is incumbent upon our mercy , to help the muslims .
allah has kept prepared a severe punishment for them – therefore fear allah , o men of intellect ! o people who believe ! allah has sent down a remembrancefor you .
he punishes whomever he wills and has mercy upon whomever he wills ; and towards him only you are to return .
what is the matter with them , that they do not believe
and when it is said to them , “ offer the prayer ” – they do not !
and if we should will , we could drown them ; then no one responding to a cry would there be for them , nor would they be saved
thus he made lightto his people , and they obeyed him . they were certainly wicked .
and with them are those who do not set gaze upon men except their husbands , the maidens with gorgeous eyes .
some men there are who say , 'we believe in god , ' but when such a man is hurt in god 's cause , he makes the persecution of men as it were god 's chastisement ; then if help comes from thy lord , he will say 'we were with you . ' what , does not god know very well what is in the breasts of all beings ?
and say not of those who are slain in the way of allah : dead . nay , they are living , but ye perceive not .
so when he came to solomon , he said , ‘ are you aiding me with wealth ? what allah has given me is better than what he has given you . indeed , you are proud of your gift !
theysaid :  we give you glad tidings in truth . so be not of the despairing ones . 
: “ you used to come to us from the right hand . ”
and they carry your loads to territory you could not have reached without great hardship . your lord is clement and merciful .
they will say ,  of course , a warner did come to us , but we belied him and we said , 'god has revealed nothing ; you are in gross error . ' 
and preferred the life of this world .
which we then placed in a secure repository
have you not seen the people who call themselves pure ? yet god purifies whom he pleases , and none shall be wronged even the breadth of a thread .
 appoint me over the granaries of the land ,  ;  i shall be a knowledgeable keeper . 
against these they had no grudge except that they believed in allah , the most mighty , the most praiseworthy ,
these shall be rewarded with high places because they were patient , and shall be met therein with greetings and salutations .
and thus have we sent itdown to be a judgement of authority in arabic . were youto follow theirdesires after the knowledge which has come to you , then you will not have any walior defender against allah .
alif , lam , ra . these are the verses of the wise book
so that you may tread its spacious paths . ”
had we willed , we could have shown them to you , and you should have known them by their marks , but surely , you will know them by the tone of their speech ! and allah knows all your deeds .
will be gathered together on a certain day which is predetermined .
allah is benignant to his servants ; he gives sustenance to whom he pleases , and he is the strong , the mighty .
verily ! allah commands that you should render back the trusts to those , to whom they are due ; and that when you judge between men , you judge with justice . verily , how excellent is the teaching which hegives you ! truly , allah is ever all-hearer , all-seer .
in outstretched columns .
the beneficent
nor thirst nor exposure to the sun . 
surely , allah shall not harm so much as the weight of an atom , and if it is a good deed he will double it , and give from his own a great wage .
whomsoever god guides , he is rightly guided ; and whom he leads astray -- thou wilt not find for them protectors , apart from him . and we shall muster them on the resurrection day upon their faces , blind , dumb , deaf ; their refuge shall be gehenna , and whensoever it abates we shall increase for them the blaze .
rememberthe brother of 'ad . when he warned his people in ahqaf -- though many a warner had come and gone before and after him :  do not worship any one but god , for i fear the punishment of an awful day for you , 
i ask no payment from you for my preaching . the lord of the universe will give me my reward .
then verily on the day of judgment ye shall be raised up .
so i call to witness the rain-producing sky ,
their predecessors gave the lie to the truth and then chastisement came upon them from whence they could not imagine .
he will rectify your deeds for you and forgive you your sins ; and whoever obeys allah and his noble messenger , has indeed achieved a great success .
when we change a sign for another in its stead—and allah knows best what he sends down—they say , ‘ you are indeed a fabricator. ’ indeed , most of them do not know .
then we cause therein the grain to grow ,
and announce unto the believers the good tidings that they will have great bounty from allah .
and fear the trial that shall not afflict those alone who among you do wrong ; and know that verily allah severe in chastising .
your sister wentand said : 'shall i guide you to one who will nurse him ' and so we restored you to your mother , so that her eyes might rejoice and that she might not sorrow . and when you killed a soul we saved you from grief and then we tried you with many trials . you stayed among the people of midian for a number of years , and then , moses , you came here according to a decree .
those who do not expect to meet us say , “ if only the angels were sent down to us , or we could see our lord. ” they have grown arrogant within themselves , and have become excessively defiant .
and forthem are maces of iron .
they ask you about the hour , “ when will it take place ? ”
your lord knows you best . if he wills , he will have mercy on you ; and if he wills , he will punish you . we did not send you as their advocate .
 to bring on , on them , stones of clay ,
he is the first and the last , the clear and the hidden . he has knowledge of all things .
he said , 'yes , indeed ; and you shall be among the near-stationed . '
would you reject the sustenance that you receive rather than give thanks ?
even though he offer his excuses .
has the message been revealed to him out ofus ?  rather , they are in doubt about my message . rather , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
gushing water ,
and inform them of the guests of abraham .
when it sights them from a distant place , they will hear it raging and roaring .
it is he who made the stars by which you reckon your way through the darkness of the desert and the sea . distinct have we made our signs for those who recognise .
they said , 'your augury is with you ; if you are reminded ? but you are a prodigal people . '
there is he whose sayings pleases you in this worldly life and uses allah as a witness for what is in his heart , but he is most stubborn in adversary .
beyond them there is hell , and that which they have earned will naught avail them , nor those whom they have chosen for protecting friends beside allah . theirs will be an awful doom .
give respite to the disbelievers and leave them alone for a while .
then he is eager that i should do more .
by no means . in fact they do not fear the hereafter .
except the wicked ones who have rejected theand have turned away from it .
“ has he made all the gods into one god ? this is really something very strange ! ”
why were there no people of understanding among those people of the destroyed towns of the past except for a few , whom we saved from destruction , to prevent people from committing evil in the land ? the unjust among them indulged in worldly pleasures and so became guilty .
wherefore verily neither ye nor that which ye worship ,
lo ! this in truth is our provision , which will never waste away .
why , my revelations had come to you , but you denied them and were filled with pride , and were among the disbelievers .
“ has he chosen daughters instead of sons ? ”
the people of noah , ar-rass and thamud denied before you ,
had the unbelievers had twice as much as the wealth of the whole earth in order to ransom themselves from the torment in the life hereafter , still their ransom would not have been accepted . for them there will be a painful torment .
in themwill be two springs flowing
wherein are upright writings .
they said , 'we are missing the king 's goblet . whoever brings it shall receive a camel 's load ; that i guarantee . '
and give glad tidingsunto those who believe and do good works ; that theirs are gardens underneath which rivers flow ; as often as they are regaled with food of the fruit thereof , they say : this is what was given us aforetime ; and it is given to them in resemblance . there for them are pure companions ; there for ever they abide .
and when the wordappears upon them , we shall bring forth for them a beast from the earth to speak to them – because the people were not accepting faith in our signs .
after having turned to carious bones ? 
verily your lord is immensely mighty , most compassionate .
you set up structures as if you will be immortal ,
surely he was one of our believing servants .
if they waited patiently until you came out to see them , it would be better for them . but god is forgiving and merciful .
you can see among them many allying themselves with the infidels . vile it was what they sent ahead of them , so that god 's indignation came upon them ; and torment will they suffer an eternity .
like pharaoh 's family and those who have gone before them , they belied the signs of their lord , and so we destroyed them for their sins and drowned pharaoh 's family . they were all harmdoers .
and neither will i ever worship what you worship .
i shall sternly punish the unbelievers in this life and in the life to come and no one will help them .
and others bound together in shackles .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities
then we smote their ears many years in the cave .
there , the believers were tried and shaken with a mighty shaking .
and when the seas rise ,
it is you we worship and you we ask for help .
nor the word of a soothsayer ; little is it that you mind .
just see how strange are the things they invent about you . they have altogether strayed , and are unable to find the right way .
they would say : “ o magician , pray for us to your lord according to your station with him . we shall certainly be guided to the right way . ”
so give true deliverance between me and them , and deliver me and the believers that are with me .
and the graves are turned inside out ,
they both ran to the door and , in the struggle , she tore his shirt at the back . they found her husband at the door . she cried ,  shall not the man who wished to violate your wife be thrown into prison or sternly punished ? 
indeed allah does not forgive that any partner should be ascribed to him , but he forgives anything besides that to whomever he wishes . and whoever ascribes partners to allah has certainly strayed into far error .
had we commanded them to kill themselves or abandon their homes , only a few of them would have done it . if they had done what they had been advised to do , it would have strengthened their faith ,
and we have certainly diversified for the people in this qur'an from everyof example , but most of the people refusedexcept disbelief .
he said : 'it grieves me to let him go with you , for i fear lest the wolf should devour him when you are not paying attention to him '
the sabbath was only appointed for those who were at variance thereon ; surely thy lord will decide between them on the day of resurrection , touching their differences .
and it is not your wealth nor your children that will bring you near unto us , but he who believeth and doeth good . as for such , theirs will be twofold reward for what they did and they will dwell secure in lofty halls .
and not equal are the blind and those who see , nor arethose who believe , and do righteous good deeds , and those who do evil . little do you remember !
strengthen my back through him ,
neither their riches nor their children shall avail them anything against god ; those -- they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
when he asked his father and his people :  what do you worship ? 
so what are they waiting for , except that the last day suddenly come upon them ? for its signs have already appeared ; so when it does come , of what use is their realising it ?
they stayed in the cave three hundred years and nine .
and he said : lo ! i have preferred the good thingsto the remembrance of my lord ; till they were taken out of sight behind the curtain .
o my people , i do not ask of you a wage for this ; my wage falls only upon him who did originate me ; will you not understand ?
 and o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice and reduce not the things that are due to the people , and do not commit mischief in the land , causing corruption .
when the angels take away from their bodies the souls of those who have wronged themselves , they will ask them ,  how did you live ?  they will reply ,  we lived on earth in weakness and oppression .  the angels will say ,  was not god 's land vast enough for you to go wherever you could live in peace ?  the dwelling of these people will be hell fire , a terrible destination .
perhaps those who disbelieve will wish that they had been muslims .
they ask : 'why has not a sign been sent down upon him from his lord ' say : 'the signs are only with allah . i am only a clear warner '
whatever they had concealed will be revealed to them . if they were to return to , they would again worship idols , for they are liars .
thou canst but admonish such a one as follows the message and fears themost gracious , unseen : give such a one , therefore , good tidings , of forgiveness and a reward most generous .
they are certainly faithless who say , ‘ allah is the thirdof a trinity , ’ while there is no god except the one god . if they do not relinquish what they say , there shall befall the faithless among them a painful punishment .
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god ; he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
for himis prayer in truth : any others that they call upon besides him hear them no more than if they were to stretch forth their hands for water to reach their mouths but it reaches them not : for the prayer of those without faith is nothing butwandering .
and thou art an indweller of this city -
and if you asked them who created them , they would surely say ,  allah .  so how are they deluded ?
and rich carpetsspread out .
and he created the jinn of a smokeless fire .
for indeed he saw one of the greatest signs of his lord .
so we made a gourd plant grow above him .
we have indeed sent down towards you a book , in which is your repute ; so do you not have sense ?
they will be served by youths who will be as beautiful as pearls .
and whoever does good works and he is a believer , he shall have no fear of injustice nor of the withholding of his due .
proclaim the glory of your lord ;
so they departed ; until , when they reached the people of a city , they asked the people for food , but they refused to receive them hospitably . there they found a wall about to tumble down , and so he set it up . he said , 'if thou hadst wished , thou couldst have taken a wage for that . '
he created the heavens and earth in truth . high is he above what they associate with him .
indeed not . we shall record what he says and shall prolong the punishment for him .
and warn those who say : allah has taken a son .
would that they were pleased with that which allah and his apostle had given them , and were to say : sufficient unto us is allah , anon allah will give us out of his grace and so will his apostle , verily unto allah we lean .
believers , when believing women come to you as emigrants , test them . allah best knows their belief . if you find them to be believers do not return them to the unbelievers ; they are not permitted to the unbelievers , nor are the unbelievers permitted to them . but give back to the unbelievers what they have spent , and there is no fault in you to marry such women , provided you give them their dowries . do not hold on to the ties with unbelieving women , ask what you have spent and let them ask what they have spent . such is the judgement of allah ; he judges between you ; and allah is the knower , and the wise .
yet they worship , besides allah , things for which no authority has been sent down to them , and of which they haveno knowledge : for those that do wrong there is no helper .
in this there is evidencefor the prudent ones .
have you considered him who has taken his desire for his god ? god has knowingly led him astray , and has sealed his hearing and his heart , and has placed a veil over his vision . who will guide him after god ? will you not reflect ?
by no means ! he has been stubbornly hostile to our revelation :
no , but they said what the ancients said before them :
those who believed and their offspring followed them in faith—we will unite them with their offspring , and we will not deprive them of any of their works . every person is hostage to what he has earned .
whenrejected his people and what they worshipped instead of god , we gave him isaac and jacob and made both of them prophets .
allah will indeed admit those who believed and did good deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; and the disbelievers enjoy , and they eat like the cattle eat , and their destination is in the fire .
and be patient unto thy lord .
or did those in whose hearts is sickness think that god would not bring to light their rancour ?
, if they turn away , your only duty is to clearly preach to them .
but those who have faith in allah and his apostles and make no distinction between any of them—them he will soon give their rewards , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
today no one shall suffer the least injustice , and you shall not be recompensed except according to your deeds .
almost bursting with fury : every time a group is cast therein , its keepers will ask ,  did no warner come to you ? 
then i ran away from you in fear , but my lord granted me the law and has appointed me as a messenger .
those who dispute concerning the signs of god , without any authority come to them , in their breasts is only pride , that they shall never attain . so seek thou refuge in god ; surely he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
say : i ask of you no reward for this , save that whoso will may choose a way unto his lord .
surely both of them were among our believing servants .
and thus we have set up in every town great ones of its wicked people to plot therein . but they plot not except against their ownselves , and they perceivenot .
and his wife was standing , so she laughed , then we gave her the good news of ishaq and after ishaq ofyaqoub .
andwhen musaasked for water for his people , we said :  strike the stone with your stick .  then gushed forth therefrom twelve springs . eachpeople knew its own place for water .  eat and drink of that which allah has provided and do not act corruptly , making mischief on the earth . 
that . and whoever venerates the sacraments of allah—indeed that arises from the godwariness of hearts .
or is it that they have not recognized their apostle , so that they deny him ?
to him you were inattentive .
thus we make plain our signs , so that the path of the evil-doers might be laid bare .
and how many a living creature that does not carry its sustenance : allah sustains it and yourselves ; and he is the hearing , the knowing .
they are on guidance from their lord , and will prosper .
verily in this was a sign , but most of them do not believe .
andwhen thy lord proclaimed that he would raise against them till the day of resurrection those who would lay on them a cruel torment . lo ! verily thy lord is swift in prosecution and lo ! verily he is forgiving , merciful .
the similitude of the life of the world is only as water which we send down from the sky , then the earth 's growth of that which men and cattle eat mingleth with it till , when the earth hath taken on her ornaments and is embellished , and her people deem that they are masters of her , our commandment cometh by night or by day and we make it as reaped corn as if it had not flourished yesterday . thus do we expound the revelations for people who reflect .
so behold the marks of god 's mercy , how he quickens the earth after it was dead ; surely he is the quickener of the dead , and he is powerful over everything .
and whoever allah guides - for him there is no misleader . is not allah exalted in might and owner of retribution ?
those before them had already plotted , but allah came at their building from the foundations , so the roof fell upon them from above them , and the punishment came to them from where they did not perceive .
o ye who believe ! ask not about things which if disclosed to you , may annoy you ; and if ye ask about them while the qur'an is being revealed , they may be disclosed to you . allah hath pardoned that ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what the hands of men have wrought , that he may make them taste a part of that which they have done , so that they may return .
other messengers were also mocked before you ; but though i granted respite to those who denied the truth , at last i seized them , and how awful was my punishment .
do those who establish friendship with the disbelievers instead of the believers seek honor ? let them know that all honor belongs to god .
in the plain arabic language .
that is because they detest that which allah hath sent down , and so he shall make of non-effect their works .
and we advanced thereto the pursuers .
if they give the lie to you now , those that went before them also gave the lie to their messengers when they came to them with clear proofs , with scriptures , and with the illuminating book .
say , “ it is not in my power to harm you , nor to bring you to right conduct . ”
and a crowd of the later .
and said : “ shall we forsake our deities for the sake of a distracted poet ? ”
as for him who is given his book in his right hand .
whom allah doth guide , - he is on the right path : whom he rejects from his guidance , - such are the persons who perish .
 and take in thy hand a little grass , and strike therewith : and break not .  truly we found him full of patience and constancy . how excellent in our service ! ever did he turn !
then we produce for you therewith gardens of date-palms and grapes , wherein is much fruit for you and whereof ye eat ;
establish worship and pay the poor-due and obey the messenger , that haply ye may find mercy .
nay , the hour is their promised time , and the hour shall be most grievous and bitter .
those who remember allahstanding , sitting , and lying down on their sides , and think deeply about the creation of the heavens and the earth , :  our lord ! you have not createdthis without purpose , glory to you ! . give us salvation from the torment of the fire .
make war on them so that allah may punish them by your hands and humiliate them , and help you against them , and heal the hearts of a faithful folk ,
 seize him and drag him into the midst of blazing fire ,
and when his lord tried ibrahim with certain words , he fulfilled them . he said : surely i will make you an imam of men . ibrahim said : and of my offspring ? my covenant does not include the unjust , said he .
those were some of the prophets on whom allah did bestow his grace , - of the posterity of adam , and of those who we carriedwith noah , and of the posterity of abraham and israel of those whom we guided and chose . whenever the signs ofmost gracious were rehearsed to them , they would fall down in prostrate adoration and in tears .
all righteously believing male or female will be granted a blessed happy life and will receive their due reward and more .
thereafter his lord exalted him , accepted his repentance , and bestowed guidance upon him ,
then satan tempted him . he said , ‘ o adam ! shall i show you the tree of immortality , and an imperishable kingdom ? ’
abiders therein : excellent it is as an abode and as a station .
for those who were settled in the land andin faith before them , who love those who migrate toward them , and do not find in their breasts any privation for that which is given to them , but preferto themselves , though poverty be their own lot . and those who are saved from their own greed—it is they who are the felicitous .
we will ease his way towards ease .
and leftfor posterity .
clear proofs have come to you from your lord . whosoever sees clearly it is for himself , and whosoever is blind , it is against himself . i am not an overseer for you .
:  eat of the good things we have provided for your sustenance , but commit no excess therein , lest my wrath should justly descend on you : and those on whom descends my wrath do perish indeed !
she said , ‘ he is the one on whose account you blamed me . certainly , i did solicit him , but he was continent , and if he does not do what i bid him , surely he shall be imprisoned and humbled . ’
'we have heard a young man called abraham mention them ' they replied .
the likeness of that which they expend in this life of the world is as the likeness of a wind wherein is intense cold , it befalleth the tilth of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroyeth it . allah wronged them not , but themselves they wrong .
say to them ,  show me those whom you have joined with him as partners . no indeed ! for he alone is god , the mighty one , the wise one . 
then make fragments of the heaven fall upon us , if thou art of the truthful .
she said :  how can i have a son , o lord , when no man has touched me ?  he said :  that is how god creates what he wills . when he decrees a thing , he says 'be ' , and it is .
and cushions arrayed in rows ,
and be not like unto her who unravelleth her yarn into strands after its strength , holding your oaths a means of discord amongst you that a community may be more numerous than anot her community ; allah only proveth you there by ; and he will surely manifest unto you on the judgment day that wherein ye have been differing .
those who believe and do good deeds , we shall cleanse them of their evil deeds and reward them according to the best of their deeds .
mention in the book abraham ; he was truthful and a prophet .
those who conceal any part of the scriptures which god has revealed in order to gain some paltry end , simply fill their bellies with fire . on the day of resurrection , god will neither speak to them nor purify them . they will have a painful punishment .
we have committed man about his parents . his mother carries him in her womb in weakness and debility , weaning him in two years . so he should be grateful to me and his parents . to me is the journeying back .
unto thy lord is the knowledge of the limit fixed therefor .
indeed , he was of our believing servants .
in it are manifest signs abraham ’ s station , and whoever enters it shall be secure . and it is the duty of mankind toward allah to make pilgrimage to the house—for those who can afford the journey to it—and should anyone renege , allah is indeed without need of the creatures .
do they seek to hasten our chastisement ?
proclaim , “ call those whom you assumebesides allah ” ; they do not own anything equal even to an atom either in the heavens or in the earth , nor do they have any share in them , nor is any one among them an aide to allah .
do not consider your being summoned by the apostle to be like your summoning one another . god knows those of you who go away surreptitiously . so let those who act in contravention of his command take heed lest a trial should befall them or a grievous punishment come upon them .
so his lord responded to him and averted from him their plan . indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing .
the mountains reduced to dust and blown away ,
he will forgive your sins and will grant you respite until an appointed term . indeed when allah 's appointed term comes , it can not be deferred ; if you only knew ! ”
you have had a good example in god 's messenger for whosoever hopes for god and the last day , and remembers god oft .
and a great number of townswe destroyed . our torment came upon themby night or while they were sleeping for their afternoon rest .
and we sent against them a howling wind in a day of continuous of ill fortune
and those who cameafter them say : our lord ! forgive us and our brethren who were before us in the faith , and place not in our hearts any rancour toward those who believe . our lord ! thou art full of pity , merciful .
and when he reached maturity , we bestowed on him right judgement and knowledge . thus we reward those who do good .
and those who fly for allah 's sake after they are oppressed , we will most certainly give them a good abode in the world , and the reward of the hereafter is certainly much greater , did they but know ;
truth alone will be of weight that day . those whose scales are heavy shall be successful ,
that is because your lord would not destroy towns for injustice while their inhabitants are unaware .
allah it is who created you in weakness , then he appointed strength after weakness , then after strength appointed weakness and grey hair . he createth whatsoever he listeth : and he is knower , the potent .
he said , “ if i ask you about anything after this , then do not keep company with me . you have received excuses from me . ”
god has sent down the very best discourse , the book conformable in its juxtapositions , which makes all of those who fear their lord , shudder . so their hearts and bodies become receptive to the remembrance of god . this is the guidance of god with which he guides whosoever he will ; but whosoever god allows to go astray has none to show him the way .
verily they have plotted their plot , and their plot is with allah , though their plot were one whereby the mountains should be moved .
he said , 'what , do you give me good tidings , though old age has smitten me ? of what do you
and the king said , “ i saw in a dream seven healthy cows whom seven lean cows were eating , and seven green ears of corn and seven others dry ; o court-members ! explain my dream , if you can interpret dreams . ”
the creation of the heavens and the earth and all the living things dispersed in them , are a sign of his . he has the power to gather them together when he will .
god -- there is no god but he . he will surely gather you to the resurrection day , no doubt of it . and who is truer in tidings than god ?
on the day when the hour has come , they will be divided ,
what allah has bestowed on his messengerfrom them - for this ye made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry : but allah gives power to his messengers over any he pleases : and allah has power over all things .
o you who have faith ! take recourse in patience and prayer ; indeed allah is with the patient .
surely we guided him upon the way whether he be thankful or unthankful .
he answersof those who believe and do good , and gives them more of his bounty . but for the unbelievers there is severe punishment .
we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
so when eisa sensed their disbelief he said , “ who will be my aides towardsallah ? ” the disciples said , “ we are the aides of allah ’ s religion ; we believe in allah , and you bear witness that we are muslims . ”
and leave thou the sea divided : verily they are a host to be drowned .
what is the matter with you that you are two parties concerning the hypocrites when allah has overthrown them for what they earned ? would you desire to guide those whom allah has caused to be led astray ? whosoever allah leads astray , you will not find for him a way .
they will say : “ our lord , twice have you caused us to die and twice have you given us life . we have now confessed our sins . is there , then , any way out ? ”
no people can hasten on their doom nor can they postpone .
o ye messengers ! eat of the good things , and do right . lo ! i am aware of what ye do .
and that those who believe not in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful doom .
when the magicians came , moses said to them ,  cast down whatever you are going to cast down . 
these are the ones from whom we accept righteous deeds and ignore their bad deeds . they will be among the dwellers of paradise . it is the true promise which was given to them .
and with how many a prophet have there been a number of devoted men who fought . they quailed not for aught that befell them in the way of allah , nor did they weaken , nor were they brought low . allah loveth the steadfast .
feared the beneficent god in secret , and turned to him with a repenting heart  .
he is only a man who has invented a lie about god , and we are not going to believe him ! 
on the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet shall bear witness against them as to what they did .
and thus we have tried some of them through others that the disbelievers might say ,  is it these whom allah has favored among us ?  is not allah most knowing of those who are grateful ?
then pharaoh and those who were before him , and the towns that were overturned , brought about iniquity .
those who are niggardly about what allah has granted them out of his bounty think that niggardli ness is good for them ; it is bad for them . what they were niggardly about will turn into a halter round their necks on the day of resur-rection . to allah belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is well aware of what you do .
 and this is the past favour with which you reproach me , that you have enslaved the children of israel . 
not equal are the blind and the seeing . nor are those who believe and work righteousness equal to the sinners . how little you reflect .
recite , , what has been revealed to you of the book and establish prayer . indeed , prayer prohibits immorality and wrongdoing , and the remembrance of allah is greater . and allah knows that which you do .
they have taken their oaths as a shield , thereby prevented others from allah ’ s way ; indeed they commit extremely evil deeds .
tasting in it neither any coolness nor drink ,
or do you want to ask your messengeras musawas asked beforeand he who changes faith for disbelief , verily , he has gone astray from the right way .
so that those who are given knowledge may realize that this is the truth from your lord and thus believe in it , and so that in their hearts they may humbly submit to him . god will surely guide the faithful to a straight path .
we have not created the heavens and the earth , and what between them is , save with the truth and a stated term ; but the unbelievers are turning away from that they were warned of .
and tell the believing women to reduceof their vision and guard their private parts and not expose their adornment except that whichappears thereof and to wraptheir headcovers over their chests and not expose their adornment except to their husbands , their fathers , their husbands ' fathers , their sons , their husbands ' sons , their brothers , their brothers ' sons , their sisters ' sons , their women , that which their right hands possess , or those male attendants having no physical desire , or children who are not yet aware of the private aspects of women . and let them not stamp their feet to make known what they conceal of their adornment . and turn to allah in repentance , all of you , o believers , that you might succeed .
those of them with whom you made a treaty , but they violate their agreement every time . they are not righteous .
if only those who disbelieve have known of the time when they shall not be able to ward off from their faces the fire nor from their backs , nor shall they be succoured !
then eat of what allah has provided for youlawful and good . and be grateful for the favor of allah , if it ishim that you worship .
all such things are sins and detestable in the sight of your lord .
and when the holy prophet confided a matter to one of his wives ; so when she disclosed it and allah conveyed this to the holy prophet , he told her part of it and held back a part ; so when the holy prophet informed her about it , she said , “ who informed you ? ” ; he said , “ the all knowing , the all aware has informed me . ”
they said :  we have more in wealth and in sons , and we can not be punished . 
and what have you understood , what the valley is !
say :  no reward do i ask of you for this , save that whosoever wills , may take a path to his lord .
on the day when he will call you forth , then shall you obey him , giving him praise , and you will think that you tarried but a little .
verily those who disbelieve , neither their riches nor their progeny shall avail them aught against allah . and these are the fellows of the fire ; thereinto they shall be abiders .
originator of the heavens and the earth . how could he have a son when he does not have a companion and he created all things ? and he is , of all things , knowing .
if you avoid the major sins that are forbidden to you , we shall pardon your evil deeds and admit you by an entrance of honor .
they ask you if what you say is true ? tell them : 'yes , by my lord , this is altogether true , and you have no power to prevent the chastisement from befalling . '
your lord is allah , who , in six days created the heavens and the earth , and then willed to the throne . he throws the veil of night over the day . swiftly they follow one another . the sun , the moon , and the stars are compelled to his order . his is the creation , his is the command . blessed is allah , the lord of the worlds .
as for those who take guardians for themselves , other than him , allah is the warden over them . you are not a guardian over them .
we shall turn about their hearts and their eyes , even as they believed not in it the first time ; and we shall leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
we have indeed created all things by a proper measure .
when he called on his lord , a call in seclusion .
shall he then who knows that what has been revealed unto youfrom your lord is the truth be like him who is blind ? but it is only the men of understanding that pay heed .
it is allah that takes the soulsat death ; and those that die notduring their sleep : those on whom he has passed the decree of death , he keeps back , but the rest he sendsfor a term appointed verily in this are signs for those who reflect .
the criminals will live forever in the torment of hell . their torment will not be relieved and they will despair of escaping .
turn to your lord and surrender yourselves to him before the punishment overtakes you , for then you will not be helped .
satan was correct in his assessment of them and they all followed him , except for a band of true believers ,
say ,  have you considered : if allah should take away your hearing and your sight and set a seal upon your hearts , which deity other than allah could bring themto you ?  look how we diversify the verses ; then theyturn away .
and inform them that the water is to be shared betweenthem . each one 's right to drink being established .
we are most knowing of how they listen to it when they listen to you andwhen they are in private conversation , when the wrongdoers say ,  you follow not but a man affected by magic . 
they will say :  we stayed a day or part of a day . ask of those who keep account . 
and pharaoh said : o chiefs ! i know not that ye have a god other than me , so kindle for me , o haman , to bake the mud ; and set up for me a lofty tower in order that i may survey the god of moses ; and lo ! i deem him of the liars .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is in them . he has power over all things .
when the sky is split open , and turns crimson like tanned leather .
and a speaker from among them will say : verily there was unto me a mate .
and , when they see a sign , turn it to mockery ,
had the people of the towns believedand maintained piety , we would have certainly showered on them our blessings from the sky and the earth . but they called our revelations lies , thus our torment struck them for their evil deeds .
surely those who said : “ our lord is allah ” and then remained steadfast shall have nothing to fear nor to grieve .
on the day when these shall be heated in hellfire and therewith branded on their foreheads , their sides , and their backs : ‘ this is what you treasured up for yourselves ! so taste what you have treasured ! ’
but whoever comes to himas a believer , and has done righteous good deeds , for such are the high ranks ,
and those who avoid the major sins and indecencies and , when angered , forgive ;
allah will not leave the believers in that which you are till he shall distinguish the evil from the good . allah will not let you see the unseen . but allah chooses from his messengers whom he will . therefore , believe in allah and his messengers , for if you believe and are cautious there shall be for you a great wage .
o my people ! what makes me invite you to deliverance , while you invite me toward the fire ?
knows their meanings ] .
and by the even and the odd .
and say , ‘ this is nothing but plain magic ! ’
they hide from the people , but they can not hide from god . he is with them , as they plot by night with words he does not approve . god comprehends what they do .
he will say , ‘ alas , had i sent ahead for my life ! ’
and we outspread the cloud to overshadow you , and we sent down manna and quails upon you : 'eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you . and they worked no wrong upon us , but themselves they wronged .
say , , it was revealed to me that a band of jinn attentively listened toand thenand said :
it is allah who has made for you the earth as a resting place , and the sky as a canopy , and has given you shape- and made your shapes beautiful , - and has provided for you sustenance , of things pure and good ; - such is allah your lord . so glory to allah , the lord of the worlds !
and if there is a party of you which believeth in that wherewith i have been sent , and there is a party which believeth not , then have patience until allah judge between us . he is the best of all who deal in judgment .
maybe my lord will give mebetter than your garden , and he will unleash upon it bolts from the sky , so that it becomes a bare plain .
do they not contemplate within themselves ? allah has not created the heavens and the earth and what is between them except in truth and for a specified term . and indeed , many of the people , inthe meeting with their lord , are disbelievers .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! are you vindictive toward us for any reason except that we have faith in allah and in what has been sent down to us , and in what was sent down before , and that most of you are transgressors ? ’
but never will they express their desire , because of thetheir hands have sent on before them ! and allah knows well those that do wrong !
follow them who do not ask you any reward and they are rightly guided .
he it is who sends down clear communications upon his servant , that he may bring you forth from utter darkness into light ; and most surely allah is kind , merciful to you .
we have appointed heirs for everything that parents and close relatives leave behind . as for those with whom you have entered into agreements , let them , too , have their due . god is witness to all things .
these are the ones who rejected the good counsel when it came to them , although it is certainly a mighty book .
if it turns out that both prove dishonest , two others should take their place from amongst those whose rights have been usurped and let them swear by god , saying ,  our testimony is indeed truer than the testimony of these two . and we have not been guilty of any misstatement for then indeed we would be transgressors . 
we saved him and all of his family
and what should teach thee ? perchance he would cleanse him ,
we could turn it , if we pleased , into straw ; then you would rue the day ,
the ten-month pregnant female camels are abandoned ,
and if you ask them , “ who has created the heavens and the earth ? ” , they will surely say , “ they are created by the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
say , “ upon allah ’ s munificence and upon his mercy – upon these should the people rejoice ” ; that is better than all their wealth and possessions .
god produced you from your mothers ' wombs knowing nothing , but gave you ears and eyes and hearts so that you may be grateful .
and assuredly we have bedecked the nearest heaven with lamps , and we have made them missiles for satans : and for them we have gotten ready the torment of the blaze .
then he drew out his hand , and it was luminous to the onlookers .
we will show them our signs in all the horizons and in themselves , until it is clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is witness over everything '
so that he will recompense those who believe and do righteous deeds from his bounty . he does not love the unbelievers .
andsaid :  embark . in the name of god be its course and mooring . my lord is surely forgiving and kind . 
only they believe in our communications who , when they are reminded of them , fall down in prostration and celebrate the praise of their lord , and they are not proud .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up , and crushed , with a single crush .
is this better or the tree of zaqqum
thus they devised a plan , and we also devised a plan , but they were not aware of it .
well , allah is not ashamed to cite the similitude of a gnat or of something even more insignificant than this . as for those who believe , they come to know from the same similitude that it is the revelation from their lord ; but those who disbelieve , say ,  what does allah mean by such similitudes ?  allah leads astray many and guides many to the right way by the same thing . and he leads astray only those who disobey allah ;
wherever you may be , death will overtake you , though you should be in raised-up towers . and if a good thing visits them , they say , 'this is from god ' ; but if an evil thing visits them , they say , 'this is from thee . ' say : 'everything is from god . ' how is it with this people ? they scarcely understand any tiding .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
soon i shall mount him on saood , the hill of fire .
and the disbelievers said to the muslims , “ follow our path and we will bear your sins ” ; whereas they will not bear anything from their sins ; they are indeed liars .
whenever our authoritative revelations are recited to those who do not wish to meet us in the life hereafter , say ,  bring us another book besides this one or change it .  , tell them ,  i can not change it myself . i only follow what is revealed to me . i fear that for disobeying my lord i shall be punished on the great .
he would have surely remained in its belly till the day they will be resurrected .
and they have said : forsake not your gods . forsake not wadd , nor suwa ' , nor yaghuth and ya'uq and nasr .
what could let you know what the nightly comer is !
o society of jinn and humans ! if you can pass through the bounds of the heavens and the earth , go ahead and pass . but you will not pass except with authorization .
miserable is the price for which they have sold their souls , in that they denywhich allah has sent down , in insolent envy that allah of his grace should send it to any of his servants he pleases : thus have they drawn on themselves wrath upon wrath . and humiliating is the punishment of those who reject faith .
the 'adrejected the messengers .
but as for those who disbelieved and denied our revelations , and denied the meeting of the hereafter , such will be brought to doom .
and his companion will say : this is that which with me is ready .
 nothing crooked or curved wilt thou see in their place . 
 and i think not the hour will ever come , and if indeed i am brought back to my lord , , i surely shall find better than this when i return to him . 
that he may recompense those who believeand do righteous good deeds . those , theirs is forgiveness and rizqun karim .
he is the first and the last , and the outer and the inner , and he has knowledge of all things .
in houses which god has permitted to be raised , and his name is celebrated therein . he is glorified therein , morning and evening .
allah said :  i will send it down unto you : but if any of you after that resisteth faith , i will punish him with a penalty such as i have not inflicted on any one among all the peoples . 
fie upon you and upon that which ye worship beside allah ! will ye not then reflect ?
even so , we have caused it to enter into the hearts of harmdoers :
if it were not for the bounty of allah to you and his mercy , and that allah turns , and is the wise ,
,  now that you have abandoned them and what they worship instead of god , seek refuge in the cave . god will , certainly , grant you mercy and provide you with help to safely get out of this trouble . 
did you cast a good look at the water that you drink ?
or any other form of creation you deem hardest of all .  they will certainly ask :  who will bring us back ?  say :  he who created you in the first instance .  they will shake their heads at you and inquire :  when will that be ?  say :  perhaps that time might have drawn near ;
those who believe in god and the last day will never ask you to exempt them from striving with their wealth and their lives , god best knows the righteous ,
know that the worldly life is only play , and distraction , and glitter , and boasting among you , and rivalry in wealth and children . it is like a rainfall that produces plants , and delights the disbelievers . but then it withers , and you see it yellowing , and then it becomes debris . while in the hereafter there is severe agony , and forgiveness from god , and acceptance . the life of this world is nothing but enjoyment of vanity .
marvel ye that there should come unto you a reminder from your lord by means of a man among you , that he may warn you ? remember how he made you viceroys after noah 's folk , and gave you growth of stature . rememberthe bounties of your lord , that haply ye may be successful .
and , when they see a sign , would scoff ;
enter the garden , ye and your spouses , joyfully .
those who adhere to the scripture , and practice prayer—we will not waste the reward of the reformers .
the path of allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . surely , to allah all things return .
whosoever brings good , he shall have the better thereof , and whosoever brings evilthen , those who do evil deeds will only be requited for what they used to do .
when she heard of their malicious talk , she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them : she gave each of them a knife : and she said ,  come out before them .  when they saw him , they did extol him , andcut their hands : they said ,  allah preserve us ! no mortal is this ! this is none other than a noble angel ! 
and o dear prophetrecite to them the case of the one to whom we gave our revelations , and in response he departed from them completely – so satan went after him – he therefore became of the astray .
surely the likeness of isa is with allah as the likeness of adam ; he created him from dust , then said to him , be , and he was .
jonah , too , was one of the messengers .
the messengers said : “ our lord knows that we have indeed been sent to you
and zakariya and yahya and isa and ilyas ; every one was of the good ;
and whosoever repents and does righteous good deeds , then verily , he repents towards allah with true repentance .
allah is he who sendeth the winds so that they raise a cloud and then spreadeth it along the heaven as he will and breaketh it into fragments , and thou beholdest the rain come forth from the intestines thereof . then when he maketh it fall upon such of his bondmen as he will , lo ! they rejoice .
he said , “ i want to marry you to one of these two daughters of mine , provided you work for me for eight years . but if you complete ten , that is up to you . i do not intend to impose any hardship on you . you will find me , god willing , one of the righteous . ”
except for those who returnbefore you apprehend them . and know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
again , what do you know – of what sort is the day of justice !
i am to you a trustworthy messenger .
when the oceans are suffered to burst forth ;
and that allah may help you with strong help .
indeed , the righteous will be in gardens and pleasure ,
but has created a barrier between them so that they will not merge totally .
a cup from a gushing spring is brought round for them ,
the mutual rivalry for piling up of worldly things diverts you ,
who do not surpass him in speech , and do as he commands .
if it had not been for the blessing of my lord , i would also have been taken to hell . 
there has to be a nation among you summoning to the good , bidding what is right , and forbidding what is wrong . it is they who are the felicitous .
said ,  lord , i have killed a man from their people and i am afraid that they will kill me .
let not their conduct grieve thee , who run easily to disbelief , for lo ! they injure allah not at all . it is allah 's will to assign them no portion in the hereafter , and theirs will be an awful doom .
yet he has not embarked upon the uphill task .
so bring our ancestors back , if you are truthful . 
and if any tidings , whether of safety or fear , come unto them , they noise it abroad , whereas if they had referred it to the messenger and to such of them as are in authority , those among them who are able to think out the matter would have known it . if it had not been for the grace of allah upon you and his mercy ye would have followed satan , save a few .
and when our command came to pass , we delivered shu'ayb and those who shared his faith , through our mercy , and the blast seized those who were engaged in wrong-doing , so they lay lifeless in their homes
as to those who have faith and do good works , surely theirs shall be a never-ending reward .
go to the pharaoh ; he has become a rebel . 
of all such things the evil is hateful in the sight of thy lord .
who uphold their testimonies ,
nay , but the unbelievers glory in their schism .
the roadis only against those who ask for leave of theewhen they are rich . they are content to be with the useless . allah hath sealed their hearts so that they know not .
then , they sold him for a trifling price , a number of dirhams , because they considered him to be of little value .
we saved him and his people from great distress ,
 or the water thereofbecomes deep-sunkenso that you will never be able to seek it . 
and he it is who has made the stars for you that you might follow the right way thereby in the darkness of the land and the sea ; truly we have made plain the communications for a people who know .
yet thy lord would never destroy the cities unjustly , while as yet their people were putting things right .
that is their reward because they disbelieved our revelations and said : when we are bones and fragments shall we , forsooth , be raised up as a new creation ?
he asks , “ when is the day of resurrection ? ”
the verdict will be given against them , because they did wrong , and they will be speechless .
indeed , on that day they will surrender themselves .
allah hath promised those of you who believe and work the righteous works that he shall make them successors on the earth even as he had made those before them successors , and that he shall surely establish for them their religion which he hath approved for them , and that he shall surely exchange unto them after their fear a security , provided they worship me , associating not aught with me ; and whosoever will disbelieve thereafter , then those ! they are the transgressors .
‘ bring it back for me ! ’ then hebegan to wipelegs and necks .
thy guardian-lord hath not forsaken thee , nor is he displeased .
we granted him virtue in this life and he shall be among the righteous ones in the life to come .
verily those who oppose allah and his apostle shall be abased even as those before them were abased ; and of a surety we have sent down manifest signs . and for the infidels will be a torment ignominious .
it was not youbut god who slew the pagans . it was not youbut god who threw dust at them . he did this as a favorable test for the believers . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
thereupon two god-fearing men whom god had blessed said ,  go into them through the gate -- for as soon as you enter , you shall surely be victorious ! put your trust in god if you are true believers . 
in fact , the unbelievers are the ones who are boastful and quarrelsome .
divorced women shall wait by themselves for three periods ; and it is not lawful for them to hide what god has created in their wombs ; if they believe in god and the last day . in such time their mates have better right to restore them , if they desire to set things right . women have such honourable rights as obligations , but their men have a degree above them ; god is all-mighty , all-wise .
and the birds assembled ; all were turning unto him .
and pharaoh proclaimed to his people , saying , ‘ o my people ! do not the kingdom of egypt and these rivers that run at my feet belong to me ? do you not perceive ?
what ! do you think that you will be left alone while allah has not yet known those of you who have struggled hard and have not taken any one as an adherent besides allah and his apostle and the believers ; and allah is aware of what you do .
and it is not for any human that allah may speak to him except as a divine revelation or while the human is on this side of the veil of greatness , or that he sends an angel to reveal by his permission , whatever he wills ; indeed he is supreme , wise .
moses prayed : 'our lord ! you bestowed upon pharaoh and his nobles splendour and riches in the world . our lord ! have you done this that they may lead people astray from your path ? our lord ! obliterate their riches and harden their hearts that they may not believe until they observe the painful chastisement .
save those who have faith and do righteous deeds , and counsel each other to hold on to truth and counsel each other to be steadfast .
the day they are presented to the fire .
andthose who strive in opposing our communications , they shall be caused to be brought to the chastisement .
lord , grant me a righteous son . ”
so we will very soon provide him ease .
then we revealed to you : follow the faith of ibrahim , the upright one , and he was not of the polytheists .
and those who came after them , saying , “ our lord , forgive us , and our brethren who preceded us in faith , and leave no malice in our hearts towards those who believe . our lord , you are clement and merciful . ”
they hamstrung the shecamel and defied the order of their lord , saying to salih : 'bring down that which you have promised us if you truly are one of the messengers '
we drown them if we will , then they have none to cry to , nor can they be saved ,
o men , you have received infallible proof from your lord , and we have sent down a beacon light to you .
these ! on them shall be benedictions from their lord and his mercy , and these ! they are the rightly guided .
and we are alert and fully prepared . ’
that is so for god turns night into day and day into night , for god is all-hearing and all-seeing ;
and the first breath of morning .
or have theythe unseen , so that they writedown ?
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe , but those who reject allah have no protector .
and when a scripture came to them from god , confirming what they have—although previously they were seeking victory against those who disbelieved—but when there came to them what they recognized , they disbelieved in it . so god ’ s curse is upon the disbelievers .
the food of sinners .
and afterward , lo ! their return is surely unto hell .
and when calamity strikes you upon the sea , all those whom you worship are lost , except him ; then when he rescues you towards land , you turn away ; and man is extremely ungrateful .
verily , the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but it is he who deceives them . and when they stand up for as-salat , they stand with laziness and to be seen of men , and they do not remember allah but little .
lord , raise up from among them a messenger who shall recite your revelations to them and teach them the book and wisdom and purify their lives . you art all-powerful and allwise  .
how indeed ! whereas if they get the better of you they respect not regarding you either kinship or agreement . they please you with their mouth , the while their hearts refuse ; and most of them are ungodly .
the messiah will never scorn to be a slave unto allah , nor will the favoured angels . whoso scorneth his service and is proud , all such will he assemble unto him ;
he holds the keys of the heavens and the earth . he increases or decreases the provision of any one he will . he has knowledge of everything .
you would have surely seen hell .
and the one who kept proper measure and then guided .
then he became a clot ; thenshaped and fashioned
and say : ' o my lord , i seek refuge in you from evil suggestions of the satans .
he knows that which deceives the eyes and what the breasts conceal .
whatever good reaches you , it is from allah , and whatever evil reaches you , it is from yourself . we have sent youas a messenger to humanity . allah is sufficient for a witness .
lest a person should say :  alas , my grief that i was undutiful to allah , and i was indeed among those who mocked , the quran , and muhammad saw and at the faithful believers , etc . ]
it is he who made you caliphs in the earth . he who disbelieves , his disbelief shall be charged against him . the unbelievers disbelief does nothing for them , except , increase them in hate with allah their disbelief increases the unbelievers only in loss .
keep watch all the night except some ,
and allah sends down waterfrom the sky , then he revives the earth therewith after its death . verily , in this is a signfor people who listen .
 and they have said : 'you shall not leave your gods , nor shall you leave wadd , nor suwa ' , nor yaghuth , nor ya'uq , nor nasr ;
then we sent our apostles successively . whenever there came to a nation its apostle , they impugned him , so we made them follow one anotherand we turned them into folktales . so away with the faithless lot !
then verily on us is their reckoning .
his is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth ; he quickeneth and he giveth death ; and he is able to do all things .
and whoever disobeys allah and his noble messenger and crosses all his limits – allah will put him in the fire , in which he will remain forever ; and for him is a disgraceful punishment .
they said :  burn him , and come to the support of your gods , if you are going to do anything . 
except those who believe and do good works and charge one another with the truth and charge one another with patience .
o people who believe ! do not befriend the people upon whom is allah ’ s wrath – they have lost hope in the hereafter the way the disbelievers have lost hope in the people of the graves .
 taste your trial . this is what you sought to hasten . 
and when the scrolls ofdeeds shall be unfolded ,
for each of them we drew examples , and each we destroyed utterly .
it will then be said to them , “ where are the partners you used to appoint ? ” –
purify your garments ;
then none among you would be his saviour .
or lest you say ,  our forefathers associated others with god before our time , and we are only the descendants who came after them . so are you going to destroy us for what those inventors of falsehood did ? 
when you received it with your tongues and spoke with your mouths what you had no knowledge of , and you deemed it an easy matter while with allah it was grievous .
an army of confederates with be defeated there .
allah desires to explain to you , and to guide you into the ways of those before you , and to turn to you , and allah is knowing , wise .
and moses said , 'if you are thankless , you and whoso is on earth , all together , yet assuredly god is all-sufficient , all-laudable . '
we made an appointment of thirty nights with mosesto which we added ten more ; so the term set by the lord was completed in forty nights . moses said to aaron , his brother :  deputise for me among my people . dispose rightly , and do not follow the way of the authors of evil . 
the mountains are scattered about as dust ,
he said : ye shall sow seven years as usual , but that which ye reap , leave it in the ear , all save a little which ye eat .
so his lord heard his prayer and repelled the women ’ s deceit away from him ; indeed he only is the all hearing , the all knowing .
and keep the prayer established , and pay the charity ; and whatever good you send ahead for yourselves , you will find it with allah ; indeed allah is seeing your deeds .
we took the children of israel across the sea : pharaoh and his hosts followed them in insolence and spite . at length , when overwhelmed with the flood , he said :  i believe that there is no god except him whom the children of israel believe in : i am of those who submit . 
he it is who gives life and causes death . and when he decides upon a thing he says to it only :  be !  and it is .
but people later cut up their religion into bits , each group rejoicing in what they have .
for it is not consonant with the majesty ofmost gracious that he should beget a son .
“ hurry to your orchard if you would gather its fruit . ”
they said :  keep him and his brother in suspense ; and send to the cities men to collect-
to pharaoh , haman , and qarun ; but they called  a sorcerer telling lies !  ...
why do not the rabbis and the priests forbid their evil-speaking and their devouring of illicit gain ? verily evil is their handiwork .
allah has commanded :  do not take two gods ; for he is but one god . so fear me alone . 
do you not know that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to god and that no one is your guardian or helper besides him ?
this qur ’ an is the speech of allah with a gracious noble messenger .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , he will pay them in full their rewards , and he will enhance them out of his grace . but those who are disdainful and arrogant , he will punish them with a painful punishment , and they will not find besides allah any guardian or helper .
hold to forgiveness ; command what is right ; but turn away from the ignorant .
at nightfall they came to their father weeping ,
he will say : “ would that i had sent ahead what would be of avail for this life of mine ! ”
the companions of the fire and the companions of the garden are not equal . the companions of the garden will achieve felicity .
that is because god has sent down the book with the truth . and those who pursue differences in the scriptures go much too far in dissension .
they say , “ if we return to medinah , then indeed the honourable group will soon expel the lowly one ” ; whereas all honour belongs to allah and to his noble messenger and to the muslims , but the hypocrites do not know .
and when the girl-child who was buried alive is asked .
what has brought you into hell ?
then indeed your lord – for those who unwittingly commit evil and then repent and reform themselves – indeed your lord is then , surely , oft forgiving , most merciful .
fruits -- and they high-honoured
or are the treasures of thy lord with them , or are they the managers ?
they have said ,  allah has taken a son .  exalted is he ; he is thefree of need . to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . you have no authority for this . do you say about allah that which you do not know ?
for surely you can not , make the dead to hear and you can not make the deaf to hear the call , when they turn back and
we rained upon them a rain , and evil is the rainon those that are warned .
‘ indeed we have suffered loss !
we will ease his way towards difficulty .
he knows that which is beyond the ken of perception as well as that which can be perceived . he is the most mighty , the most wise .
o believers , when you meet an army , stand firm , and think of god a great deal that you may be blessed with success .
thus was the state of those people , and we encompassed in knowledge all concerning dhu al- qarnayn .
and that to your lord is your returning ;
they said , 'be not afraid ; behold , we give thee good tidings of a cunning boy . '
perchance the unbelievers will wish that they had surrendered :
andwhen musasaid to his boy-servant :  i will not give upuntil i reach the junction of the two seas ori spend years and years in travelling . 
and you , adam , inhabit the garden , you and your wife , and eat whatever you wish ; but do not approach this tree , lest you become sinners . ”
recall what time he said unto his father and his people what are these images to which ye are cleaving ?
the descendants of those whom we boarded along with nooh ; he was indeed a grateful bondman .
they said ,  these are confusing dreams and we do not know the interpretation of such dreams . 
why do you not reflect ?
that which is with you will be spent , but what is with allah shall last , and we will surely pay the patient their reward by the best of what they used to do .
give good tidings to the believers that there awaits them with god great bounty .
we never heard of it in the former faith . it is surely a fabrication .
they will be served a drink of the finest sealed wine ,
and we made the earth burst forth with springs , and the waters met for a preordained purpose .
o people , have fear of your lord . the earthquake of the hour shall be a great thing .
say :  those who invent a lie against allah will never prosper . 
if you belie me , other nations before you also belied . it is only for a messenger to deliver the clear deliverance .
lo ! in the difference of day and night and all that allah hath created in the heavens and the earth are portents , verily , for folk who ward off .
these apostles : we have preferred some of them above some others : of them are some unto whom allah spake , and some he raised many degrees . and we vouchsafed unto isa , son of maryam , the evidences , and we aided him with the holy spirit ; and had allah so willed those who came after them had not fought among themselves after the evidences had come unto them but they differed ; then of them some believed and of them some disbelieved . and had allah so willed , they had not fought among themselves , but allah doth whatsoever he intendeth .
when his lord called him in the sacred valley of tuwa ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth halloweth allah , the sovereign , the holy , the mighty , the wise .
they will call therein for every kind of fruit , in peace and security .
hewill say :  you stayed not but a little , if you had only known !
, say ,  people , truth has certainly come to you from your lord . one who seeks guidance does so for his own good and one who goes astray will find himself lost . i am not your keeper  .
we have made thisa trial for the evildoers .
do not invoke blessings on any of them who die , nor stand to pray at their graves , for they disbelieved in god and his prophet , and died transgressors .
those whom you invoke , other than him , can not help you , nor can they help themselves '
and multiplied corruption .
the jews say the nazarenes are not on anything , and the nazarenes say it is the jews who are not on anything . yet they both read the book . and those who do not know say like their saying . allah will judge between them their disputes on the day of resurrection .
so rely upon allah ; indeed , you are upon the clear truth .
or giving food on a day of hunger
my verses had already been recited to you , but you were turning back on your heels
and the criminals will see the fire and will be certain that they are to fall therein . and they will not find from it a way elsewhere .
alif lam mim ra . these are the verses of the book ; and that which is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
but the thamud , - they were destroyed by a terrible storm of thunder and lightning !
and when they argue with one another in hell , the weak will say to the proud : 'we were your followers , will you help us against any share of the fire '
our promise to them came true and we saved them and those whom we wanted , but destroyed the unjust people .
 god has begotten ?  they are liars indeed !
from a discharged living germ
theirs are good tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter - there is no changing the words of allah - that is the supreme triumph .
alif-lam-meem .
yet would they say , 'our eyes have been dazzled ; nay , we are a people bewitched ! '
and the mountains move , and vaporize .
they answer : nay , but yewere not believers .
 but if you turn away , then no reward have i asked of you , my reward is only from allah , and i have been commanded to be one of the muslims . 
but as for those who have deviated , they have become firewood for gehenna !  '
all their deeds are in the scrolls ,
which would envelope mankind . that would be a grievous affliction .
in that case we would certainly have made you to taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , then you would not have found any helper against us .
then , when they saw it as a sudden cloud coming towards their valleys , they said , 'this is a cloud , that shall give us rain ! ' 'not so ; rather it is that you sought to hasten -- a wind , wherein is a painful chastisement ,
wave ring between this and that ; neither for this nor for that and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him thou wilt never find a way .
aad too belied . how then were my punishment and my warnings !
and do not ever assume that allah is unaware of what the unjust do ; he does not give them respite but for a day in which the eyes will become fixed , staring .
indeed we sent it down on the night of ordainment .
it is a revelation sent down from the lord of the worlds .
nay , verily it is a furnace
from pharaoh who was most prominent among the prodigals .
indeed in this is a sign ; and most of them were not muslims .
covet ye then that they would believe for you whereas surely a party of them hath been hearing the word of allah and then reverting it after they have understood it , while they know .
say , “ i am only a human like you ; it is inspired in me that your god is one god . so be upright towards him , and seek forgiveness from him. ” and woe to the idolaters .
for allah only is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; he creates whatever he wills ; he may bestow daughters to whomever he wills , and sons to whomever he wills .
nor can there be any cause for reproach against those who , when they came to you asking for mounts to go to the battlefront , and when you said that you had no mounts for them , they went back , their eyes overflowing with tears , grieving that they had no resources to enable them to take part in fighting .
and they fall down upon their faces weeping ; and it increases them in humility . '
we tried the people of pharaoh before them : a noble messenger was sent to them ,
they can never harm you beyond annoyance . in a fight , they will turn back in defeat and they will not be helped .
behold ! to allah indeed belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he certainly knows your present state . the day they are brought back to him he will inform them about what they have done , and allah has knowledge of all things .
muhammad is not the father of any of your males , but the apostle of allah and the seal of the prophets ; and allah of everything is ever the knower .
but those who strive against our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
tell them :  i am not master of my own gain or loss but as god may please . if i had the knowledge of the unknown i would have enjoyed abundance of the good , and no evil would have touched me . i am only a bearer of warnings and bringer of happy news for those who believe . 
and they say ,  never will the fire touch us , except for a few days .  say ,  have you taken a covenant with allah ? for allah will never break his covenant . or do you say about allah that which you do not know ? 
this is our provision , which will never be exhausted .
you do not seek from them any recompense for your service . this is merely an admonition to all mankind .
then penetrate to the centre of the enemy army .
when you do not produce before them any miracle , they say : 'why do you not choose for yourself a miracle ? ' say to them : ' i follow only what is revealed to me by my lord . this is nothing but a means of insight into the truth , and guidance and mercy from your lord to the people who believe .
but as for the unjust , they will be , for hell , firewood . '
why , was there never a village that believed and its belief benefited them ? except jonah 's nation , when they believed , we spared them from a degrading punishment in this life and we gave them enjoyment for awhile .
of them are some who believe in him , and of them are some who deterfrom him ; and hell suffices for a blaze !
the parable of the two parties is that of one who is blind and deaf and one who sees and hears . are they equal in comparison ? will you not then take admonition ?
and make others settle after them in their land ?
do not argue with the people of the book except only by the best manner , except the unjust among them . tell them ,  we believe in what is revealed to us and to you . our lord and your lord is one . we have submitted ourselves to his will  .
so covet not things we have bestowed on a portion of them to enjoy , and do not grieve for them , and protect those who believe ;
except iblis who refused to join with the others in prostration .
god does not forgive the sin of considering others equal to him , but he may choose to forgive other sins . whoever believes in other gods besides him has indulged in a great sin .
they have sworn by god the most earnest oaths if a sign comes to them they will believe in it . say : 'signs are only with god . ' what will make you realize that , when it comes , they will not believe ?
these are the people upon whom are the blessings from their lord , and mercy ; and it is they who are on guidance .
and do not kill your children , fearing poverty ; we shall provide sustenance to them as well as to you ; indeed killing them is a great mistake .
as an ordinance from us . we have been sending
on that day , the spirit and the angels who stand in lines will not speak except those whom the beneficent god has permitted , and he will speak the right words .
such is allah 's way that has come down from the past . never shall you find any change in the way of allah .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am to you a trustworthy adviser .
and they even sought to snatch away his guests from him , but we blinded their eyes .  now taste ye my wrath and my warning . 
when agreeting is offered you , meet it with a greeting still more courteous , orof equal courtesy . allah takes careful account of all things .
and when the wild beasts are gathered
god is the one who created the heavens and the earth , sent down water from the sky by which he produced fruits for your sustenance , enabled you to use boats to sail on the sea , and placed the rivers at your disposal , all by his command .
and make the day for livelihood ?
it is not for the sun to overtake the moon , nor doth the night outstrip the day . they float each in an orbit .
you ask them no wage for it . it is only a reminder for all mankind .
o men , the messenger has now come to you with the truth from your lord ; so believe ; better is it for you . and if you disbelieve , to god belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth ; and god is all-knowing , all-wise .
and peace be unto the sent ones .
then his soul prompted him to kill his brother , so he killed him , and became one of the losers .
and the night as it dissipates ;
but if you bring him not to me , there shall be no measure for you with me , neither shall you come nigh me . '
and whoever does not accept the-divine caller , he shall not escape in the earth and he shall not have guardians besides him , these are in manifest error .
it is not for any prophet to embezzle . whoso embezzleth will bring what he embezzled with him on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full what it hath earned ; and they will not be wronged .
the all-merciful
the densely tree 'd gardens ,
by people , who can neither be diverted by merchandise nor bargaining from worshipping god , saying their prayers and paying religious tax . they do these things , for they are afraid of the day when all hearts and eyes will undergo terrible unrest and crisis .
of them are some who listen unto thee , but we have placed upon their hearts veils , lest they should understand , and in their ears a deafness . if they saw every token they would not believe therein ; to the point that , when they come unto thee to argue with thee , the disbelievers say : this is naught else than fables of the men of old .
they shall abide in it forever .
the truth is from thy lord ; be then thou not of the doubters .
they are niggardly in spending for you . when fear comes , you can see them looking at you , their eyes rolling about like to faint because of the agony of death . when their fear subsides , they start to bite you with their sharp tongues . they are miserly in spending for a virtuous cause and have no faith . god has turned their deeds devoid of all virtue . this was not at all difficult for god .
when you received it with your tongues and said with your mouths that of which you had no knowledge and thought it was insignificant while it was , in the sight of allah , tremendous .
and were saying ,  are we to leave our gods for a mad poet ? 
they said : if the wolf should devour him when we area band , then surely we should have already perished .
have we sent down a charter to them which mentions what they associate with him ?
and attend to your prayers , and practice regular charity , and kneel with those who kneel .
o believers , give in charity what is good of the things you have earned , and of what you produce from the earth ; and do not choose to give what is bad as alms , that is , things you would not like to accept yourself except with some condescension . remember that god is affluent and praiseworthy .
assuredly we brought the truth unto you , but most of you are to the truth averse .
the sure calamity !
those who dispute the signs of allah without any authority having reached them are very hateful before allah and the believers . as such allah sets a seal on every heart that is proud and arrogant .
say : 'what think you ? if in the morning your water should have vanished into the earth , then who would bring you running water ? '
you have attained a high moral standard .
but those who belie our verses , punishment shall touch them for their misdeeds .
do you suppose that most of them listen or exercise their reason ? they are just like cattle ; indeed , they are further astray from the way .
so she conceived him and withdrew with him to a distant place .
greed for more and more distracted you
“ here it is ; so taste it. ” for the disbelievers there is the suffering of the fire .
rather , if you have patience and are cautious , and they suddenly come against you , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand marked angels '
noron those who came to you to be provided with mounts , and when you said :  i can find no mounts for you ,  they turned back , while their eyes overflowing with tears of grief that they could not find anything to spend .
say to those who disbelieve : you shall be vanquished , and driven together to hell ; and evil is the resting-place .
so hold fast to what has been revealed to you . surely you are on the straight way .
there is no compulsion in religion . righteousness is now distinct from error . he who disbelieves in the idol and believes in allah has grasped the firmest tie that will never break . allah is hearing , knowing .
the romans have been defeated
and that “ we would take up stations in the heaven to try to hear but anyone who now attempts to listen finds a shooting meteor in wait for him ” ;
and that when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; so whoever believes in his lord , he should neither fear loss nor being overtaken :
say :  obey allah , and obey the messenger : but if ye turn away , he is only responsible for the duty placed on him and ye for that placed on you . if ye obey him , ye shall be on right guidance . the messenger 's duty is only to preach the clear .
they claim that the angels , who are themselves the worshipers of the merciful , are females . did they witness their creation ! their witness shall be written down and they shall be questioned .
who shall inherit paradise and will remain in it .
we had tried the people of pharaoh before them . a respected prophet had come to them :
they went to david whereupon he was afraid of them , but they said : 'do not be afraid , we are two that have a dispute , one of us has wronged the other . judge between us justly , and do not transgress , and guide us to the right path .
and the book inscribed
whenever a new advice comes to them from their lord , they do not listen to it except while playing .
if we will , we could send down to them from the heaven a sign , to which they would bend their necks in humility .
those who disbelieve say , “ you are not a messenger. ” say , “ god is a sufficient witness between me and you , and whoever has knowledge of the scripture . ”
do they then only wait for the hour , - that it should come on them of a sudden ? but already have come some tokens thereof , and when itis on them , how can they benefit then by their admonition ?
and in the dawns they prayed for forgiveness .
when the sky is rent apart ,
we will show them our proofs on the horizons , and in their very souls , until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is witness over everything ?
and we helped him against the people who cried lies to our signs ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all together .
then we brought you back to life after your death , so that you may be grateful .
those who have traded faith in exchange for disbelief can never do any harm to god . there will be a painful torment for them .
even if the wrong-doers had all that there is on earth , and as much more , would they offer it for ransom from the pain of the penalty on the day of judgment : but something will confront them from allah , which they could never have counted upon !
when the occurrence occurs ,
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who have been given a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah , to settle their dispute , but a party of them turn back and decline .
are you , then , going to contend with him regarding what he sees with his eyes ?
behold , we have made it an arabic koran ; haply you will understand ;
and he constructed the ship , and whenever an assembly of the eminent of his people passed by him , they ridiculed him . he said ,  if you ridicule us , then we will ridicule you just as you ridicule .
allah , there is no god but he -- he will most certainly gather you together on the resurrection day , there is no doubt in it ; and who is more true in word than allah ?
and has no food except the filth from the washing of wounds ,
forbidden unto youare carrion and blood and swineflesh , and that which hath been dedicated unto any other than allah , and the strangled , and the dead through beating , and the dead through falling from a height , and that which hath been killed byhorns , and the devoured of wild beasts , saving that which ye make lawful , and that which hath been immolated unto idols . andthat ye swear by the divining arrows . this is an abomination . this day are those who disbelieve in despair ofyour religion ; so fear them not , fear me ! this day have i perfected your religion for you and completed my favour unto you , and have chosen for you as religion al-islam . whoso is forced by hunger , not by will , to sin : lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and , when moses said to his people ,  remember the favor of allah upon you when he saved you from the people of pharaoh , who were afflicting you with the worst torment and were slaughtering yoursons and keeping your females alive . and in that was a great trial from your lord .
when someone brought him the glad news , joseph 's shirt was placed on his face and his eye-sight was restored , he said ,  did i not tell you that i know about god that which you do not know ? 
have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of the consequence for those who were before them , and they were mightier than these in power ? allah is not such that aught in the heavens or in the earth escapeth him . lo ! he is the wise , the mighty .
say , “ if the ocean were ink for the words of my lord , the ocean would run out , before the words of my lord run out , ” even if we were to bring the like of it in addition to it .
does he not know that god observes all things ?
we sent revelations to moses telling him ,  travel with my servants during the night and strike a dry road across the sea . have no fear of being overtakennor of anything else  .
honorable recorders ,
but allah hath full knowledge of your enemies : allah is enough for a protector , and allah is enough for a helper .
o men ! there has come to you indeed an admonition from your lord and a healing for what is in the breasts and a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
so give them tidings of a painful doom ,
then we have put youon a plain way ofcommandment ] . so follow you that , and follow not the desires of those who know not . .
have you not seen that your lord increases the shadow . had he wanted he would have made it stationary ] , and has made the sun their guide .
then we will inherit from him what he speaks of , and he will come to us alone .
and we rained on them a rain ; indeed it is an evil rain that rains on those that are warned .
and the heaven he raised and imposed the balance
can the two groups , the blind and the deaf , be considered equal to those who have vision and hearing ? will you then not take heed ?
nor arethe shade and the sun 's heat .
and those who believe will say :  are these the menwho swore their strongest oaths by allah that they were with you ?  all that they did has been in vain , and they have become the losers .
and whoever takes allah and his apostle and those who believe for a guardian , then surely the party of allah are they that shall be triumphant .
and man prays for evil as he ought to pray for good , and man is ever hasty .
with cups , pitchers , and sparkling drinks .
and say :  truthhas come and batilhas vanished . surely ! batil is ever bound to vanish . 
a stalwart of the jinn said :  i will bring it to you before you rise from your council . surely i have the power to do so and i am trustworthy . 
, in order that he may manifest to them the truth of that wherein they differ , and that the rejecters of truth may realise that they had indeedfalsehood .
the pharaoh said :  o nobles , i am not aware of any other lord of yours but myself . so , o haman , fire some clayto build a tower for me that i may mount upthe god of moses ; for i think he is a liar . 
and when our manifest revelations are rehearsed unto them , their argument is no other than that they say bring our fathers , if ye say sooth .
and will be followed by the second one ,
the son replied : ' i will go to a mountain for refuge and it will save me from the water . ' noah said : 'none can save anyone today from the command of allah except those on whom he may have mercy . ' thereupon a wave swept in between the two and he was drowned .
to pharaoh , haman and qarun . but they said :  he is only a deceiving sorcerer . 
and do not go about in the land exultingly , for you can not cut through the earth nor reach the mountains in height .
and for all , we have appointed heirs – from whatever the parents and near relatives leave behind ; and to those with whom you have made an agreement , give them their dues ; indeed all things are present before allah .
and the night when it departeth ,
say ,  would you acquaint allah with your religion while allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and allah is knowing of all things ? 
similarly , whenever a noble messenger came to those before them they always said , “ he is a magician or a madman . ”
he travelled again
and the scripture inscribed
before these , the people of nooh had denied , and so did the dwellers of rass and the thamud .
prophet , mobilize the believers for the battle . it will take only twenty of your men who are steadfastto defeat two hundred unbelieving men . your two hundred men would defeat their two thousand ; the unbelievers have no understanding .
and when you look there , you will see pleasure and great dominion .
and we indeed bestowed great knowledge to dawud and sulaiman ; and they both said , “ all praise is to allah , who bestowed us superiority over many of his believing bondmen . ”
the same was the case with the people of noah when they charged the messenger with imposture : we drowned them and made them a sign of warning for entire mankind , and we have prepared a painful chastisement for the unjust .
then he set out on another expedition
and divorced women shall waitfor three menstrual periods , and it is not lawful for them to conceal what allah has created in their wombs , if they believe in allah and the last day . and their husbands have the better right to take them back in that period , if they wish for reconciliation . and theyhave rightssimilarover themto what is reasonable , but men have a degreeover them . and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the sending down of the scripture is from god the almighty , the omniscient .
call to mind when abraham said to his father and his people ,  i disown utterly that which you worship .
this is a day whereon they shall not be able to speak .
if you were to ask them : “ who created the heavens and the earth and who has kept the sun and the moon in subjection ? ” they will certainly say : “ allah. ” how come , then , they are being deluded from the truth ?
he supplicated : 'lord , prison is dearer to me than that to which they invite me . yet if you do not shield me from their guile i shall yield to them and be one of the ignorant '
then allah will , thereafter , relent toward whomsoever he liketh , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
beginning to be afraid of them . but they said ,  do n't be afraid  ; and they gave him the good news of a son who would be endowed with knowledge .
the messiah , the son of maryam , is purely a noble messenger ; many noble messengers have passed before him ; and his mother is a truthful woman ; they both used to eat food ; see how we make the signs clear for them , and see how they turn away !
like unto hidden pearls ,
the processor of strength , having an honorable place with the lord of the dominion ,
woe , on that day , to those who reject ,
we have appointed stages for the moon till it returns in the shape of a dry old branch of palm-tree .
and associate him with me in my task .
and who shun vain conversation ,
do you not know that to god belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth , and that apart from god you have no guardian or helper ?
any one who kills a believer intentionally will be cast into hell to abide there for ever , and suffer god 's anger and damnation . for him a greater punishment awaits .
they said , “ father , pray for the forgiveness of our sins ; we were indeed at fault . ”
: 'eat and drink with a good appetite because of that which you did '
nay , heed him not : but bow down in adoration , and bring thyself the closer !
he replied : 'moses , your request is granted .
unless'if allah wills ' and remember your lord when you forget and say : 'it may be that my lord will guide me to something nearer to rectitude than this '
say :  what thing is most weighty in evidence ?  say :  allah is witness between me and you ; this qur'an hath been revealed to me by inspiration , that i may warn you and all whom it reaches . can ye possibly bear witness that besides allah there is another allah ?  say :  nay ! i can not bear witness !  say :  but in truth he is the one allah , and i truly am innocent ofjoining others with him . 
but their hearts are in confused ignorance of this ; and there are , besides that , deeds of theirs , which they willto do , -
allah is the light of the heavens and the earth . the parable of his light is a niche wherein is a lamp—the lamp is in a glass , the glass as it were a glittering star—lit from a blessed olive tree , neither eastern nor western , whose oil almost lights up , though fire should not touch it . light upon light . allah guides to his light whomever he wishes . allah draws parables for mankind , and allah has knowledge of all things .
then if you turn your backs , i have not asked you for any wage ; my wage falls only on god , and i have been commanded to be of those that surrender . '
therein will they recline : therein can they callfor fruit in abundance , anddrink ;
this is indeed the truthful narration . there is no god except allah . it is allah who is the almighty , the wise .
and said firaun , “ o haman ! build a high palace for me , in order that i may reach the routes. ” –
so by oath of the lord of the heavens and the earth , this qur ’ an is the truth , in the same language that you speak .
a scripture whose verses are detailed , a quran in arabic for people who know .
and abraham exhorted his sons , and jacob , “ o my sons , god has chosen this religion for you , so do not die unless you have submitted . ”
amidst gardens and fountains ,
then will allah after this turnto whom he pleases , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and when a token cometh unto them , they say : we will not believe till we are given that which allah 's messengers are given . allah knoweth best with whom to place his message . humiliation from allah and heavy punishment will smite the guilty for their scheming .
allah sets forth the parablea slave under the dominion of another ; he has no power of any sort ; anda man on whom we have bestowed goodly favours from ourselves , and he spends thereof , privately and publicly : are the two equal ? praise be to allah . but most of them understand not .
for what sin she was killed ,
we are indeed able to show you what we promise them .
and made your sleeprest
say :  whether ye hide what is in your hearts or reveal it , allah knows it all : he knows what is in the heavens , and what is on earth . and allah has power over all things .
when you said to the believers , “ is it not enough for you that your lord has reinforced you with three thousand angels , sent down ? ”
and it seemed good to themafter they had seen the signsto imprison him for a time .
nor does he speak out of desire .
nor do i think that the hour will come . even if i returned to my lord , i should surely find a better place than this '
he sends down water from the sky , and riverbeds flow according to their capacity . the current carries swelling froth . and from what they heat in fire of ornaments or utensils comes a similar froth . thus god exemplifies truth and falsehood . as for the froth , it is swept away , but what benefits the people remains in the ground . thus god presents the analogies .
so the truth came to pass , and what they were producing came to nothing .
and those who had envied his position the day before began to say on the morrow :  alas , we had forgotten that it is allah who increases the provision of those of his servants whom he will and grants in sparing measure to those whom he will . but for allah 's favour upon us , he could have made us to be swallowed too . alas , we had forgotten that the unbelievers do not prosper . 
and when it was said to them : reside in this town and eat from it wherever you wish , and say , put down from us our heavy burdens : and enter the gate making obeisance , we will forgive you your wrongs : we will give more to those who do good .
on that day , we will let them surge on one another , and the horn shall be blown , and we will gather them all together .
who play in talk of grave matters ;
when he gains power , he strives to spread corruption on earth , destroying properties and lives . god does not like corruption .
the word will not be changed in my presence , nor am an oppressor at all unto my bondmen .
covering it with what covered it .
and no nation outstrips its term , nor do they put it back .
all praises and thanks be to allah , whocreated the heavens and the earth , and originated the darkness and the light , yet those who disbelieve hold others as equal with their lord .
then the satan whispered unto the twain in order that he might discover unto the twain that which lay hidden from the twain of their shame , and said : your lord forbade you not vender tree but lest ye twain should become angels or become of the abiders .
asin moses when we sent him to the pharaoh with clear authority .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and he who is given wisdom has been given a lot of good . yet none will remember except the owners of minds .
it is notfor allah to take a son ; exalted is he ! when he decrees an affair , he only says to it ,  be ,  and it is .
your lord knows whatever their breasts conceal , and whatever they disclose .
they follow the guidance of their lord and they will have everlasting happiness .
allah is the light of the heavens and the earth : his lightmay be likeneda lamp in a niche : the lamp is in a glass shade : the glass shade is like a glittering star and lamp is lit with the olive oil of a blessed tree which is neither eastern nor western : its oil isas if it were going to shine forth by itself though no fire touched itlight upon light ; allah guides to his light whomever he wills . he cites parables to make the message clear to the people ; he has perfect knowledge of everything .
unto allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he giveth life and he taketh it . except for him ye have no protector nor helper .
and to thamudtheir brother salih . he said :  o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other ilahbut him . . indeed there has come to you a clear signfrom your lord . this she-camel of allah is a sign unto you ; so you leave her to graze in allah 's earth , and touch her not with harm , lest a painful torment should seize you .
his are the ships displayed upon the sea , like banners .
but on that day none will punish as hewill punish ,
they said : no harm ; surely to our lord we go back ;
have they not travelled through the earth , and seen the consequences for those before them ? they were stronger than them , and they left more impact on earth . but god seized them for their sins , and they had no defender against god .
does it seem odd to these people that we have revealed to a man from among themselves , , ‘ warn mankind , and give good news to the faithful that they are in good standing with their lord ’ ? the faithless say , ‘ this is indeed a plain magician . ’
then we followed them up with our apostles and we followedwith jesus son of mary , and we gave him the evangel , and we put kindness and mercy into the hearts of those who followed him . but as for monasticism , they innovated it—we had not prescribed it for them—only seeking allah ’ s pleasure . yet they did not observe it with due observance . so we gave to the faithful among them theirreward , but many of them are transgressors .
moses replied ,  i did that when i was one of the misguided ,
we shall surely ease him to the easing .
andwhen we raised the mountain above them as if it was a dark cloud and they were certain that it would fall upon them , ,  take what we have given you with determination and remember what is in it that you might fear allah . 
as guidance and mercy for the doers of good
satan made their deeds seem fair to them and said ,  none of the people shall prevail against you this day ; i shall be your protector !  but when the two forces came in sight of each other , he turned on his heels , saying ,  this is where i leave you : i see what you do not , and i fear god -- god is severe in his punishment . 
we have already written in the psalms following the reminder ,  my righteous servants shall inherit the earth . 
‘ o abraham , let this matter alone ! your lord ’ s edict has certainly come , and an irrevocable punishment shall overtake them . ’
so pharaoh had led his people astray , and was no guide to them .
then we sent against them one shout and they became like the trampled twigs of thepenbuilder .
perform the prayer at the decline of the sun , until the darkness of the night ; and the quran at dawn . the quran at dawn is witnessed .
the sabbath was appointed only for those who differed concerning it , and lo ! thy lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
there is no blame on them in respect of their fathers , nor their brothers , nor their brothers ' sons , nor their sisters ' sons nor their own women , nor of what their right hands possess ; and be careful ofallah ; surely allah is a witness of all things .
 who fearedmost gracious unseen , and brought a heart turned in devotion :
surely we brought man into being out of dry ringing clay which was wrought from black mud ,
andwhen you slew a man and disputed over it , but allah was to bring out that which you were concealing .
we have delivered the word to them , that they may remember .
then indeed , after that you are to die .
o ye who believe ! prescribed unto you is fasting even as it was prescribed unto those before you , that haply ye may fear god .
as for the people on the left : how miserable will be the people on the left !
and manat the other third ?
except lut 's followers : we will most surely deliver them all ,
but when the deafening cry comes ,
is , then one against whom the word of punishment justified . will yourescue him who is in the fire ?
say : 'lord , if you should show me that which they are promised ,
but those who do not believe in the hereafter are ever prone to deviate from the right way .
and they will not remember except that allah wills . he is worthy of fear and adequate forforgiveness .
o my people ! i do not ask you any material reward for it . my reward lies only with allah . but i will not drive away those who have faith : they will indeed encounter their lord . but i see that you are an ignorant lot .
if thou art solicitous for their guidance , then verily allah guideth not whomsoever he sendeth astray , and for them there are no helpers .
is it ye who shed it from the raincloud , or are we the shedder ?
what ! as for him then against whom the sentence of chastisement is due : what ! can you save him who is in the fire ?
god has made devoid of all virtue the deeds of those who have disbelieved and prevented others from the way of god .
god drove the unbelievers back in their fury , and they gained no advantage . god was sufficientthe believers in the battle . god is all-powerful and all-mighty .
who has settled us by his grace in the mansions of eternal rest , where there is no labour for us , nor does weariness come upon us . 
indeed , he saw one of the greatest signs of his lord .
turn not thy cheek away from men in scorn , and walk not in the earth exultantly ; god loves not any man proud and boastful .
which carry clouds laden with water ,
and we have distributed theamongst them , in order that they may celebratepraises , but most men are aversebutingratitude .
no ! they will say this merely because the truth which they had concealed will become obvious to them ; or else if they were sent back , they would still revert to what was forbidden to them.for they are just liars .
if any of you lack the means to marry free believing women , he may marry one of the believing maids under your control . god is well aware of your faith . you are from one another . marry them with the permission of their guardians , and give them their recompense fairly—to be protected—neither committing adultery , nor taking secret lovers . when they are married , if they commit adultery , their punishment shall be half that of free women . that is for those among you who fear falling into decadence . but to practice self-restraint is better for you . god is most forgiving , most merciful .
and those who believe and work righteous works -- them we shall surely settle in lofty dwellins of the ; they shall be of the garden whereunder the rivers flow ; they shall be abiders therein . excellent is the hire of the workers .
when he saw the sun rising up , he said :  this is my lord . this is greater .  but when it set , he said :  o my people ! i am indeed free from all that you join as partners in worship with allah .
if we let him taste our favours after adversity , he says :  misfortune has left me ,  and begins to brag and exult ,
this we recite to you of the communications and the wise reminder .
we did them no injustice , but it was they who were the unjust .
say ,  with allah is the far-reaching argument . if he had willed , he would have guided you all . 
and proclaim the purity of your lord .
and when it is said to them : guard against what is before you and what is behind you , that mercy may be had on you .
whatever good you may receive is certainly from god and whatever you suffer is from yourselves . we have sent you , , as a messenger to people . god is a sufficient witness to your truthfulness .
thus do we insert denial into the hearts of the criminals .
whatever hardships you face on earth and in your souls were written in the book before the creation of the souls . this is certainly easy for god
such will not escape in the earth , nor have they any protecting friends beside allah . for them the torment will be double . they could not bear to hear , and they used not to see .
had we sent down unto thee writing upon parchment , so that they could feel it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said : this is naught else than mere magic .
and when the sacred months have passed , then kill the polytheists wherever you find them and capture them and besiege them and sit in wait for them at every place of ambush . but if they should repent , establish prayer , and give zakah , let themon their way . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and the magicians came to pharaoh . they said ,  indeed for us is a reward if we are the predominant . 
and sent a messenger to them from among themselves :  worship god alone . you have no deity other than him . will you not then fear god ? 
give full measure , and do not cheat .
remember , when we asked the angels to bow in homage to adam , they all bowed but iblis , who disdained and turned insolent , and so became a disbeliever .
verily the fellows of the garden to-day shall be happily employed .
do they not know that god knows whatever they conceal or reveal ?
he will say :  alas ! would that i had sent forthformy life ! 
peace ! until the appearance of dawn .
certainly they must have passed the town on which an evil shower was rained . have they not seen it ? rather , they did not expect resurrection .
the heavens , they almost break apart . at that time the angels glorify their lord with his praise and seek forgiveness for those who live on earth . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they disputed upon their plan with one another , and spoke in secret
theysay :  we have believed in allah and in the messenger , and we obey ,  then a party of them turn away thereafter , such are not believers .
do not let their wealth and children impress you . for god seeks to punish them through these things in the life of this world , so that their souls shall depart while they are still denying the truth .
when the young men fled for refuge to the cave and said : our lord ! give us mercy from thy presence , and shape for us right conduct in our plight .
do you not know that god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? his decree is already recorded in the book and issuing such a judgment is not difficult for him at all .
we announced to the children of israel in the book :  you will surely create disorder twice in the land , and become exceedingly arrogant . 
have they never heard the stories about their predecessors , the peoples of noah , 'ad , thamud , abraham , midian , and of the ruined cities ? their messengers brought them clear evidence of the truth . it was not god who wronged them ; they wronged themselves .
they are certainly losers who deny the encounter with allah . when the hour overtakes them suddenly , they will say , ‘ alas for us , for what we neglected in it ! ’ and they will bear their burdens on their backs . look ! evil is what they bear !
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they neither repent nor take heed .
if you divorce them before the marriage is consummated , but after their dower money has been settled , give them the half of their dower money , unless theyagree to forego it , or the manin whose hand lies the marriage knot foregoes it . to forego is nearer to righteousness . do not neglect any chance of behaving benevolently towards each other . god is observant of whatever you do .
they indeed found their fathers astray ,
will receive glad news both in this life and in the life hereafter . the words of god do not change . this alone is the supreme triumph
and when our word came to pass , we rescued shu'aib and those who believed , with him , by our grace , but those who were wicked were seized by a punishment from heaven , and lay overturned in their homes in the morning .
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the variations in your languages and your colours : verily in that are signs for those who know .
but those who cry lies to our signs , them the chastisement shall visit , for that they were ungodly .
he said : place meover the treasures of the land , surely i am a good keeper , knowing well .
and there is one who argues concerning allah without having knowledge nor any proof nor a clear text .
and young maidens of equal age ,
and we makeeasy in thy tongue , only that thou mayst bear good tidings therewith unto those who ward off , and warn therewith the froward folk .
though only those who are averse to the truth will turn away from .
they asked ,  abraham , did you do this to our idols ? 
and those who , when tyranny strikes them , they defend themselves ,
that he is the lord of sirius ;
who has made the earth your couch , and the heavens your canopy ; and sent down rain from the heavens ; and brought forth therewith fruits for your sustenance ; then set not up rivals unto allah when ye know .
and the inhabitants of midian also charged their prophets with falsehood . moses was also rejected . i gave respite to those who denied the truth , but then i seized them . consider then , how terrible my repudiation of them was .
it behoves not the sun to overtake the moon , neither does the night outstrip the day , each swimming in a sky .
we have sent an apostle to you as a witness against you , as we had sent an apostle to the pharaoh .
surely , they will soon find out the truth !
these ! for them are gardens everlasting whereunder rivers flow ; bedecked they shall be therein with bracelets of gold , and wear they shall green robes of satin and brocade , reclining therein on the couches ; excellent the reward , and goodly the resting-place !
who created the heavens and the earth , and what between them is , in six days , then sat himself upon the throne , the all-compassionate : ask any informed of him !
when their brother noah said to them ,  will you have no fear of god ?
is it that they do not recognize their apostle , and so they deny him ?
another of his signs is the night , a time for you to sleep , and the day to seek his bounty . verily there are signs in this for those who pay heed .
and he made it a word to continue in his posterity that they may return .
it is he who blesses you—and so do his angels—that he may bring you out from darkness into light , and he is most merciful to the faithful .
or that he will not seize them suddenly in their daily activities and they will not be able to frustrate him ?
o mankind ! now there hath come unto you an exhortation from your lord and a healing for that which is in your breasts , and a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
and when it said unto them : believe even as mankind have believed , they say : shall we believe even as the fools have believed ? lo ! verily it is they who are the fools ; and yet they know not .
o mankind ! ye are the poor in your relation to allah . and allah ! he is the absolute , the owner of praise .
if you were to ask them :  who sends down waterfrom the sky , and gives life therewith to the earth after its death ?  they will surely reply :  allah .  say :  all the praises and thanks be to allah !  nay ! most of them have no sense .
they say , 'fairy-tales of the ancients that he has had written down , so that they are recited to him at the dawn and in the evening . '
or say they : there is a madness in him ? nay , but he bringeth them the truth ; and most of them are haters of the truth .
youwe worship ; and youwe rely for help .
and the shadow of a smoking blaze
andsaid ,  you have only taken , other than allah , idols asaffection among you in worldly life . then on the day of resurrection you will deny one another and curse one another , and your refuge will be the fire , and you will not have any helpers . 
the bedouins say ,  we have believed .  say ,  you have notbelieved ; but say , 'we have submitted , ' for faith has not yet entered your hearts . and if you obey allah and his messenger , he will not deprive you from your deeds of anything . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful . 
fashioning out of him the two sexes , the male and the female ?
there is a sign for them in the lifeless earth . we revive it and we produce grain from it of which they eat .
we have given preference to some prophets over others and we gave the psalms to david .
 our lord ! give them double penalty and curse them with a very great curse ! 
vanished has my power from me . 
say : dispute ye with us concerning allah when he is our lord and your lord ? ours are our works and yours your works . we look to him alone .
enjoying what their lord has given them , and their lord protected them from the punishment of hellfire .
look , therefore , at the signs of god 's mercy ; how he resurrects the earth after its death . truly , the same god will resurrect the dead ; for he has power over all things .
if you shake the trunk of the palm tree , it will provide you with fresh ripe dates .
so they wentuntil when they embarked in the boat he made a hole in it.said : have you made a hole in it to drown its inmates ? certainly you have done a grievous thing .
god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they fall apart . and were they to fall apart , there is none to hold them together except he . he is most clement , most forgiving .
they will say all the same :  our eyes were dazed . we were a people ensorcelled . 
and when they had cast , moses said : 'what you have brought is sorcery . surely , allah will render it as nothing . allah does not put right the work of the corrupt '
the angels bowed in homage in a body
is he then who has to guard himself with his own person against the evil chastisement on the resurrection day ? and it will be said to the unjust : taste what you earned .
allah made a covenant of old with the children of israel and we raised among them twelve chieftains , and allah said : lo ! i am with you . if ye establish worship and pay the poor-due , and believe in my messengers and support them , and lend unto allah a kindly loan , surely i shall remit your sins , and surely i shall bring you into gardens underneath which rivers flow . whoso among you disbelieveth after this will go astray from a plain road .
he resolved to scare them off the land , but we drowned him , and those with him , altogether .
to the people of midian , we sent their brother shu'ayb . he said ,  my people , worship god . you have no deity other than him . do not give short measure and short weight . i see you are prospering . i fear for you the punishment of a fateful day .
it is god who has created ears , eyes , and hearts for you . little are the thanks that you give .
eat and drink at ease for that which you have sent on before you in days past !
then why is it not -- if you are not held under authority --
and say :  i am indeed a plain warner . 
he said ,  you throw !  when they made their cast , they bewitched the eyes of the people and struck them with awe , for they showed a greatmagic .
say : my lord enjoineth justice . and set your faces uprightat every place of worship and call upon him , making religion pure for him . as he brought you into being , so return ye .
she started towards him , and he would have succumbed to her , if he had not seen a sign from his lord -- we did this in order to keep evil and indecency away from him , for he was truly one of our chosen servants .
and recall what time we said unto the angels : prostrate youselves before adam . so they prostrated themselves , but iblis did not ; he said : shall i prostrate myself before one whom thou hast created of clay ?
and we did not send before you any messenger or prophet except that when he spoke , satan threw into it . but allah abolishes that which satan throws in ; then allah makes precise his verses . and allah is knowing and wise .
and he lifted his father and mother upon the throne ; and the others fell down prostrate before him . 'see , father , ' he said , 'this is the interpretation of my vision of long ago ; my lord has made it true . he was good to me when he brought me forth from the prison , and again when he brought you out of the desert , after that satan set at variance me and my brethren . my lord is gentle to what he will ; he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and our command is but once , like the twinkling of an eye .
on that day you will see every one that suckles shall forsake her suckling , and every carrier shall miscarry , and you shall see mankind drunk although they arenot drunk ; dreadful will be the punishment of allah .
and we have not sent youexcept as a herald of glad tidings and warnings .
allah created the heavens and the earth with consummate wisdom , so that every soul may be requited for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
they will therefore say , “ will we get some respite ? ”
yet why did they not , when our punishment came to them , humble themselves ? but their hearts hardened and the shaitan made what they did fair-seeming to them .
repel evil with the best deeds ; we well know the matters that they fabricate .
which we have reserved as punishment for evil-doers ?
and what think those who invent lies against allah , of the day of judgment ? verily allah is full of bounty to mankind , but most of them are ungrateful .
their lord gives them the good news of his mercy and his pleasure and gardens of eternal bliss .
never sent we a messenger or a prophet before thee but when he recitedsatan proposedin respect of that which he recited thereof . but allah abolisheth that which satan proposeth . then allah establisheth his revelations . allah is knower , wise ;
nay ; when a man 's soul reaches up to the throat ,
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment overtaking them at midday while they are playing around ?
indeed god loves those who honour their covenants and fear him . god loves the righteous .
they said :  you are only one of those bewitched !
say :  o allah ! lord of power , thou givest power to whom thou pleasest , and thou strippest off power from whom thou pleasest : thou enduest with honour whom thou pleasest , and thou bringest low whom thou pleasest : in thy hand is all good . verily , over all things thou hast power .
and if you fear that you will not deal justly with the orphan girls , then marry those that please you ofwomen , two or three or four . but if you fear that you will not be just , thenone or those your right hand possesses . that is more suitable that you may not incline .
he said : the prayer of you both has indeed been accepted , therefore continue in the right way and do not follow the path of those who do not know .
and we made mary ’ s son and his mother a sign , and we sheltered them on high ground with security and flowing springs .
you will see and they will see ,
the day on which he will gather you for the day of gathering ; that is the day of loss and gain . he who believes in allah and does good deeds , allah willacquit him of his evil deeds and admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow , where he shall live for ever . that is the mighty triumph .
blessed was i on the day i was born , and blessed i shall be on the day i die and on the day i am raised to life again . 
and a sign unto them is that we bear their offspring in a laden ship .
do they have a ladderand listenand come back to the rest of the people with clear authority ?
and moses said ,  o pharaoh , i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds
andthe people of noah before ; indeed , they were a people defiantly disobedient .
we shall unite them to maidens with big black and white lovely eyes .
make a fragment of the sky falls upon us , should you be truthful . ’
and that we thought that men and jinn did not utter a lie against allah :
and you shall see the angels encircling the throne exalting with the praise of their lord . and the matter will be justly decided between them , and it shall be said : 'praise belongs to allah , lord of all the worlds '
and say :  we will not believe you until you make a spring of water gush forth from the earth for us ;
to how many unjust towns have we given respite and then sized with torment . to me do all things return .
and we set , between them and the towns which we had blessed , towns easy to be seen , and we made the stage between them easy , : travel in them safely both by night and day .
had your lord wished , he would have made mankind one community ; but they continue to differ ,
and many prophets have fought in allah ’ s cause – and many devoted men were with them ; so neither did they lose heart due to the calamities that befell them in allah 's cause , nor did they weaken and nor were they subdued ; and the steadfast are the beloved of allah .
and lower thou thy wlng unto those who follow thee as believers .
when you are rejoicing in a boat , a favorable breeze and a violent storm arises with waves surrounding you from all sides . thinking that you will not survive , you start to pray sincerely to god . in prayer , you say ,  if you rescue us from this we shall certainly be grateful  .
and the king said ,  bring him to me .  but when the messenger came to him , said ,  return to your master and ask him what is the case of the women who cut their hands . indeed , my lord is knowing of their plan . 
andwhen we said to the angels ,  prostrate to adam ,  and they prostrated , except iblees ; he refused .
different traditions existed in the past . travel in the land and find out about the fate of those who rejected the truth .
o you who believe , men should not laugh at other men , for it may be they are better than them ; and women should not laugh at other women , for they may perhaps be better than them . do not slander one another , nor give one another nick-names . after believing , it is bad to givea bad name . those who do not repent behave wickedly .
as in the case of pharaoh ’ s clan and those who were before them , who denied our signs . so allah seized them for their sins , and allah is severe in retribution .
when it is god who has created you and all your handiwork ? 
as well asothers of them , who have not already joined them : and he is exalted in might , wise .
and hellfire will be brought forth for the deviators ,
upon the day when thou seest the believers , men and women , their light running before them , and on their right hands . 'good tidings for you today ! gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein to dwell for ever ; that is indeed the mighty triumph . '
by the hands of messenger-angels ,
then moses threw his staff , and at once it devoured what they falsified .
and indeed you possess an exemplary character .
- that for you in it is whatever you like ?
and of the devils were some that dived for him , and performed other , lesser tasks . but we kept them restrained .
he knows all that enters the earth , all that comes out of it , all that descends from the sky and all that ascends to it . he is all-merciful and all-forgiving .
and when distress afflicts a man he calls upon his lord turning to him frequently ; then when he makes him possess a favor from him , he forgets that for which he called upon him before , and sets up rivals to allah that he may causeto stray off from his path . say : enjoy yourself in your ungratefulness a little , surely you are of the inmates of the fire .
and those who stayed away from the worship of idols , and inclined towards allah – for them are glad tidings ; therefore give glad tidings to my bondmen . –
yes , why not ? if you patiently endure and remain pious , and the disbelievers attack you suddenly , your lord will send down five thousand marked angels to help you .
 deliver the creatures of god to me . i am the trusted messenger sent to you .
say :  travel in the land and see what was the end of those who rejected truth . 
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf listen to your call when they turn their backs ,
it is naught but revelation that is revealed ,
and ascertain the hypocrites.they were told : ‘ come , fight in the way of allah , or defend , they said , ‘ if we knew any fighting , we would have surely followed you. ’ that day they were nearer to unfaith than to faith . they say with their mouths what is not in their hearts , and allah knows well whatever they conceal .
those who do not believe in god and his messenger should know that we have prepared hell for the disbelievers .
the day when jibreel and all the angels will stand in rows ; none will be able to speak except one whom the most gracious commands and who spoke rightly .
so we sent among them a noble messenger from among them , “ worship allah , you do not have any other god except him ; so do you not fear ? ”
and we had made several towns upon the road between them and the towns which we had blessed – and kept them according to the length of the journey ; “ travel safely in them , by night and by day . ”
upon that day the earth will be rent asunder from around them as they hurry forth that is an easy gathering for us .
 so you will drinklike thirsty camels ! 
has it not always been so that every time they made a covenant , some of them set it aside ? nay , most of them never believe in it sincerely .
the bedouin arabs have said ,  we are believers .  tell them ,  you are not believers , but you should say that you are muslims . in fact , belief has not yet entered your hearts . if you obey god and his messenger , nothing will be reduced from your deeds . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
do the people of the towns feel secure that our might will not come upon them by day , while they play ?
his people , who had constantly indulged in evil deeds , came running to him . he said ,  my people , here are my pure daughters . have fear of god and do not humiliate me before my guests . is there no person of understanding among you ? 
and he made them like green blades devoured .
no intercessor will they have from those whom they made equal with allah , and they willreject and deny their partners .
this is because only allah is the truth , and all that they worship besides him are falsehood , and because only allah is the supreme , the great .
they bid thee hasten on the doom , when lo ! hell verily will encompass the disbelievers
and they rebelled against the messenger of their lord , and he seized them with a surpassing grip .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and for the believers who follow you .
 lest the soul shouldsay : 'ah ! woe is me ! - in that i neglectedtowards allah , and was but among those who mocked ! '-
and can neither help them , nor help their own selves ?
or else did they feel secure against its coming in broad daylight while they played about ?
—those who arestingy and bidpeople to be stingy , and conceal whatever allah has given them out of his bounty ; and we have prepared for the faithless a humiliating punishment .
they tried to cause conflict before , and they hatched plots against you , until the truth prevailed , and the command of god became evident—in spite of their dislike .
and your companion is notmad .
every soul shall be pledged for what it has earned ,
so they differed with one another in their task , and secretly conferred .
and we will provide them with fruit and meat from whatever they desire .
hesaid : 'did we not bring you up when you were a child ? and have you not spent years of your life amongst us ?
and if you could see when they are terrified but there is no escape , and they will be seized from a place nearby .
pharaoh said : 'and what is the lord of the worlds '
he answered :  did i not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me ? 
the all knowing of all things hidden and visible , the most honourable , the wise .
to the pharaoh , haman , and korah , who said ,  he is only a lying magician .  .
and those who have believed afterwards and emigrated , and struggled with you -- they belong to you ; but those related by blood are nearer to one another in the book of god ; surely god has knowledge of everything .
and if every one that hath wronged had all that is in the earth , surely he would ransom himself therewith . and they shall conceal remorse when they behold the torment , and the matter will be decreed between them in equity , and they shall not be wronged .
they will surely say :  allah .  say :  will you not , then , fear ? 
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests :
proclaim , “ i worship only allah , as his sincere bondman . ”
who will be in paradise
now the word of our lord hath been fulfilled concerning us . lo ! we are about to taste .
'but we do think that no man or spirit should say aught that untrue against allah .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and is moreover firmly established on the throne . he knows what enters within the earth and what comes forth out of it , what comes down from heaven and what mounts up to it . and he is with you wheresoever ye may be . and allah sees well all that ye do .
but there are others who admit their sins of mixing good deeds with evil . it may be that god will accept their repentance , for god is forgiving and kind .
know that one-fifth of your battle gains belongs to god and the messenger , to his close relatives and orphans , to the needy and travellers , if you believe in god and the revelation we sent down to our servant on the decisive day , the day when the two forces met . god has power over all things .
was he not a nutfahpoured forth ?
rather , every person among them desires that he would be given scriptures spread about .
ranks specially bestowed by him , and forgiveness and mercy . for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
again , ye soon shall know !
say , ‘ indeed my lord expands the provision for whomever of his servants that he wishes and tightens it , and he will repay whatever you may spend , and he is the best of providers . ’
say :  behold all that is in the heavens and on earth  ; but neither signs nor warners profit those who believe not .
they said ,  surely joseph and his brotherare dearer to our father than ourselves , although we are a band . truly , our father is clearly mistaken .
o you who have faith ! do not approach prayer when you are intoxicated , until you know what you are saying , norin the state of ritual impurity until you have washed yourselves , except while passing through . but if you are sick or on a journey , or any of you has come from the toilet , or you have touched women , and you can not find water , then make your ablution on clean ground and wipe a part of your faces and your hands . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
and other gains , which are not within your power , but which allah has compassed : and allah has power over all things .
on the day when the earth will be changed to other than this earth , and the heavens – and they will all come forth standing before allah , the one , the dominant above all .
but to allah belongs the lastand the first .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and we ordained among his descendants prophethood and the book , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will indeed be among the righteous .
o you who have faith ! if a vicious character brings you some news , verify it , lest you should visiton some people out of ignorance , and then become regretful for what you have done .
him to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ! and allah is witness to all things .
if you do not help him , yet god has helped him already , when the unbelievers drove him forth the second of two , when the two were in the cave , when he said to his companion , 'sorrow not ; surely god is with us . ' then god sent down on him his shechina , and confirmed him with legions you did not see ; and he made the word of the unbelievers the lowest ; and god 's word is the uppermost ; god is all-mighty , all-wise .
allah brought down from their fortresses those people of the book who had supported the invading confederates and cast such terror into their hearts that some of them you kill and some of them you take captive .
and when the oceans are swept away .
but when they measure or weigh for others , they reduce !
except those that pray ,
then what ails them , that they believe not ,
and if they incline to peace , incline thou also to it , and trust in allah . lo ! he , even he , is the hearer , the knower .
what keeps people from belief that guidance has come to them , but they question ,  why has god sent a mortal messenger ? 
no indeed ; it is a reminder
when they come to you they say :  we believe ;  but unbelieving they came and unbelieving go ; and god is aware of what they conceal in their hearts .
and we rescued him and loutto the land which we have blessed for the 'alamin .
they are pursued by a curse in this , as well as on the day of resurrection ; evil is the award conferred !
this is a revelation from the compassionate , the merciful -
and content yourself with those who pray to their lord morning and evening , desiring his presence . and do not turn your eyes away from them , desiring the glitter of this world . and do not obey him whose heart we have made heedless of our remembrance—so he follows his own desires—and his priorities are confused .
marry off those who are single among you , and the upright among your male and female slaves . if they are poor , allah will enrich them out of his grace , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
and the hearts ' contents shall be brought into the open ?
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their own children ; but those who have lost their souls do not believe .
who , when disaster strikes them , say ,  indeed we belong to allah , and indeed to him we will return . 
or , who is it that shall provide for you if he withholds his provision ? yet they persist in arrogance and aversion .
then he shewed him the great sign .
so the people that committed wrong were eliminated . and praise to allah , lord of the worlds .
 zachariah , we bring you good news of a son whose name shall be john . we have not given such a name to anyone before . 
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused condition .
the reminder will be received by him who fears ,
say , “ i have no control over any benefit or harm to myself , except as god wills . had i known the future , i would have acquired much good , and no harm would have touched me . i am only a warner , and a herald of good news to a people who believe . ”
say : 'whosoever is an enemy to gabriel -- he it was that brought it down upon thy heart by the leave of god , confirming what was before it , and for a guidance and good tidings to the believers .
do not keep your hand fastened to your neck nor outspread it , altogether outspread , for you will be left sitting rebuked , destitute .
by oath of this era of yours .
he who brings the truth and he who confirms it—it is they who are the godwary .
surely , he is the hearer , the knower .
but if he is one of those brought near .
said unto those around him : hear ye not ?
do their minds command them this ] or are they people exceeding the bounds .
and spendfrom what we have provided you before death approaches one of you and he says ,  my lord , if only you would delay me for a brief term so i would give charity and be among the righteous . 
and dense orchards ,
and appoint goodness for us in this world and the hereafter , for indeed we have come back to you. ’ said he , ‘ i visit my punishment on whomever i wish , but my mercy embraces all things . soon i shall appoint it for those who are godwary and give the zakat and those who believe in our signs
noble scribes ,
and heals me when i am sick ,
when they see you they just take you in derision : ‘ is this the one whom allah has sent as an apostle ! ?
it shall annihilate everything by the command of its lord . wherefore they became such that naught could be seen save their dwellings thus we requite a nation of the culprits .
then he turned to the heaven while it was all smoke . he said to the heaven and the earth : “ come , willingly or unwillingly. ” they said : “ here we comein willing obeisance . ”
as such we have assigned for every prophet an enemy ; the satans of humans and jinn , revealing varnished speech to each other , all as a delusion . but had your lord willed , they would not have done so . therefore leave them and what they invent ,
and those who were deemed weak will say unto those who were stiff necked : aye , it was your plotting by night and by day , when ye were commanding us that we should disbelieve in allah and set up peers unto him . and they will keep secret their shame when they behold the torment . and we shall place shackles on the necks of those who disbelieved . they shall be requited not save according to that which they had been working .
each soul is held in pledge for what it earns ,
and what do they , who fabricate lies against allah , assume will be their state on the day of resurrection ? indeed allah is most munificent upon mankind , but most people are not thankful .
they say : 'what , when we have been destroyed in the earth , shall we indeed be in a new creation ' indeed , they disbelieve that they will meet their lord .
the lights of clear perception have now come to you from your lord . then , he who chooses to see clearly , does so for his own good ; and he who chooses to remain blind , does so to his own harm . i am not your keeper .
and thus we have sent you among a nation before which other nations have passed away , that you might recite to them what we have revealed to you andthey deny the beneficent allah . say : he is my lord , there is no god but he ; on him do i rely and to him is my return .
we have revealed a book to you which is admonition for you . will you not then understand ?
and'aad and thamud and the companions of the well and many generations between them .
most surely man is in loss ,
moses said to them :  woe betide you . do not fabricate a lie against god , or he will destroy you with some affliction . for he who fabricates lies is doomed to failure . 
nay ! verily , he has been stubborn and opposing our ayat .
for everyone we have appointed heirs to what the parents and near relatives leave , as well as those with whom you have made a compact ; so give them their share . indeed allah is witness to all things .
then may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
and allah gave them the reward of this life , and the best reward of the everlasting life . allah loves the gooddoers .
and those on the left hand , who will be those on the left hand ? .
the day when they shall rise upand nothing about them will be hidden from god .  to whom shall the kingdom belong that day ?  it shall belong to god , the one , the all powerful .
have we not opened your breast for you ) ?
kaf . ha ' . ya ' . ayn . sad .
so , we subjected to him the wind , it blew gently to his order whithersoever he willed ,
and make me of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
god has struck a similitude -- a man in whom partners disagreeing share , and a man the property of one man . are the two equal in likeness ? praise belongs to god ! nay , but most of them do not know .
eat and enjoy yourselves for a little ; surely you are guilty .
as for myself , allah alone is my lord , and i associate none with my lord in his divinity .
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
when we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' all prostrated themselves except iblis , who was one of the jinn , disobedient to the command of his lord . would you then take him and his descendants to be your guardians , other than me , when they are your clear enemy ? how evil is the exchange for the harmdoers !
and when the apostles said , ' o jesus son of mary , is thy lord able to send down on us a table out of heaven ? ' he said , 'fear you god , if you are believers .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
verily ! manis ungrateful to his lord ;
downcast shall be their looks ; abjectness shall overspread them . such is the day which they are promised .
holy is he who took his servant by night from the sacred place of worshipto the remote house of worship -- the precincts of which we have blessed , so that we might show him some of our signs . surely , it is he who is all hearing , and all seeing .
wherever they are found , abasement is stamped upon them , except for an asylum from allah and an asylum from the people . they have earned the wrath of allah , and poverty has been stamped upon them . that , because they would deny the signs of allah and kill the prophets unjustly . that , because they would disobey and commit transgression .
god knows all that you conceal or reveal .
alif , lam , meem .
and indeed he had warned them of our seizure – in response they doubted the warnings .
and those who after they have been wronged emigrated for the cause of allah , we will lodge them with a goodin this world , but greater still is the wage of the everlasting life , if they but knew ;
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the subduer :
and they say ,  when is this promise , if you should be truthful ? 
verily , we have created themof special creation .
and he is going to be satisfied .
thus have we installed in every town its major criminals that they may plot therein . yet they do not plot except against their own souls , but they are not aware .
woe to every sinful liar .
the answer of the believers , when summoned to allah and his messenger , in order that he may judge between them , is no other than this : they say ,  we hear and we obey  : it is such as these that will attain felicity .
say : 'it is revealed to me that a party of jinn listened then said :  we have indeed heard a wonderful koran ,
so he will be in a pleasant life -
put your hand in the bosom of your shirt ; it will come out white without any blemish . this will be one of nine tokens for the pharaoh and his people , who are a wicked lot indeed . 
“ he will forgive you some of your sins , and give you respite up to an appointed term ; indeed the promise of allah can not be averted when it arrives ; if only you knew . ”
 seek forgiveness from your lord and turn to him in repentance for your sins . he will provide you good sustenance for an appointed time and will reward everyone according to his merits . i am afraid that you will suffer torment on the great dayif you turn away .
and we desired to show favour to those who were abased in the land , and to make them imams , and to make them the heirs ,
 my wealth has not availed me ,
for the harmdoers there is indeed , a punishment before that , but most of them do not know .
taste your burning : this is that which ye sought to be hastened .
many men will not believe howsoever you wish ,
and there came a caravan of travellers and they sent their water-drawer to draw water from the well . he let down his bucket into the well and he exclaimed ,  oh , what a lucky find , here is a boy !  they hid him like a piece of merchandise , but god knew well what they did .
those who recite the book of god , who are steadfast in prayer and , who spend out of what we have given them for the cause of god , both in public and in private , have hope in an indestructible bargain
o ye who believe ! raise not your voices above the voice of the prophet , nor speak aloud to him in talk , as ye may speak aloud to one another , lest your deeds become vain and ye perceive not .
“ this is nothing but the tradition of former people . ”
allah creates in the first instance and will later repeat it . thereafter it is to him that you shall be sent back .
allah will judge with justice , whereas those whom they call upon beside him can not judge at all . surely allah -- and he alone -- is all- hearing , all-seeing .
the pioneers—the first of the migrants and the supporters , and those who followed them in righteousness . god is pleased with them , and they are pleased with him . he has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , where they will abide forever . that is the sublime triumph .
whether you reveal anything or conceal it , verily , allah is ever allknower of everything .
and drive the evildoers as herds , into gehenna
allah 's are the excellent names ; so call on him thereby ; and leave alone those who profane his names . anon will they be requitcd for that which they were wont to work .
god has made the earth for you a spreading ,
that we bore their progeny in the laden ark is a sign for them ;
even then they denied him ; so we saved him and those with him , in the ark , and established them in the land , and drowned those who denied our signs . so think of the fate of those who were warned .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds , and gives them more out of his grace ; andthe unbelievers , they shall have a severe punishment .
 no shade of coolness , and is of no use against the fierce blaze .
will all be brought together to the tryst of an appointed day .
the bedouins who lagged behind will say to you : 'we were occupied with our possessions and families , so ask allah to forgive us ' but they say with theirtongues what they do not mean in their hearts . say : 'who can help you against allah if it is that he wills harm for you or desires benefit for you ? allah is aware ofwhat you do '
they will not believe in it till they behold the painful doom ,
indeed , it throws sparksas a fortress ,
save iblis . he refused to be among the prostrate .
and those who observe their prayers .
and wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . and wherever you may be , turn your faces towards it . so that the people may not have any argument against you—except those who do wrong among them . so do not fear them , but fear me , that i may complete my blessings upon you , and that you may be guided .
he will speak to the people from the crib , and in adulthood , and will be one of the righteous . ”
we shall cast out any grudge they may have in their hearts.they will sit on couches face to face like brothers together .
then he said to them on oath :  i am your sincere friend ; 
had we made him an angel , we would have made him a man , and confused them when they are already confused .
say : “ if the merciful one had a son , i would have been the first one to worship him . ”
so consider the signs of his benevolence : how he quickens the earth after it had become waste . he is verily the one who will raise the dead . he has power over everything .
say :  o people , act as best you can on your part , i am acting too . you will come to know in time
wherefrom they get no aching of the head nor any madness ,
then adam received certain words from his lord , and he turned to him clemently . indeed he is the all-clement , the all-merciful .
and he is not miserly concerning the unseen .
we have revealed the book of guidance and mercy to the believers and we know all of its details .
and there had certainly come to them a messenger from among themselves , but they denied him ; so punishment overtook them while they were wrongdoers .
had allah so willed , he would have made you all one single community . however , he lets go astray whomsoever he wills and shows the right way to whomsoever he wills . surely you shall be called to account regarding what you did .
when they see thee , they treat thee no otherwise than in mockery :  is this the one whom allah has sent as a messenger ? 
did we will , we would have changed them where they were , then they could not go on , nor could they return .
and they brought his shirt stained with false blood . he said :  nay , but your ownselves have made up a tale . sopatience is most fitting . and it is allahwhose help can be sought against that which you assert . 
believers , do not violate the rites of allah , or the sacred month , or the offerings , ornecklaces , nor those whose aim is to the sacred house seeking from their lord bounty and pleasure . once your pilgrimage has ended , you are free to hunt . do not allow your hatred for a nation who would bar you from the holy mosque to lead you to transgress . and cooperate in righteousness and warding off , and do not cooperate in sinfulness and transgression . have fear of allah , for allah is stern in retribution .
who provided them against destitution and gave them security against fear .
weshall call the keepers of hell .
who , then , is more unjust than he who lies about god and rejects the truth when it comes to him ? is not hell an abode for those who deny the truth ?
then we delivered him and all his family
o children of adam ! we have bestowed raiment upon you to cover yourselvesand as an adornment , and the raiment of righteousness , that is better . such are among the ayatof allah , that they may remember .
they it is who say : do not spend upon those who are with the apostle of allah until they break up . and allah 's are the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
they thought no harm would come of it , so they were wilfully blind and deaf . and afterward allah turnedtoward them . noware many of them wilfully blind and deaf . allah is seer of what they do .
and by the night , and what it covers .
when you have performed the prayer , remember god , standing and sitting and on your sides . then , when you are secure , perform the prayer ; surely the prayer is a timed prescription for the believers .
but how will they come to you for judgment when they already have the torah in which is the judgement of allah ? then they turn away after that ; those are not believers .
allah and his angels praise and venerate the prophet . believers , praise and venerate him and pronounce peace upon him in abundance .
go forth , whether light or heavy , and strive with your wealth and your lives in the cause of allah . that is better for you , if you only knew .
certainly our messengers came to abraham with the good news , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ ‘ peace ! ’ he replied . presently he broughta roasted calf .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he has knowledge of what state you are upon . on the day when they shall be returned to him , he will tell them all what they have done . and allah has knowledge of everything .
and we saved those who believed in and feared god .
every soul shall have a taste of death in the end to us shall ye be brought back .
eat every kind of fruit , and follow the easy ways of your lord ' from its belly comes forth a drinkof many hues in which there is healing for people . surely , in this there is a sign for a nation who reflect .
what , shall i seek after any judge but god ? for it is he who sent down to you the book well-distinguished ; and those whom we have given the book know it is sent down from thy lord with the truth ; so be not thou of the doubters .
are their hearts diseased , or do they have doubts , or do they fear that allah and his noble messenger will oppress them ? in fact they themselves are the unjust .
and whenever you apply force become tyrannical .
then he made his offspring from semen of worthless water .
have they not considered what things allah has created ? their shadows incline to the right and to the left , prostrating to allah , while they are humble .
hence bear with patience whatever they say , and celebrate your lord 's glory before the rising of the sun and before its setting ;
and when they meet those who believe , they say ,  we have believed  ; but when they are alone with one another , they say ,  do you talk to them about what allah has revealed to you so they can argue with you about it before your lord ?  then will you not reason ?
“ possibly he would have misled us away from our gods had we not been firm upon them ” ; soon they will know , when they see the punishment , who was astray from the path .
and we have enjoined upon man , to his parents , good treatment . his mother carried him with hardship and gave birth to him with hardship , and his gestation and weaningis thirty months.until , when he reaches maturity and reachesforty years , he says ,  my lord , enable me to be grateful for your favor which you have bestowed upon me and upon my parents and to work righteousness of which you will approve and make righteous for me my offspring . indeed , i have repented to you , and indeed , i am of the muslims . 
god is he who sends the winds , which agitate clouds , which we drive to a dead land , and thereby revive the ground after it had died . likewise is the resurrection .
he who denieth and turneth away .
and when the sky is rent asunder ,
he it is who sends down water for you from the sky out of which you drink and out of which grow the plants on which you pasture your cattle ,
o ye who believe ! be ye maintainers of justice , bearers of testimony for allah 's sake , though it be against yourselves or your parents or kindred . be he rich or poor , allah is nigher unto either wherefore follow not the passion , lest ye deviate . if ye incline or turn away , then verily of that which ye work allah is ever aware .
when people receive mercy , they are happy with it . however , when hardship befalls them because of their own deeds , they despair .
instead , they shall reject their worship , and become adversaries against them .
and who sends down waterfrom the sky in due measure . then we revive a dead land therewith , and even so you will be brought forth ,
and if they belie thee , say thou : unto me my work , and unto you your work : ye are quit of that which i work and am quit of that which ye work .
then the shaitanmade them slip therefrom , and got them out from that in which they were . we said :  get you down , all , with enmity between yourselves . on earth will be a dwelling place for you and an enjoyment for a time . 
when they said ,  joseph and his brother are more beloved to our father than we , while we are a clan . indeed , our father is in clear error .
surely thy lord will decide between them by his judgment ; he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they fall down on their faces , weeping , and it increaseth humility in them .
said jesus the son of mary :  o allah our lord ! send us from heaven a table set , that there may be for us - for the first and the last of us - a solemn festival and a sign from thee ; and provide for our sustenance , for thou art the best sustainer . 
they have aroused our wrath ,
and when such people commit an indecent act they say : 'we found our fathers doing that , and allah has enjoined it on us . say : 'surely allah never enjoins any indecency . do you say things regarding allah that you do not know ? '
indeed he who has ordained the qur ’ an upon you , will surely bring you back to where you wish ; proclaim , “ my lord well knows him who came with guidance , and him who is in open error . ”
this is a reminder . and lo ! for those who ward offis a happy journey 's end ,
o people who believe ! when you go forth to fight in holy war , make a proper study , and do not say to the one who greets you , “ you are not a muslim , ” – you seek the means of this worldly life ; so with allah are the bounties in plenty ; you too were like this before , then allah bestowed his favour on you , therefore you must make a proper study ; indeed allah knows whatever you do .
“ that no bearer of a burden shall bear the burden of another ,
then we said : adam ! verily this is an enemy unto thee and thine spouse ; so let him not drive forth you twain from the garden , lest thou be destressed .
you cause the night to enter the day , and you cause the day to enter the night ; and you bring the living out of the dead , and you bring the dead out of the living . and you give provision to whom you will without account . 
so they hamstrung the she-camel , and defied the command of their lord , and said , “ o saleh , bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are one of the messengers . ”
they who believed and have been fearing god ;
whoever comes to his lord guilty , for him is hell , where he neither dies nor lives .
indeed your lord ’ s striking is severe .
when youwere on the near side of the valley , and they on the farther side , and the caravan on the ground lower than you . even if you had made a mutual appointment to meet , you would certainly have failed in the appointment , butthat allah might accomplish a matter already ordained ; so that those who were to be destroyedmight be destroyed after a clear evidence , and those who were to livemight live after a clear evidence . and surely , allah is all-hearer , all-knower .
and those who believeand do righteous good deeds , to them we shall surely give lofty dwellings in paradise , underneath which rivers flow , to live therein forever . excellent is the reward of the workers .
we have made some of these apostles to excel the others among them are they to whom allah spoke , and some of them he exalted byrank ; and we gave clear miracles to isa son of marium , and strengthened him with the holy spirit . and if allah had pleased , those after them would not have fought one with another after clear arguments had come to them , but they disagreed ; so there were some of them who believed and others who denied ; and if allah had pleased they would not have fought one with another , but allah brings about what he intends .
do you wonder that a remembrance should come to you from your lord to a man from yourselves in order that he may warn you ? remember , that he has made you the heirs of noah 's nation and increased you in broad stature , remember the favors of allah in order that you prosper '
if you shun the great sins you have been forbidden , we shall cancel out your minor misdeeds and admit you to a place of honour .
certainly we had given abraham his probity before , and we knew him
so we delivered him and his followers , except his wife ; she was of those who remained behind .
so we make it enter the hearts of the sinners .
our lord ! remove this punishment from us . indeed we have believed ! ’
which none but the hellish eat . 
when we saved him and his family , all ,
when the truth did come to them from us , they said :  this is indeed evident sorcery ! 
do not let their speech grieve you . all might belongs to allah . he is the hearing , the knowing .
god 's it is to show the way ; and some do swerve from it . if he willed , he would have guided you all together .
'then if they give you the lie , say : 'your lord is of unbounded mercy ; but his punishment shall not be averted from the guilty folk . '
andthamud he spared not ;
and what would make you know that he would purify himself ,
on parchment for distribution ,
and most of them follow nothing but conjecture . certainly , conjecture can be of no avail against the truth . surely , allah is all-aware of what they do .
no people can hasten or delay the term already fixed for them .
they will reply :  nay , ye yourselves had no faith !
possessed of sound judgement . he settled ,
say , ‘ i have no control over any benefit for myself , norany harm except what allah may wish . had i known the unseen , i would have acquired much good , and no ill would have befallen me . i am only a warner and bearer of good news to a people who have faith . ’
are free of blame ,
it shall be no offence for you to hint at a proposal of marriageor to cherish them in your hearts . god knows that you will bear them in mind . but do not enter into any secret arrangement with them , beyond conveying some indication to them of your inclination . do not proceed with tying the marriage-knot before the end of their waiting period . know that god has knowledge of all your thoughts . therefore , take heed and bear in mind that god is forgiving and forbearing .
say : he it is who multiplieth you in the earth , and unto whom ye will be gathered .
then , after that , god will relent towards whomever he wills . god is forgiving and merciful .
iblis said ,  lord , because you have caused me to go astray , i shall make earthly things attractive toand mislead all of them
lo ! the righteous verily are in delight ,
he frowned and then turned away
or , who has made the earth firm to live in ; made rivers in its midst ; set thereon mountains immovable ; and made a separating bar between the two bodies of flowing water ? god besides allah ? nay , most of them know not .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage falls only upon the lord of all being ;
he only is the first and he only the last , and he only is the evident and he only the concealed ; and it is he who knows all things .
and those who answer the call of their lord , and to worship none but him alone ] , and perform as-salat , and whotheir affairs by mutual consultation , and who spend of what we have bestowed on them ;
god has been gracious to us and has saved us from the torment of hell 's intense heat --
those are guided by their lord and will surely prosper .
oneobeyed , and faithful in trust .
and olives , and palms ,
they are aware of the favours of allah , and yet refuse to acknowledge them . most of them are determined not to accept the truth .
they forsake their beds , calling upon their lord in fear and in hope , and spend out of what we have provided them with .
how many a community that dealt unjustly have we shattered , and raised up after them another folk !
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall make them enter gardens through which rivers flow , to dwell therein forever ; therein they shall have pure spouses , and we shall admit them into a dense shade .
and when it is said unto those who fear : what is it that your lord hath sent down ? they say : that which is better . for those who do good is good in this world , and the dwelling of the hereafter is better . excellent is the dwelling of the god-fearing !
here you are - those who argue on their behalf inworldly life - but who will argue with allah for them on the day of resurrection , or who willbe their representative ?
gardens , and springs .
and when you read the qur ’ an o dear prophet , we created an invisible barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
thou wilt not find any people who believe in allah and the last day , loving those who resist allah and his messenger , even though they were their fathers or their sons , or their brothers , or their kindred . for such he has written faith in their hearts , and strengthened them with a spirit from himself . and he will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to dwell therein . allah will be well pleased with them , and they with him . they are the party of allah . truly it is the party of allah that will achieve felicity .
the earth will become bright from the light of your lord . the book of records will be presented and the prophets and witness will be summoned . all will be judged with justice and no wrong will be done to anyone .
may allah pardon you , ; why did you give them permission ? until it was evident to you who were truthful and you knewthe liars .
and thamud , and the people of lout , and the dwellers of the wood ; such were the confederates .
those who persevere and place their trust in their lord .
and we sent noah to his people : ' i am for you a warner , and a bearer of good tidings :
do not defy allah . indeed i bring you a manifest authority .
when moses returned to his people , angry and indignant , he said , ‘ evil has been your conduct in my absence ! would you hasten on the edict of your lord ? ’ he threw down the tablets and seized his brother by the head , pulling him towards himself . he said , ‘ son of my mother , indeed this people thought me to be weak , and they were about to kill me . so do not let the enemies gloat over me , and do not take me with the wrongdoing lot . ’
and from those who say ,  we are christians  we took their covenant ; but they forgot a portion of that of which they were reminded . so we caused among them animosity and hatred until the day of resurrection . and allah is going to inform them about what they used to do .
together with grapes and vegetables ,
who join together what allah has bidden to be united ; who fear their lord and dread the evil reckoning .
wait for the daywhen the sky will give out dense smoke
who hears the revelations of god being recited to him , yet persists in denying with arrogance as though he had never heard them ! so warn him of a painful punishment .
but they slaughtered her . thereupon salih warned them : 'enjoy yourselves in your homes for a maximum of three days . this is a promise which shall not be belied . '
after them succeeded angeneration : they inherited the book , but they chosethe vanities of this world , saying :  will be forgiven us .  , if similar vanities came their way , they wouldseize them . was not the covenant of the book taken from them , that they would not ascribe to allah anything but the truth ? and they study what is in the book . but best for the righteous is the home in the hereafter . will ye not understand ?
there you are loving them , and they do not love you . you believe in the entire book . when they meet you they say : 'we , believe ' but when alone , they bite their fingertips at you out of rage . say : 'die in your rage ! allah has knowledge of what is in your chests '
thy lord hath not forsaken thee , nor is he displeased .
and when they hear vain talk , they avoid it , and say , “ we have our deeds , and you have your deeds ; peace be upon you ; we do not desire the ignorant . ”
no indeed , soon you will know !
norupon those who , when they came to you that you might give them mounts , you said ,  i can find nothing for you to ride upon .  they turned back while their eyes overflowed with tears out of grief that they could not find something to spend .
and we sent blessings upon him and ishaq ; and among their descendants – some who do good deeds , and some who clearly wrong themselves .
on the day when they see it , they will feel as if they had tarried in this world for only one evening or one morning .
but he withdrewin his might , and said : a wizard or a madman .
and knew not what my reckoning !
and do thoubring thy lord to remembrance in thysoul , with humility and in reverence , without loudness in words , in the mornings and evenings ; and be not thou of those who are unheedful .
they said ,  we shall continue worshipping the calf until moses comes back . 
she said :  o my lord ! how shall i have a son when no man hath touched me ?  he said :  even so : allah createth what he willeth : when he hath decreed a plan , he but saith to it , 'be , ' and it is !
and we inspired moosa that , “ put forth your staff ” ; it immediately began swallowing up their fabrications .
therefore guard againstallah and obey me :
is it not a token for them that the doctors of the children of israel know it ?
indeed man is created very impatient , greedy .
and our command is only a fleeting one – like the batting of an eyelid .
evil is the metaphor of the people who reject our signs and wrong themselves .
abraham was indeed a model , devoutly obedient to allah , true in faith , and he joined not gods with allah :
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah hath revealed therein . if any do fail to judge bywhat allah hath revealed , they arethose who rebel .
prohibited to youare : - your mothers , daughters , sisters ; father 's sisters , mother 's sisters ; brother 's daughters , sister 's daughters ; foster-mothers , foster-sisters ; your wives ' mothers ; your step-daughters under your guardianship , born of your wives to whom ye have gone in , - no prohibition if ye have not gone in ; -wives of your sons proceeding from your loins ; and two sisters in wedlock at one and the same time , except for what is past ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful ; -
they solemnly swear by god :  if a sign comes to us we shall certainly believe in it .  tell them :  the signs are with god .  yet for all you know they will not believe if the signs came to them .
because of their breaking their pledge , we cursed them , and made their hearts hard . they twist the words out of their context , and they disregarded some of what they were reminded of . you will always witness deceit from them , except for a few of them . but pardon them , and overlook . god loves the doers of good .
who brings out the pastures
is this a better hospitality or the tree of azzakkum !
they said :  o shu'aib , much of what you say is meaningless to us , and thenyou are powerless among us . but for your clan we would have stoned you to death . you have no power over us .
when you were propagating it with your tongues , and uttering with your mouths that whereof you had no knowledge , you counted it a little thing , while with allah it was very great .
and mention in the scripture abraham . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
you shall certainly taste the painful punishment :
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , all-mighty , all-forgiving . 
when he made the slumber fall upon you as a reassurance from him and sent down water from the sky upon you , that thereby he might purify you , and remove from you the fear of satan , and make strong your hearts and firmfeet thereby .
and reached the highest pinnacle .
and when isa came with ; evidences , he said : of a surety i have come unto you with wisdom , and to expound unto you some of that wherein ye differ ; so fear allah and obey me .
as a command from our presence - lo ! we are ever sending -
surely they will be of no avail to you against allah . indeed the wrong-doers are friends of each other , whereas allah is the friend of the god-fearing .
covering the people 's this shall be a torment afflictive .
and when moses , said to his nation : 'why do you harm me , when you know that i am the messenger of allah sent to you ' but when they swerved away allah caused their hearts to swerve . allah never guides impious people .
it is he who sent down the shechinainto the hearts of the believers , that they might add faith to their faith -- to god belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth ; god is all-knowing , all-wise --
 but , without doubt , i amhe that forgives again and again , to those who repent , believe , and do right , who , - in fine , are ready to receive true guidance . 
and we gave moses the book , that haply they would be guided ;
circulated among them will be plates and vessels of gold . and therein is whatever the souls desire anddelights the eyes , and you will abide therein eternally .
 how can you bear that which is beyond your comprehension ? 
as for man , whenever his lord tries him , and honours him , and blesses him , then he says , 'my lord has honoured me . '
but the only response from his people was their saying , “ kill him , or burn him. ” but god saved him from the fire . surely in that are signs for people who believe .
they can not help them , though they be hosts made ready for them .
when comes the help of god , and victory ,
and there is no way of reproach against those who take revenge after being wronged .
and those who disbelieve say : 'why has no sign been sent down to him by his lord ' say : 'allah leads astray whom he will , and guides those who repent ,
would that you knew what sijin is ! ?
concerning the great news ,
he admits into his mercy , whomever he wills ; and for the unjust he has kept prepared a painful punishment .
has not the news reached you , of those before you , the people of nuh , and 'ad , and thamud ? and those after them ? none knows them but allah . to them came their messengers with clear proofs , but they put their hands in their mouthsand said :  verily , we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent , and we are really in grave doubt as to that to which you invite us . 
to bring thee every cunning sorcerer .
it is god who placed the sea at your service , so that ships may run through it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in six days and his throne was upon the waters that he might try you , which of you excel in works . if you say : 'after death you shall be raised up ' the unbelievers will say : 'this is nothing but clear sorcery '
upon that day the tidings will be darkened for them , nor will they ask each other .
 the all-knower of the gha'ib , and he reveals to none his gha'ib . 
they can not listen to the higher groupfor they are pelted from every side .
remember also that we made another solemn covenant with you : you shall not shed blood among yourselves nor expel one another from your homes . and you confirmed it and you are a witness to it .
whether you discuss a thing or conceal it , surely god has knowledge of everything .
or that he will not seize them when they are apprehensive of the impending calamity ? surely your lord is most compassionate , most merciful .
o you who believe , when the call to prayer is made on the day of congregation , hasten to remember god , putting aside your business . this is better for you if you can understand .
we shall test you through fear , hunger , loss of life , property , and crops . , give glad news to the people who have patience
they shall know tomorrow whichsoever is a liar insolent .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge with you from the urgings of the devils .
surely the hour is coming -- i am about to make it manifest -- so that every soul may be rewarded as it strives :
all that we say is that some of our gods have smitten thee with evil . he said : verily i call allah to witness , and bear ye witness , that i am quit of that which ye associate .
and never may the disbelievers pride that they have escaped ; indeed they can never defeat .
surely , in that there is a sign for those who believe .
 now cause a piece of the sky to fall on us , if thou art truthful ! 
going round between it and balling water fierce .
pharaoh said :  moses ! who is the lord of the two of you ? 
allah has never put two hearts within one person 's body ; nor has he made your wives , whom you compare to your mothers ' backs , your true mothers ; nor has he made those whom you adopt as sons your own sons . these are only words that you utter with your mouths . but allah proclaims the truth and directs you to the right path .
shall be the food of the guilty sinners .
, leave them alone to dispute and play until they face the day with which they have been threatened :
the people of moses replied : 'we were oppressed before your coming to us and after it . ' moses said : 'your lord will soon destroy your enemy and make you rulers in the land . then he will see how you act . '
cast down thy staff . ' and when he saw it quivering like a serpent he turned about , retreating , and turned not back . 'moses , fear not ; surely the envoys do not fear in my presence ,
we have made every person 's actions cling to his neck . on the day of judgment , we will bring forth the record of his actions in the form of a wide open book .
who whispers in the chests of people ,
by thesent forth in quick succession ,
he said , “ o my people , why are you quick to do evil rather than good ? if only you would seek god ’ s forgiveness , so that you may be shown mercy . ”
and moosa prayed , “ our lord ! you have given firaun and his chiefs adornment and wealth in the life of this world , our lord , that they may lead astray from your path ; our lord ! destroy their riches and harden their hearts so that they may not accept faith until they witness the painful punishment . ”
which of you is a prey to madness .
when he arrived at the well of midian , he found there a throng of people watering , and he found , besides them , two women holding back . he said , ‘ what is your business ? ’ they said , ‘ we do not wateruntil the shepherds have driven out , and our father is an aged man . ’
nor in those who when they came to you that you might carry them , you said : i can not find that on which to carry you ; they went back while their eyes overflowed with tears on account of grief for not finding that which they should spend .
will call out ,  were we not with you ?  will reply ,  yes , you were with us but you spent your life in disbelief and hypocrisy , wished death to , had doubts about his message and let your longings deceive you until the decree of god came to pass . the devil deceived you about the mercy of god .
say ,  god alone has the conclusive proof . if he had willed , he could have guided every one of you . 
the believers who cooperate with others in patienceand kindness .
penetrating deep into the armies ,
it was not the devils that revealed it .
 there is nothing beyond our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
and when abraham said , 'my lord , make this a land secure , and provide its people with fruits , such of them as believe in god and the last day . ' he said , 'and whoso disbelieves , to him i shall give enjoyment a little , then i shall compel him to the chastisement of the fire -- how evil a homecoming ! '
the lightning almost snatches away their sight : whenever it shines for them , they walk in it , and when the darkness falls upon them , they stand . had allah willed , he would have taken away their hearing and sight . indeed allah has power over all things .
we granted him isaac and jacob as a gift and helped both of them to become righteous people .
he bethinketh that his wealth shall abide for him .
so that we may bring life to a dead land ; and slake the thirst of our creation ; cattle and men , in great numbers .
when the faithless nourished bigotry in their hearts , the bigotry of pagan ignorance , allah sent down his composure upon his apostle and the faithful , and made them abide by the word of godwariness , for they were the worthiest of it and deserved it , and allah has knowledge of all things .
does man not see that we created him of a sperm drop , and lo ! he is flagrantly contentious ?
and there are others among them who hurt the prophet saying : 'he lends an ear ' say : 'he lends an ear of good for you ; he believes in allah and trusts the believers , and he is a mercy to the believers among you . those who hurt the messenger of allah for them there is a painful punishment '
and what shall make thee know that which the inevitable calamity is .
and say :  will you purify yourself ,
o you who have believed , allah will surely test you through something of the game that your hands and spearsreach , that allah may make evident those who fear him unseen . and whoever transgresses after that - for him is a painful punishment .
o believers , when you conspire with the messenger , before your conspiring advance a freewill offering ; that is better for you and purer . yet if you find not means , god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
had we revealed it to any of the non-arabs ,
if any one of them said :  i am god besides him ,  we should award him hell ; for this is how we requite the evil-doers .
obey allah and obey the messenger . but if you turn away from obedience , our messenger has no other duty than to clearly convey the truth .
and whomsoever allah sends astray , for him there is no waliafter him . and you will see the zalimunwhen they behold the torment , they will say :  is there any way of return ? 
then his wife came forward , making moan , and smote her face , and cried : a barren old woman !
then judge between me and them with decisive judgement and save me and those with me of the believers . 
and we blessed him and isaac . among their descendantsare virtuous , andwho manifestly wrong themselves .
say : each one doth according to his rule of conduct , and thy lord is best aware of him whose way is right .
and for allah only is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; he may forgive whomever he wills , and punish whomever he wills ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
with allah is the repentance of those alone who do an evil foolishly and thereafter repent speedily , surely it is they unto whom allah shall relent . and allah is knowing , wise .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . to him all matters shall return .
‘ certainly you have come to us alone , just as we created you the first time , and left behind whatever we had bestowed on you . we do not see your intercessors with you—those whom you claimed to bepartners inyou . certainly all links between you have been cut , and what you used to claim has forsaken you ! ’
we sent forth moses with our signs and with manifest authority ,
and whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is allah 's , and allah is sufficient as a protector .
comeththe command of allah : seek ye not then to hasten it : glory to him , and far is he above having the partners they ascribe unto him !
their looks cast down , abasement shall overtake them ; and they were called upon to make obeisance indeed while yet they were safe .
it should say , when it sees the chastisement , ' o that i might return again , and be among the good-doers . '
that isof the tidings of the townships . we relate it unto thee . some of them are standing and somereaped .
but they answered :  by no means shall we cease to worship it until moses returns to us . 
and have you seen the fire that you ignite ?
it is indeed the word of an honorable messenger ,
in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
and follow that which is revealed to you , and be patient until allah issuesjudgement , and he is the best of judges .
and give good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds ; that they will have gardens beneath which rivers flow . whenever they are provided with fruit therefrom as sustenance , they will say , “ this is what we were provided with before , ” and they will be given the like of it . and they will have pure spouses therein , and they will abide therein forever .
this is naught but a custom of the ancients ;
he said : now , because thou hast sent me astray , verily i shall lurk in ambush for them on thy right path .
they said : surely to our lord shall we go back :
, it is all the same whether or not you ask for their forgiveness . even if you were to ask forgiveness for them seventy times , allah shall not forgive them . that is because they disbelieved in allah and his messenger ; and allah does not bestow his guidance on such evil-doing folk .
and this world 's life is naught but a play and an idle sport and certainly the abode of the hereafter is better for those who guard ; do you not then understand ?
have the unbelievers been rewarded what they were doing ?
the sending down of the book , wherein no doubt is , from the lord of all being .
we will , surely , suffice you against those who mock ,
when the trumpet is blown .
for they said :  a man ! alone from among us , that we are to follow ? truly , then we should be in error and distress or madness ! 
she said to his sister , ‘ follow him. ’ so she watched him from a distance , while they were not aware .
likewise , the divorced women should also be given something in accordance with the known fair standard . this is an obligation upon the god-fearing people .
o which of your lord 's bounties will you and you deny ?
but you prefer the life of this world ,
and those before them rejected , and these have not yet attained a tenth of what we gave them , but they gave the lie to my apostles , then how was the manifestation of my disapproval ?
before them the people of noah denied the truth , as did the 'ad and pharaoh of the stakes ,
indeed we have sent down to you the quran in a gradual descent .
and give not a thing in order to have more .
hold thou fast wherefore to that which is revealed unto thee : verily thou art on the straight path . s
and before that they lived at ease ,
all this as sustenance for our servants . and thus we do bring the dead land back to life with water . such shall be the coming forth .
the believers say ,  are these the people who proclaimed themselves to be our sworn friends ?  their deeds have become devoid of all virtue and they themselves have become lost .
i do not ask for any payment for my preaching . i shall receive my reward from the lord of the universe .
o prophet ! when any of you divorce your wives , divorce them during their period of purity and calculate the period carefully : be mindful of god , your lord . do not drive them out of their homes , nor should they themselves leave , unless they become openly guilty of immoral conduct . these are the bounds set by god . he who transgresses god 's bounds wrongs his own soul . you never know , after that , god may well bring about some new situation .
say thou : o allah ! sovereign of the dominion : thou givest dominion unto whomsoever thou wilt , and thou takest away dominion from whomsoever thou wilt ; thou honourest whomsoever thou wilt , and thou abasest whomsoever thou wilt ; and in thine hand is good . and verily thou art over every thing potent .
surely in the watches of the night the soul is most receptive and words more telling .
are they better than the people of tubba ' and those who came before them ? we destroyed them , because they were guilty of sin .
we then fulfilled the promise to them , therefore rescued them and whomever we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
an orphan near of kin ,
even so we have sent down to thee the book . those to whom we have given the book believe in it ; and some of these believe in it ; and none denies our signs but the unbelievers .
then he became of those who believed and enjoined on each other steadfastness and enjoined on each other compassion .
go forth , light and heavy ! struggle in god 's way with your possessions and your selves ; that is better for you , did you know .
and your lord comes , with the angels , row after row .
he said , “ yes , and you will be among those favored . ”
and what can make you know what is the day of recompense ?
so exalted is allah , the true sovereign , there is no god except him , the lord of the noble throne .
see you notthat allah , he it is whom glorify whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , and the birds with wings out-spread . of each one heknows indeed his salatand his glorification , and his glorification ] , and allah is all-aware of what they do .
when it is recited to them , they say ,  we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . we were muslims before it was revealed  .
if you could see them when they are set before the fire ! they will say : 'would that we could return ! then we would not belie the verses of our lord and would be believers '
nay ! they say :  we found our fathers following a certain way and religion , and we guide ourselves by their footsteps . 
yet they choose beside him other gods who create naught but are themselves created , and possess not hurt nor profit for themselves , and possess not death nor life , nor power to raise the dead .
do you think that most of them can hear or understand ? they are like cattle , no , they are further astray from the path .
shame on you and on that you worship other than allah ! have you no understanding '
and we gave them portents wherein was a clear trial .
and in the night prostrate to him ; and exalt him for a long night .
see how they cover themselves up to hidefrom him . but when they cover themselves up with their garments , he knows what they hide and what they reveal . he knows their innermost thoughts .
whereon the heaven will be cleft asunder ? his promise is certainly to be accomplished .
have we not made the earth an expanse ,
he said , ‘ indeed i am going toward my lord , who will guide me . ’
verily we have tried them as we tried the people of the garden , when they resolved to gather the fruits of thein the morning .
that was because their apostles were wont to come unto them with evidences , but they said : shall a mere human bein guide us ? wherefore they disbelieved and turned away ; and allah needed them not . and allah is self sufficient , praiseworthy .
and their leading chiefs said :  remain attached to your gods . there is surely some motive behind it .
and made therein lofty mountains , and given you to drink of sweet water ?
and lower your wing to those of the believers who follow you .
 he indeed would well-nigh have misled us from our gods , had it not been that we were constant to them !  - soon will they know , when they see the penalty , who it is that is most misled in path !
we relate to you , , the best of stories in what we have revealed to you of this qur'an although you were , before it , among the unaware .
do you then hope that they will believe in you when some of them have already heard the word of god and then , after having understood it , they knowingly perverted it ?
whenever a plague befell them , they would say , “ o moses , pray to your lord for us , according to the covenant he made with you . if you lift the plague from us , we will believe in you , and let the children of israel go with you . ”
o my father , indeed i fear that there will touch you a punishment from the most merciful so you would be to satan a companion . 
god will increase the guidance and piety of those who seek guidance .
he said : my lord ! when shall there be a sonto me , and old age has already come upon me , and my wife is barren ? he said : even thus does allah what he pleases .
do you feel secure that we will not cause a part of the land to sink or engulf you with sand storms when you would find no one to protect you ?
those who , while they sat at home , said of their brethren : if they had been guided by us they would not have been slain . say : then avert death from yourselves if ye are truthful .
moses replied ,  they are just behind me . i came earlier to seek your pleasure  .
and the jews say : the hand of allah is tied up ! their hands shall be shackled and they shall be cursed for what they say . nay , both his hands are spread out , he expends as he pleases ; and what has been revealed to you from your lord will certainly make many of them increase in inordinacy and unbelief ; and we have put enmity and hatred among them till the day of resurrection ; whenever they kindle a fire for war allah puts it out , and they strive to make mischief in the land ; and allah does not love the mischief-makers .
or desire they to outwit ? the unbelievers , they are the outwitted .
he will forgive you some of your faults and grant you a delay to an appointed term ; surely the term of allah when it comes is not postponed ; did you but know !
besides him . so scheme against me , all of you , and do not hesitate .
those who were to carry the responsibility of the torah but ignored , are like donkeys laden with books . how terrible is the example of the people who reject the revelations of god . god does not guide the unjust .
the believers are but brothers , so make settlement between your brothers . and fear allah that you may receive mercy .
fight in the way of allah , and know that allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
build the ark with our seeing , and as we reveal . do not speak to me concerning the evildoers ; they shall be drowned '
there shall be repose and ease , and a garden of delight ;
pharaoh said to those around him ,  did you hear ? 
maintain the prayer and give the zakat , and obey the apostle so that you may receivemercy .
say ,  it may be that a part of what you would hasten on is close behind you . 
 and my advice will not profit you , even if i wish to give you good counsel , if allah 's will is to keep you astray . he is your lord ! and to him you shall return . 
purity is to him who took his bondman in a part of the night from the sacred mosque to the aqsa mosque around which we have placed blessings , in order that we may show him our great signs ; indeed he is the listener , the beholder .
say : whose is the earth , and whoever is therein , if you know ?
god will say ,  this is the day when the truthful will benefit from their truthfulness . they shall forever dwell in gardens through which rivers flow . god is pleased with them and they with him : that is the supreme triumph .
if god should take men to task for their evildoing , he would not leave on the earth one creature that crawls ; but he is deferring them to a term stated ; and when their term is come they shall not put it back by a single hour nor put it forward .
hallowed be thine lord , the lord of majesty , from that which they ascribe !
allah said : be thou gone ; then who soever of them followeth thee , hell is your meed , a meed ample .
allah is the waliof those who believe . he brings them out from darkness into light . but as for those who disbelieve , their auliyaare taghut , they bring them out from light into darkness . those are the dwellers of the fire , and they will abide therein forever .
and there entered with him two young men in the prison . one of them said :  verily , i saw myselfpressing wine .  the other said :  verily , i saw myselfcarrying bread on my head and birds were eating thereof .  :  inform us of the interpretation of this . verily , we think you are one of the muhsinun . 
say ,  have you thought : if god destroys me and those who are with me , or treats us mercifully , then who will protect those who deny the truth from a painful chastisement ? 
that is because they say , ‘ the fire shall not touch us except for a number of days , ’ and they have been misled in their religion by what they used to fabricate .
and that the foolish one among us used to speak concerning allah an atrocious lie .
and on the day when he will muster them all and will ask the angels : “ are they the ones who worshipped you ? ”
we have frequently seen you turn your face towards heaven . so we will make you turn in a direction for prayer that will please you . so turn your face now towards the sacred mosque : and wherever you may be , turn your faces towards it . those who were given the book know this to be the truth from their lord . god is not unaware of what they do .
 butfor my part that he is allah , my lord , and none shall i associate with my lord .
those who believe , and are godfearing --
when the earth shall be shaken to its depths ,
those who are misers and preach miserliness to others , and hide what allah has bestowed upon them from his munificence ; and we have kept ready a disgraceful punishment for the disbelievers .
and remember david and solomon , when they gave judgment in the matter of the field into which the sheep of certain people had strayed by night : we did witness their judgment .
then verily spake unto them openly , and secretly also i addressed them .
and the mountains shudder and shake .
they said :  we will surely try to prevail over our father to send him . be sure we shall do so . 
do you not see that allah makes the night phase into the day and makes the day phase into the night and has subjected the sun and the moon to his will so that each of them is pursuing its course till an appointed time ? allah is well aware of all that you do ?
not with thee is aught of the affair : he shall either relent toward them or torment them , for verily they are wrong-doers .
such people as these will receive a double reward , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and give alms out of what we have given them ,
but he beguiled a great many of you . why did you not then understand ?
have not my revelations been rehearsed unto you , and them ye have been belying ?
but as for him who is stingy and complacent .
but he who commits either a fault or a sin , and then casts it upon an innocent person , lays upon himself the burden of a false charge and a flagrant sin .
that he may forgive you some of your sins and respite you until a specified time . indeed when allah ’ stime comes , it can not be deferred , if you know . ’
to turn them intolike the left-over grass grazed by cattle .
have you seen sperm ?
believing in god and in the last day , bidding to honour and forbidding dishonour , vying one with the other in good works ; those are of the righteous .
allah does not burden any human being with a responsibility heavier than he can bear . everyone will enjoy the fruit of the good that one has earned and shall suffer for the evil that one has committed . ( o believers , pray like this to allah :  our lord , take us not to task if we forget and lapse into error inadvertently . lord ! lay not on us the kind of burdens that you had lain on the people before us . lord , lay not on us the kind of burden that we have not the strength to bear . be kind to us , forgive us and show mercy to us . you are our protector : help us against the disbelievers . 
we did not create the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them except with consummate wisdom , and indeed the hour is bound to come . so forbear with a graceful forbearance .
indeed , mankind was created anxious :
if ye lend unto allah a goodly loan , he will double it for you and will forgive you , for allah is responsive , clement ,
they said :  are you the one who has done this to our gods , o ibrahim ? 
and what have you understood , how tremendous the true event is !
and appoint for me , from my household , someone who will help me bear my burden -
allah , there is no god except he . in allah let the believers put their trust .
we have indeed sent down to you clear signs ; and none will disbelieve in them except the sinners .
say : if men and jinn should combine together to bring the like of this quran , they could not bring the like of it , though some of them were aiders of others .
moses said to his people ,  turn to god for help and be patient . the earth belongs to god . he gives it to those of his servants whom he chooses , and the future belongs to the god-fearing . 
but when he brought them our signs , at once they laughed at them .
and mary , daughter of imran , who guarded the chastity of her womb , so we breathed into it of our spirit . she confirmed the words of her lord and his books , and she was one of the obedient .
and ye are classes three .
those who are faithful to their trusts and pledges .
who created seven heavens one upon another . thou seest not in the creation of the all-merciful any imperfection . return thy gaze ; seest thou any fissure ?
said ,  the lord says that it must not have even tilled the soil nor irrigated the fields and it must be free of blemishes and flaws .  they said ,  now you have given us the right description .  after almost failing to find it , they slaughtered the cow .
know that allah is severe in requitingand that allah is forgiving , merciful .
perhaps you will destroy yourself out of grief because they disbelieve this book .
do they then expectbutthe days of the men who passed away before them ? say :  wait ye then : for i , too , will wait with you . 
so that they will not worship god who brings forth whatever is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows whatever you conceal or reveal .
say :  i am commanded to worship god with obedience all-exclusive for him ;
waitand they too will be waiting .
and that you should keep your course towards the religion uprightly ; and you should not be of the polytheists .
say , “ o people of the scripture ! do you resent us only because we believe in god , and in what was revealed to us , and in what was revealed previously ; and most of you are sinners ? ”
let neither their wealth nor their children please you . through these allah seeks to punish them in this life , and that their souls depart while they are unbelievers .
then , after them , we sent moses with our miracles to pharaoh and his establishment , but they denounced them . so consider the end of the evildoers .
then , after them , we sent moses with our tokens unto pharaoh and his chiefs , but they repelled them . now , see the nature of the consequence for the corrupters !
god has prepared for them a severe retribution . so beware of god , o you who possess intellect and have faith . god has sent down to you a reminder .
he said , ‘ o my people ! is my tribe more formidable in your sight than allah , to whom you pay no regard ? indeed my lord comprehends whatever you do .
hell ; in which they will roast ; what a miserable abode !
allah is the one who created you , then provided for you , then will cause you to die , and then will give you life . are there any of your  partners  who does anything of that ? exalted is he and high above what they associate with him .
or feeding , during days ofstarvation ,
they will do you no harm , beyond insulting you . and if they fight you , they will turn around and flee , then they will not be helped .
if ye be on a journey and can not find a scribe , then a pledge in hand . and if one of you entrusteth to another let him who is trusted deliver up that which is entrusted to himand let him observe his duty to allah his lord . hide not testimony . he who hideth it , verily his heart is sinful . allah is aware of what ye do .
we have enchained their necks up to their chins . thus , they can not bend their heads .
they replied : 'we are sent to a sinful nation ,
surely we have given thee a manifest victory ,
this , my brother has ninetynine ewes , but i have only one ewe . he said :  give her into my keeping  and overcame me in the argument '
they demand that you hasten on the punishment ! gehennawill encompass the unbelievers .
dead are they , not alive ; and they perceive not when they will be raised up .
his property and worldly gains will be of no help to him .
and we certainly showed pharaoh our signs - all of them - but he denied and refused .
let not the free disposalof the disbelievers throughout the land deceive you .
with justice allah will judge , but those upon whom they call , other than him , can not judge anything at all ! allah is the hearer , the seer .
then fir'aunpursued them with his hosts , but the sea-water completely overwhelmed them and covered them up .
when god desires to guide someone , he opens his breast to islam ; and whoever he wills to let go astray , he causes his breast to be constricted as if he had to climb up to the skies . that is how god heaps ignominy upon those who refuse to believe .
this is our book , that speaks against you the truth ; we have been registering all that you were doing . '
and as for those who are happy , they will be in paradise , remaining therein for as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills—a reward without end .
that is because they believed , and then they disbelieved ; so their hearts were sealed over , and they do not understand .
and in this wise we sent not before thee into any city a warner but the affluent thereof said : verily we ! we found our fathers on a certain way and verily their footsteps we are following .
and we made them patterns that invite unto the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
say , ‘ if i go astray , my going astray is only to my own harm , and if i am rightly guided that is because of what my lord has revealed to me . indeed he is all-hearing and nearmost . ’
and it behoves not the all-merciful to take a son .
moses said to him , ‘ may i follow you for the purpose that you teach me some of the probity you have been taught ? ’
and most surely they were with us , of the elect , the best .
and most of them believe not in allah without associatingwith him !
and when we give the people a taste of mercy after adversity has touched them , at once they conspire against our verses . say ,  allah is swifter in strategy .  indeed , our messengers record that which you conspire
he said :  o my lord ! i have called to my people night and day :
said he , 'respite me till the day they shall be raised . '
we shall inflict retribution on them , whether we take you away from the world ,
when affliction befalls a man , he supplicates to uson his side , sitting or standing . but as soon as we relieve him from his affliction , he continues , as though he never supplicated to us when harm touched him . so it is , that which the sinners were doing seem fairly decorated to them .
it also belongs to the poor emigrants who have been driven out of their homes and their possessions , those who seek allah 's favour and good pleasure and help allah and his messenger . such are the truthful ones .
allah obliterateth usury , and increaseth the alms . and allah loveth not any ingrate sinner .
did you think that we had created you only for play , and that you would never be returned to us '
that we created man in toil and trouble .
god will punish them with the greatest torment .
recount to them the story of noah when he said to his people :  o people , if you find my staying with you and warning through god 's signs , unbearable to you , know that i have reposed my trust in god . so plan your move , and call your associates , and make certain of your plan ; then do whatever you intend against me , allowing me no respite .
have you not considered those who fled their homes , by the thousands , fearful of death ? god said to them , “ die. ” then he revived them . god is gracious towards the people , but most people are not appreciative .
god is he who created seven heavens , and their like of earth . the command descends through them , so that you may know that god is capable of everything , and that god encompasses everything in knowledge .
and verily ! your lord , he is indeed the all-mighty , the most merciful .
they will ask you about dhu ' l-qarnayn . say ,  i will give you an account of him . 
then say thou : 'wouldst thou to be purified ?
yet the wrongdoers follow their desires without knowledge . but who can guide whom god leaves astray ? they will have no helpers .
surely the hypocrites are in the lowest stage of the fire and you shall not find a helper for them .
striking them with stones of hard clay ,
and is it not possible for the one who created the heavens and the earth to create the likes of them ? it is surely possible , why not ? and he is the great creator , the all knowing of everything .
so he shall be in a life of pleasure ,
on a grievous day ,
and sons abiding in his presence
then , after them we brought forth anot her generation .
they feel ashamed before men but do not feel ashamed before god , despite his being present with them when they plot at night , uttering things of which he does not approve ; and indeed god is fully aware of what they do .
nor can you guide the blind out of their straying . you can make no one listen , except those who believe in our verses ; for they are muslims .
o you who have believed , if you obey a party of those who were given the scripture , they would turn you back , after your belief , unbelievers .
a fountain whereat drink the servants of god , making it to gush forth plenteously .
those whose eyes had been under a covering from my reminder , and who could not bear to hear .
and none is comparable to him . ”
abiders therein they shall be for ever , and they shall find neither a protecting friend nor a helper .
and the folk of moses , after , chose a calf , out of their ornaments , of saffron hue , which gave a lowing sound . saw they not that it spake not unto them nor guided them to any way ? they chose it , and became wrong-doers .
“ fear him who has aided you with the things you know . ”
and when they returned to their own followers they returned exulting .
so that he may reward them in full , and give them a greater increase by his grace . he is verily forgiving and rewarding .
but every time we removed the penalty from them according to a fixed term which they had to fulfil , - behold ! they broke their word !
he said ,  do you , instead of god , worship things that can neither harm nor benefit you ? 
and that god may help thee with mighty help .
lot prayed ,  lord , help me against this wicked people . 
he said : what then is your errand ! o ye sent ones !
they may enjoy the life of this world , but in the end they must return to us , and then we shall cause them to taste severe chastisement for their disbelieving . '
or , has he not been informed of what is in the scriptures of musa ?
even if we open a door in the heavens and they ascend through it in broad daylight ,
and moses said : 'if you and all mankind are thankless , he is surely rich , praised '
the hour will indeed come ; there is no doubt about that . yet most people do not believe .
so do not call any other god beside allah lest you become of those who will be punished ,
do they not observe the birds above them , spreading their wings and folding them in ? none can uphold them exceptmost gracious : trulymost gracious : truly it is he that watches over all things .
those who deny and reject our signs shall be the inhabitants of the fire ; therein shall they abide forever . 
and press your hand to your side , it shall come out white without evil : another sign :
nor will his wealth profit him when he falls .
anda qur'an which we have separatedthat you might recite it to the people over a prolonged period . and we have sent it down progressively .
one who follows guidance does so for himself and one who goes astray does so against his soul . no one will suffer for the sins of others . we have never punished anyone without sending them our messenger first .
and all the noble messengers we sent before you were like this – eating food and walking in the markets ; and we have made some of you a test for others ; so will you , o people , patiently endure ? and o dear prophet , your lord is all seeing .
then what iswith them that they are , from the reminder , turning away
was he not once a drop of ejaculated semen ,
unto allahwhatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and whether ye make known what is in your minds or hide it , allah will bring you to account for it . he will forgive whom he will and he will punish whom he will . allah is able to do all things .
he said ,  i only complain of my suffering and my grief to allah , and i know from allah that which you do not know .
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but allah bringeth whom he will into his mercy . and the wrong-doers have no friend nor helper .
on the day when a man fleeth from his brother
say ,  this is my way ; on the basis of sure knowledge , i call on you to have faith in god , i and those who follow me . god is holy ; i am not one of those who associate partners with god . 
the satans are barred from listening to anything from the heavens .
so does he not know ? when those in the graves are raised ,
iblis found his estimate of them to be true , and they followed him , except a party of the believers .
thus it was . and surely we have encompassed all that was with him , in knowledge
we created man in the best design .
or do you think that most of them hear or understand something ? they are not but like the cattle – in fact more astray from the path than them !
even after we have turned into decayed bones ? 
when their brother salih said to them ,  will you not fear allah ?
and they defeated them by god ’ s leave , and david killed goliath , and god gave him sovereignty and wisdom , and taught him as he willed . were it not for god restraining the people , some by means of others , the earth would have gone to ruin . but god is gracious towards mankind .
the day when a friend shall be of no avail to his friend nor shall they be helped ,
we have ordained death among you and we are not to be overcome ,
then we caused the clouds to provide shade for you and sent down for you manna and quails , saying ,  eat the good things we have provided for you .  indeed , they did not wrong us , but they wronged themselves .
and fruits that they may like .
a calamity from your lord befell the orchard as they slept .
o men ! a proof has come to you from your lord , and we have sent down unto you a clear light .
o you who have believed , do not kill game while you are in the state of ihram . and whoever of you kills it intentionally - the penalty is an equivalent from sacrificial animals to what he killed , as judged by two just men among you as an offeringdelivered to the ka'bah , or an expiation : the feeding of needy people or the equivalent of that in fasting , that he may taste the consequence of his deed . allah has pardoned what is past ; but whoever returns , then allah will take retribution from him . and allah is exalted in might and owner of retribution .
my people i do not ask any payment for what i preach to you . no one except god has to give me any reward . i do not drive away those who have faith ; they will all receive mercy from their lord . i know that you are ignorant people .
and on the day when the trumpet shall be blown , then those who are in the heavens and those who are in the earth shall be terrified except such as allah please , and all shall come to him abased .
these are rightly guided by their lord : and these are the ones who will prosper .
some faces on that day will be joyous ,
he said : surely you can not have patience with me
and if allah should amplify the provision for his servants they would certainly revolt in the earth ; but he sends it down according to a measure as he pleases ; surely he is aware of , seeing , his servants .
those are upon guidance from their lord ; those are the prosperers .
and how many a generation before them have we destroyed ! canst thousee a single man of them , or hear from them the slightest sound ?
in both of them will be two flowing springs .
how many favours of your lord will then both of you deny ?
our lord ! lo ! we have heard a crier calling unto faith :  believe ye in your lord !  so we believed . our lord ! therefor forgive us our sins , and remit from us our evil deeds , and make us die the death of the righteous .
the heartdid not misconstrue what he saw .
in response they denied him , so we rescued him and those with him in the ship , and we drowned those who denied our signs ; indeed they were a blind group .
he created seven heavens one above the other in layers . you will not find any flaw in the creation of the gracious one . then look once again : can you see any flaw ?
and whoever has not believed in allah and his messenger - then indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers a blaze .
except such weak ones among men , women and children , as are incapable of adopting any plan or of finding any way out .
we have given thee seven of the oft-repeated , and the mighty koran .
therefore you and all what you worship .
but when he tries him , then straitens to him his means of subsistence , he says : my lord has disgraced me .
it is he who hath made youagents , inheritors of the earth : he hath raised you in ranks , some above others : that he may try you in the gifts he hath given you : for thy lord is quick in punishment : yet he is indeed oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and remove the fury in the believers ' hearts . and allah turns in forgiveness to whom he wills ; and allah is knowing and wise .
he it is who sends blessings on you , as do his angels , that he may bring you out from the depths of darkness into light : and he is full of mercy to the believers .
they will say : 'if we had only listened and understood , we would not be among the inmates of the blazing fire . ' ”
to the lot-tree
believers , in case of murder , the death penalty is the sanctioned retaliation : a free man for a free man , a slave for a slave , and a female for a female . however , if the convicted person receives pardon from the aggrieved party , the prescribed rules of compensation must be followed accordingly . this is a merciful alteration from your lord . whoever transgresses against it will face a painful punishment .
verily those who have disbelieved , if they had all that is in the earth and with it as much again whereby to ransom themselves from the torment on the day of judgement , it shall not be accepted of them , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
mention the day whereon thou shalt see the believing men and believing women , their light running before them and on their right hands : glad tidings unto you to-day : gardens whereunder rivers flow , abiders therein they will be . that ! it is the mighty achievement .
repel , bywhat is best , evil . we are most knowing of what they describe .
is with them the unseen , and they write it down !
as for poets , the erring follow them .
most of those who call you from behind the private chambers do not have any understanding .
on him devolves the knowledge of the hour , and no fruit emerges from its covering and no female conceives or delivers except with his knowledge . on the day when he will call out to them , ‘ where are my ‘ partners ’ ? ’ they will say , ‘ we informed you that there is no witness amongst us . ’
 their account is only with my lord , if ye couldunderstand .
god verifies the truth by his words , though sinners be averse . '
thus have we made you a community of the  golden mean  so that you may be witnesses in regard to mankind and the messenger may be a witness in regard to you . we had appointed the former giblah towards which you used to turn your face merely to test who would follow the messenger and who would turn back . it was indeed a hard test but not for those who had been blessed with guidance from allah . allah will not let go to waste this faith of yours ; rest assured that he is full of pity and mercy for mankind .
this is part of the wisdom that your lord has revealed to you . do not set up any other deity with god , lest you be cast into hell , condemned and rejected .
the day when every person will come up pleading for himself , and every one will be paid in full for what he didand they will not be dealt with unjustly .
and incline not to the disbelievers and the hypocrites . disregard their noxious talk , and put thy trust in allah . allah is sufficient as trustee .
what is your opinion – if he were upon guidance ,
and they say : the beneficent hath taken unto himself a son . be he glorified ! nay , butare honoured slaves ;
perhaps god will plant affection between you and those of them you consider enemies . god is capable . god is forgiving and merciful .
until when they came unto the valley of the ants , an ant said : o ants ! enter your habitations lest sulaiman and his hosts crush you while they perceive not .
and make your lord your exclusive object .
o you who believe ! obey god and obey the messenger and those in authority among you . and if you dispute over anything , refer it to god and the messenger , if you believe in god and the last day . that is best , and a most excellent determination .
by no means ! we shall write down all what he says ; and we shall greatly prolong his chastisement ,
they are those whom god knows what is in their hearts . so ignore them , and admonish them , and say to them concerning themselves penetrating words .
as for those who disbelieve , for them is the fire of hell , wherein they will never be finished off and die , nor will its punishment be lightened for them . thus we will repay every ingrate .
but if they turn back , say : allah is sufficient for me , there is no god but he ; on him do i rely , and he is the lord of mighty power .
so fear allah , and obey me .
they said :  in allah we put our trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the folk who are zalimun .
 yet we bring to you the truth , and we are truthful .
and the satans , every builder and diver
grant , o lord , that i and my offspring may remain constant in devotion . grant , o lord , my supplication .
then he called upon his lord : “ verily i am vanquished ; so come you to my aid . ”
to god leads the right path , though some deviate . if he willed he could guide you all to the right way .
they ask thee of the hour : when will it come to port ?
whatever is in the heavens and the earth , belongs to him . he is all-high and supreme .
o you who have believed , if you support allah , he will support you and plant firmly your feet .
the fruit thereof is as though the hoods of the serpents .
it is god who has revealed the book to you in which some verses are clear statementsand these are the fundamental ideas of the book , while other verses may have several possibilities . those whose hearts are perverse , follow the unclear statements in pursuit of their own mischievous goals by interpreting them in a way that will suit their own purpose . no one knows its true interpretations except god and those who have a firm grounding in knowledge say ,  we believe in it . all its verses are from our lord .  no one can grasp this fact except the people of reason .
their eyes humiliated , they will emerge from the graves , as if they were swarming locusts .
to him is the call of truth . those to whom they call , other than him , give them no answer . they are like he who stretches out his hands to the water andbids it rise to his mouth , it does not reach it ! the prayers of the unbelievers goes astray .
he brings out the living from the dead , and brings out the dead from the living . and he revives the earth after its death . and thus shall you be brought out .
and what will you wish , except if allah wills – the lord of the creation .
if they reject you , messengers before you were also rejected . to god all matters are returned .
had it not been for a writ from god that had already gone forth , you would have been severely punished on account of what you took .
and what is that in your right-hand , o moses ? ”
the promise made to you by god was verified when you destroyedby his leave , until you were unmanned and disputed the order , and thus disobeyedeven after he had brought you in sight ofyou longed for . some of you desired this world , and some of you the next . then he put you to flight beforein order to try you . buthe has forgiven you , for surely god is kind to the faithful .
this is by way of hospitality from him who is most forgiving , most merciful . ”
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he pleases , and punishes whom he pleases . and god is most forgiving and merciful .
andsee them , so they too shall see .
he will say ,  oh , would that i had provided beforehand for my life ! 
this is how we deal with the guilty .
say :  god alone has knowledge . my duty is only to warn you clearly . 
and , o my people ! ask forgiveness of your lord , then turn to him ; he will send on you clouds pouring down abundance of rain and add strength to your strength , and do not turn back guilty .
and do not incline towards the unjust , for the fire will touch you – and you do not have any supporter other than allah – then you will not be helped .
believers , do not say to the prophet ,  ra'ina  but say ,  unzurna ,  and listen to him with attention . for those who deny the truth , there is a painful punishment .
that is of the tidings of the cities we relate to thee ; some of them are standing and some stubble .
and how many a village have i respited in its evil doing ! then i seized it . to me is the return .
there are happy tidings for those who keep away from the worship of false gods and turn to god in repentance . give glad tidings to my creatures .
and when we wish to destroy a town , we send our commandment to the people of it who lead easy lives , but they transgress therein ; thus the word proves true against it , so we destroy it with utter destruction .
do they not see the birds , constrained in the middle of the sky ? none withholds them but allah ; most surely there are signs in this for a people who believe .
by the night as it envelops ;
excepting the weak ones among men , women and children , unable to find a stratagem and not guided to a way .
and whereas before this exists the book of moosa , a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book giving testimony , in the arabic language , to warn the unjust ; and to give glad tidings to the virtuous .
thus , in the end , both will find themselves in the fire , therein to abide : that is the reward of evil-doers .
and those who disbelieve say : why has not a sign been sent down upon him from his lord ? you are only a warner anda guide for every people .
do they watch and wait for anything except for days similar to those who passed away before them ? say : 'wait ; i shall be with you among those who arewaiting '
a proud group among shu'ayb 's people said ,  we must expel youand your followers from our town unless you give-up your faith and live as our own people .  shu'ayb asked them ,  will you use force against us ?
when allah showed them to you as few in yourdream , if he had shown them to you as many , you would surely have been discouraged , and you would surely have disputed in making a decision . but allah saved . certainly , he is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
what they spend in this life is like the freezing wind that may strike and destroy the farms of the people who have wronged themselves . god has not done injustice to them , but they have wronged themselves .
such are those whom allah has cursed , making them deaf and blinding their eyes .
he who obeys the messenger , has indeed obeyed allah , but he who turns away , then we have not sent youas a watcher over them .
and the horn will be blown ; and at once from the graves to their lord they will hasten .
briefenjoyment , after which a painful punishment awaits them .
and he shall speak to men in the cradle and also later when he grows to maturity and shall indeed be among the righteous . '
and a fifththat the wrath of allah be upon her if he speaketh truth .
and that which they had earned did not help them .
when those who deny the truth hear the admonition , they would almost cause you to stumble with their evil eyes ; and they say ,  he is certainly mad . 
then the wrong-doers among them substituted another word in place of the one told them . so we sent upon them a scourge from the heaven as a punishment for their wrong-doing .
your lord is self-sufficient and merciful . had he wanted , he could have destroyed you and replaced you by other people , just as he had created you from the offspring of others .
or feeding on a day of severe hunger
and verily , you will find themthe greediest of mankind for life andthan those who - ascribe partners to allah . everyone of them wishes that he could be given a life of a thousand years . but the grant of such life will not save him even a little frompunishment . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
be aware that it is out of their mendacity that they say ,
except those who repent and come to believe and do the right , for whom god will turn evil into goodness , for god is forgiving and kind .
and if it be said unto them : follow that which allah hath revealed , they say : nay , but we follow that wherein we found our fathers . what ! even though the devil were inviting them unto the doom of flame ?
but as for those whose weights are light—it is they who have lost their souls , because they used to mistreat our revelations .
and when abraham said , 'my lord , show me how thou wilt give life to the dead , ' he said , 'why , dost thou not believe ? ' 'yes , ' he said , 'but that my heart may be at rest . ' said he , 'take four birds , and twist them to thee , then set a part of them on every hill , then summon them , and they will come to thee running . and do thou know that god is all-mighty , all-wise . '
the faithful are surely brothers ; so restore friendship among your brothers , and fear god that you may be favoured .
praying at dawn for god 's pardon ,
abiding therein as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except what your lord should will . indeed , your lord is an effecter of what he intends .
if we had mercy on them and removed their afflictions , they would still persist in their insolence , blindly wandering .
those who belied shu'aib became as though they had never dwelt therein ; those who belied shu'aib , it is they who became the losers .
and the severally severing
so be steadfast , and you can not be steadfast except with allah . and do not grieve for them , nor be upset by their guile .
he said , ' o my lord , forgive me and my brother and enter us into thy mercy ; thou art the most merciful of the merciful . '
turning aside disdainfully to leadastray from the way of allah . for such there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we will make him taste the punishment of the burning :
and thy lord is best aware of all who are in the heavens and the earth . and we preferred some of the prophets above others , and unto david we gave the psalms .
indeed for the godwary there will be gardens of bliss near their lord .
and who will renounce the religion of ibrahim except him who is a fool at heart ? we indeed chose himin this world ; and indeed in the hereafter he is among those worthy of being closest to us .
say , ‘ indeed , should i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a tremendous day . ’
and they say : if only he would bring us a miracle from his lord ! hath there not come unto them the proof of what is in the former scriptures ?
when they are told :  come to that which god has revealed , and to the prophet ,  you should see the hypocrites , how they hesitate and turn their faces away .
when abraham , said to his father and his nation : ' i am quit from what you worship ,
and if they firmly decide to divorce them , allah is all hearing , all knowing .
and they say ,  obedience .  but when they leave you , a group of them spend the night determining to do other than what you say . but allah records what they plan by night . so leave them alone and rely upon allah . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
he created the heavens and earth in truth and formed you and perfected your forms ; and to him is thedestination .
when you were fleeing without paying any attention to anyone , while the apostle was calling you from your rear , he requited you with grief upon grief , so that you may not grieve for what you lose nor for what befalls you , and allah is well aware of what you do .
therefor hath he no lover here this day ,
this book , beyond all doubt , was revealed by the lord of the universe .
and we did not send before you any apostle but we revealed to him that there is no god but me , therefore serve me .
look , therefore , at the prints of allah 's mercy : how he quickeneth the earth after her death . lo ! he verily is the quickener of the dead , and he is able to do all things .
we will provide them with fruits and meat , such as they desire .
but it will be ignored by the most unfortunate ,
among the believers there are those who have remained true to the covenant they made with allah . among those some of them have fulfilled their vow and others await the appointed time . they have not changed in the least .
on the day a man will flee from his brother
there is truly a reminder in this for whoever has a heart , whoever listens attentively .
and surely i am going to send a present to them , and shall wait to see whatdo the apostles bring back .
except as a mercy from your lord . verily ! his grace unto youis ever great .
there are people who say to their parents ,  fie upon you ! are you telling us that we shall be raised from our graves ? so many people have died before us and  their parents plead to god and say to their child ,  woe to you ! have faith ; the promise of god is certainly true  they reply ,  what you say is only ancient legends  .
of theiram , with lofty pillars ,
the polytheists will say , “ had god willed , we would not have practiced idolatry , nor would have our forefathers , nor would we have prohibited anything. ” likewise those before them lied , until they tasted our might . say , “ do you have any knowledge that you can produce for us ? you follow nothing but conjecture , and you only guess . ”
or that he may catch them with gradual wasting . truly ! your lord is indeed full of kindness , most merciful ?
and when your lord said to the angels : surely i am going to create a mortal of the essence of black mud fashioned in shape .
indeed the faithful are those who have faith in allah and his apostle , and when they are with him in a collective affair , they do not leave until they have sought his permission . indeed those who seek your permission are those who have faith in allah and his apostle . so when they seek your permission for some of theirswork , give permission to whomever of them you wish and plead with allah to forgive them . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
those who responded to allah and the apostleafter they had been wounded—for those of them who have been virtuous and godwary there shall be a great reward .
they had already vowed before god that they would never turn their backs : and a vow made to god must be answered for .
 'and that i guide thee to thy lord , so thou shouldst fear him ? ' 
soon shall the hosts be routed , and they shall turnbacks .
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a seizure exceeding .
 further , make him march in a chain , whereof the length is seventy cubits !
then turned his back and waxed proud ,
and when moses was about to seize he who was the enemy of both of them , he said : 'moses , would you kill me as you killed a living soul yesterday ? you desire only to be a tyrant in the land , and you do not want to be among the reformers '
and we raised over them the mount fortheir covenant ; and we said to them ,  enter the gate bowing humbly  , and we said to them ,  do not transgress on the sabbath  , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
they said ,  o our people , we have heard a book , which has been sent down after moses , fulfilling the predictions existing in previous scriptures ; it guides to the truth , and to the right path .
he has the keys of the heavens and the earth ; and those who deny the revelations of god will be losers .
they said ,  it is all the same to us whether you advise or are not of the advisors .
the day when the punishment will envelop them from above them and from below their feet , and he will say , “ taste the flavour of your deeds ! ”
and throwing up sparks as huge as towers
and man will cry out : “ what is the matter with her ? ”
but pharaoh said :  you have come to accept belief in him without my permission ! this surely is a plot you have hatched to expel the people from the land . you will soon come to know .
the virtuous will live in bliss ,
and we have sent down from the rain-clouds water plenteous .
and we destroyed the others .
 i had no knowledge of the chiefson high when they were disputing and discussing .
who are more unjust than those who invent falsehoods against god and reject his revelations ? these will have their sharewhich is ordained for them and when ourmessengers come to them to cause them to die and ask them ,  where are those whom you had been worshipping besides god ?  they will reply ,  we had gone astray from the path of god .  thus , they will testify against their own souls by confessing their disbelief .
kill you joseph , or cast him forth into some land , that your father 's face may be free for you , and thereafter you may be a righteous people . '
 our lord ! i have made some of my offspring settle in a barren valley near your sacred house ! our lord ! i did so that they may establish prayer . so make the hearts of people affectionately inclined to them , and provide them with fruits for their sustenance that they may give thanks .
say , “ you are promised a day , which you can not postpone by one hour , nor bring forward . ”
doerof all that he intends .
and those who , when reminded of the revelations of their lord , do not fall before them deaf and blind .
and long not for that wherewith allah hath preferred one of you above anot her unto men shall be the portion of that which they earn , and unto women shall be the portion of that which they earn . and ask allah for some of his grace , verily allah is of everything knower .
nay , but the hour is their appointed time , and the hour will be more grievous and more bitter .
there is no denying that it will befall -
how many a prophet we have sent to the former peoples !
we and our fathers were promised this before ; these are but old stories . 
master of the honourable throne .
and those who of their private parts are guards .
the day on which their struggle shall not avail them aught , nor shall they be helped .
when they reached the junction of the two seas they found out that they had forgotten all about the fish . the fish found its way into the sea .
certainly we sent noah and abraham and we ordained among their descendants prophethood and the book . some of them areguided , and many of them are transgressors .
argue not with the people of the book except in the fairest manner , unless it be those of them that are utterly unjust . say to them : “ we believe in what was revealed to us and what was revealed to you . one is our god and your god ; and we are those who submit ourselves to him . ”
and led themby deceit . when they tastedof the tree their disgrace became exposed to them ; and they patched the leaves of the garden to hide it . and the lord said to them :  did i not forbid you this tree ? and i told you that satan was your open enemy .
and when they see you , , they take you not except in ridicule , ,  is this the one whom allah has sent as a messenger ?
say ,  we have believed in allah and in what was revealed to us and what was revealed to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob , and the descendants , and in what was given to moses and jesus and to the prophets from their lord . we make no distinction between any of them , and we are muslimsto him . 
it is out of his mercy that he has made for you night and day that you may reposeand seek his bountythat you might be grateful .
and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences , their argument is only that they say ,  bringour forefathers , if you should be truthful . 
and strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said :  our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth . we shall invoke no god beside him , for we shall have uttered a blasphemy then .
but recite the name of your lord withdrawing yourself from everything , devoting yourself exclusively to him .
with authority there , faithful to his trust .
and indeed we have left thereof an evident ayahfor a folk who understand .
vision comprehendeth him not , but he comprehendethvision . he is the subtile , the aware .
butturned back with his chiefs , and said ,  a sorcerer , or one possessed ! 
such is the way of allah in days gone by , and you shall find no change in the ways of allah .
when some trouble toucheth man , he crieth unto his lord , turning to him in repentance : but when he bestoweth a favour upon him as from himself , doth forget what he cried and prayed for before , and he doth set up rivals unto allah , thus misleading others from allah 's path . say ,  enjoy thy blasphemy for a little while : verily thou artof the companions of the fire ! 
even so do we recompense the good-doers .
tell them : “ yes ; and you are utterly helpless . ”
then , if they do not answer you , know that it has been sent down with god 's knowledge , and that there is no god but he . so have you surrendered ?
o prophet ! wage jihad against the faithless and the hypocrites , and be severe with them . their refuge will be hell , and it is an evil destination .
certainly not ! there will be no place of refuge .
do not marry women who associate partners with god until they believe . a believing bondwoman is better than a woman who associates partners with god , however pleasing she may appear to you . nor give believing women in marriage to men who associate partners with god , till they have believed ; a believing bondman is certainly better than a man who associates partners with god , even though he may please you . such people call you to hell-fire ; but god calls you to paradise and to forgiveness . he makes his messages clear to people , so that they might bear them in mind .
then the pangs of childbirth brought her to the base of the palm-tree ; she said , “ oh , if only had i died before this and had become forgotten , unremembered . ”
to allah belongs all that is in heaven and earth . it is sufficient that allah is a guardian .
you see many among them vie with one another in sin and transgression and practice what is unlawful . it is vile indeed what they have been doing !
and who believe in what has been revealed to you , , and what was revealed before you , and of the hereafter they are certain .
and they denied them unjustly and proudly while their soul had been convinced of them ; consider , then how was the end of the mischief-makers .
that is because they hated what allah has sent down , so he annulled their deeds .
he said , ‘ my lord ! the prison is dearer to me than to what they invite me . if you do not turn away their schemes from me , i will incline towards them and become one of the senseless . ’
before this , we used to pray to him . he is the good , the compassionate . ”
and say unto those who believe not : act according to your power . lo ! weare acting .
they said 'shu'aib , we do not understand much of what you say to us . indeed , we see you weak among us . if it was not for your tribe we would have stoned you because you are not strong against us '
children of adam ! if messengers come to you from among yourselves , reciting my revelations to you , then those that take warning and mend their ways , on such shall come no fear nor shall they grieve .
if you do good deeds , you will for your own good – and if you commit evil , it is for yourself ; therefore when the second of those promises came – so the enemy maim your faces , and enter the mosque as they had entered it the first time , and destroy until they ruin all they could capture .
by the lord of the heavens and the earth , this is certainly true even as you speak .
when it does not behove the merciful to have a son .
she said : verily seek refuge with the compassionate from thee if thou art god-fearing .
the verses of this book have been fully expounded . it is a reading in the arabic language for the people of knowledge .
peace be upon me on the day i was born , and on the day i die ; and on the day when i shall be raised up alive '
indeed , those who disbelieve - never will their wealth or their children avail them against allah at all . and it is they who are fuel for the fire .
was there none but he to whom the reminder could be vouchsafed excluding all others ? nay ; he is an insolent liar . ”
and we shall turn to whatever deeds theydid , and we shall make such deeds as scattered floating particles of dust .
and we redeemed him with a great sacrifice .
they said :  we are men of valour , and brave fighters . it is for you to decide . so consider what you should command . 
and your lord is rich , full of mercy , if he will , he can destroy you , and in your place make whom he will as your successors , as he raised you from the seed of other people .
that , because they pursued what displeased allah , and loathed his pleasure . so he has made their works fail .
then wherefore succoured them not those whom they had taken for gods beside allah , as a means of approach ? aye ! they failed them . and that was their lie , that which they had been fabricating .
when they are told , ‘ do not cause corruption on the earth , ’ they say , ‘ we are only reformers ! ’
imade themnot to witnessthe creation of the heavens and the earth and nottheir own creation , nor was ito take the misleaders as helpers .
when the buried infant shall be asked
we sent a revelation to moses saying ,  strike the sea with your staff .  the sea was rent asunder and each side stood high up like a huge mountain .
to be a messenger to the children of israel saying ,  i have come to you with a sign from your lord . i will create for you out of clay as the likeness of a bird ; then i will breathe into it , and it will be a bird , by the leave of god . i will also heal the blind and the leper , and bring to life the dead , by the leave of god . i will inform you too of what things you eat , and what you treasure up in your houses . surely in that is a sign for you , if you are believers .
he did not believe in god the supreme ,
and who causeth me to die , then giveth me life ,
and put your hand into the opening of your garment ; it will come out white without disease.among the nine signsto pharaoh and his people . indeed , they have been a people defiantly disobedient . 
“ what drove you to hell ? ”
lo ! allah and his angels shower blessings on the prophet . o ye who believe ! ask blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation .
and he has no authority over them , but that we may distinguish him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it ; and your lord is the preserver of all things
a scripture that we have revealed unto thee , full of blessing , that they may ponder its revelations , and that men of understanding may reflect .
even so , and we made it an inheritance for other folk ;
and his wife was standing , and she smiled . then we gave her good tidings of isaac and after isaac , jacob .
it was not in idle sport that we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them .
everything in the heavens and earth glorifies god -- he is the mighty , the wise one .
the evils of what they did will become evident to them , and the very thing they ridiculed will haunt them .
the number of months , according to god , is twelve months—in the decree of god—since the day he created the heavens and the earth , of which four are sacred . this is the correct religion . so do not wrong yourselves during them . and fight the polytheists collectively , as they fight you collectively , and know that god is with the righteous .
and fight in the way of allah with those who fight with you , and do not exceed the limits , surely allah does not love those who exceed the limits .
nay , but allah must thou serve , and be among the thankful !
what is the matter with you that you do not speak ? 
they say : 'if we follow the guidance with you , we shall be driven from our land ' but have we not given them a secure sanctuary from which fruits of every kind are collected as a provision from us ? indeed , most of them do not know .
but they turned away ; so we loosed on them the flood of arim , and we gave them , in exchange for their two gardens , two gardens bearing bitter produce and tamarisk-bushes , and here and there a few lote-trees .
 verily ! they are enemies to me , save the lord of the 'alamin ;
and glorify him in the night and when the stars begin to wane .
surely hell lies in wait ,
the unbelievers of the people of the book and the idolaters would never leave off ; till the clear sign came to them ,
and they swear by allah that they are surely of you , whereas they are not of you ; but they are a people who dread .
or say ,  our fathers worshipped idols before us and we as their descendants followed them . would you then destroy us because of what the followers of falsehood have done ? 
surely , i will punish him with a terrible punishment , or i will slaughter him or he gives me a good reason '
repentance with allah is only for those who do evil in ignorance , then turnsoon , so these it is to whom allah turns , and allah is ever knowing , wise .
he said : go down , one of you a foe unto the other . there will be for you on earth a habitation and provision for a while .
and of men is he who takes instead frivolous discourse to lead astray from allah 's path without knowledge , and to take it for a mockery ; these shall have an abasing chastisement .
arise and warn !
they said : we do not prefer you to what has come to us of clear arguments and to he who made us , therefore decide what you are going to decide ; you can only decide about this world 's life .
they replied : 'its recompense in whosoever 's saddle bag it is found , he shall be its recompense . as such we punish the harmdoers '
the messengers would say ,  would you still follow in the footsteps of your fathers even if i was to bring you better guidance ?  they would say ,  we have no faith in your message  .
but not such of them as are thy bondmen single-hearted .
allah sufficeth as a witness between us and you , that we were unaware of your worship .
nay , verily , thisis an admonition ,
and seek forgiveness from allah ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
the jews say ,  the christians have no ground to stand on ,  and the christians say ,  the jews have no ground to stand on .  yet they both recite the book , and those who have no knowledge say the same ; god will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning their disputes .
do not be discouraged or grieved . you alone will have true dignity if you only are true believers .
then he shall find himself in a life of bliss ;
indeed , allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and allah is the seer of what you do '
the proud oppressors said ,  we reject that which you believe in  .
yet thy lord never destroyed the cities until he sent in their mother-city a messenger , to recite our signs unto them ; and we never destroyed the cities , save that their inhabitants were evildoers .
have we not expanded your chest for you ,
and those who are in the fire shall say to the keepers of hell : call upon your lord that he may lighten to us one day of the punishment .
he will certainly admit them to a place they will love ; and indeed allah is all knowing , most forbearing .
they say , ‘ we have greater wealth and more children , and we will not be punished ! ’
that is the one , who drives away the orphan ,
had we intended to take a diversion , we could have taken it fromwith us - ifwe were to do so .
and he brought those of the people of the scripture who supported them down from their strongholds , and cast panic into their hearts . some ye slew , and ye made captive some .
the unbelievers say ,  when will the day of judgment come if what you say is at all true ? 
until , when they came upon the valley of ants , an ant said , “ o ants ! go into your nests , lest solomon and his troops crush you without noticing . ”
no indeed ; surely , if he gives not over , we shall seize him by the forelock ,
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian , but he was a monotheist , a muslim . and he was not of the polytheists .
 and the whole hosts of iblis together .
when the wife of 'imran said : my lord ! i have vowed unto thee that which is in my belly as a consecrated . accept it from me . lo ! thou , only thou , art the hearer , the knower !
and they wished to cause him harm , so we made them the greatest of losers .
and has there come to you the story of the litigants , when they made an entry into the private chamber by ascending over the walls ?
then after them sent we moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs . but they were arrogant : they were a people in sin .
this is an unfair distinction !
then of them were some who believed therein , and of them were some who turned aside therefrom , and hell -will suffice as a flame .
undoubtedly , allah knows whatever they hide and whatever they disclose . indeed , he does not like the arrogant .
we created man of a sperm-drop , a mingling , and we made him hearing , seeing .
there is none to avert it .
you would see the inferno .
is it they who apportion the mercy of your lord ? it is we who distribute among them their livelihood in the life of this world , and raise some of them above others in rank , so that they may take one another into service ; and the mercy of your lord is better thanwhich they amass .
they say :  how is it that no sign was sent by his lord ?  tell them :  unknown things are only known to god . so watch and wait ; i am waiting and expecting with you . 
everyone in the heavens and the earth asks him . every day he is managing .
who will face the humiliating torment and suffer everlasting retribution  .
allah forgiveth not that partners should be set up with him ; but he forgiveth anything else , to whom he pleaseth ; to set up partners with allah is to devise a sin most heinous indeed .
and of his signs is , thathe created for you from yourselves pouses that ye may find repose in them , and he set between you affection and mercy . verily herein are signs for a people who ponder .
andthose who reject our communications and the meeting of the hereafter , their deeds are null . shall they be rewarded except for what they have done ?
say : ye , in truth ; and ye will be brought low .
these are the verses of the clear book .
this it is which allah announceth unto his bondmen who believe and do good works . say : i ask of you no fee therefor , save lovingkindness among kinsfolk . and whoso scoreth a good deed we add unto its good for him . lo ! allah is forgiving , responsive .
this book is revealed from god the majestic and all-wise .
only those fabricate lies who do not believe in the signs of allah , and it is they who are the liars .
they hate to see your success and rejoice if any misfortune befalls you . if you will be patient and pious , their plots can cause no harm to you . god has control over all their actions .
to those whose hearts when allah is mentioned , are filled with fear , who show patient perseverance over their afflictions , keep up regular prayer , and spendout of what we have bestowed upon them .
it is not for the mushrikun , to maintain the mosques of allah , while they witness against their ownselves of disbelief . the works of such are in vain and in fire shall they abide .
it was said : enter thou the garden . he said : would that my people knew .
except our first death , and shall we not be punished '
and you are not serving what i serve ,
hesaid to aaron : 'when you saw them in error , what prevented you ,
they swear by allah solemnly that , if thou order them , they will go forth . say : swear not ; known obedience . lo ! allah is informed of what ye do .
and we prescribed for them therein : the life for the life , and the eye for the eye , and the nose for the nose , and the ear for the ear , and the tooth for the tooth , and for wounds retaliation . but whoso forgoeth itit shall be expiation for him . whoso judgeth not by that which allah hath revealed : such are wrong-doers .
 we do not come down ,   but only by your lord 's command .  to him belongs whatever lies before us and behind us , and the space in between . your lord does not ever forget :
did he not make their plan into misguidance ?
when the wife of imran said , 'lord , i have vowed to thee , in dedication , what is within my womb . receive thou this from me ; thou hearest , and knowest . '
and have patience with what they say , and leave them with noble .
o ye who believe ! enter not houses other than your own , until ye have asked permission and saluted those in them : that is best for you , in order that ye may heed .
do not lean towards the wicked , or you will be caught in the flames of hell , and have none to befriend you other than god , nor will you be given help .
and they shall tender submission to allah on that day ; and what they used to forge shall depart from them .
emerging from between the backbone and the ribs .
excepting those thy servants among them that are sincere . '
say : if you love allah , then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your faults , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they shall have no protectors to help them against allah . for he whom allah causes to go astray will have no way to save himself .
and when thy lord said to the angels , ' i am setting in the earth a viceroy . ' they said , 'what , wilt thou set therein one who will do corruption there , and shed blood , while we proclaim thy praise and call thee holy ? ' he said , 'assuredly i know that you know not . '
say : 'if i go astray , then i go astray only against myself ; if i am guided it is because of that which my lord has revealed to me . he is the hearer , and thenear '
on the day when the secrets are disclosed .
answer the call of your lordbefore there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . you will have no refuge on that day nor there will be for you any denying .
god knows what you hide and disclose .
send with us the children of isra'il ?
then they all shall be taken back unto allah , their true master . lo ! his shall be the judgement . and he is the most swift of reckoners .
when the fetters and chains are on their necks , and they dragged
say ,  i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
 verily , we fear from our lord a day , hard and distressful , that will make the faces look horrible . 
 that you worship none but allah , surely , i fear for you the torment of a painful day . 
and they will say , “ praise god , who has lifted all sorrow from us . our lord is most forgiving , most appreciative .
he will forgive for you your sins and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow and pleasant dwellings in gardens of perpetual residence . that is the great attainment .
a provision for you and for your cattle .
the disbelievers among the people of the book and the pagans will dwell forever in hell ; they are the worst of all creatures .
for every community we have ordained certain rites that they may commemorate the name of god by reading it over the cattle we have given them for sacrifice . your god is one god , so be obedient to him . give good tidings to those who bow in obedience to god ,
this is a reminder and it sharpens the insight of every servant of god who turns to him in repentance .
your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection regarding everything they had disputed .
then most surely their return shall be to hell .
no eye can see him , though he sees all eyes . he is the subtle , the aware .
and fear the day in which you will be returned to allah ; and every soul will be paid back in full what it had earned , and they will not be wronged .
and if we had ordered them ,  kill yourselvesor leave your homes ,  very few of them would have done it ; but if they had done what they were told , it would have been better for them , and would have strengthened their ;
lo ! with hardship goeth ease ;
they said , “ you are nothing but humans like us , and the gracious did not send down anything ; you are only lying . ”
o you who have faith ! do not be like the faithless who say of their brethren , when they travel in the land or go into battle , ‘ had they stayed with us they would not have died or been killed , ’ so that allah may make it a regret in their hearts . but allah gives life and brings death , and allah watches what you do .
and from the evil of the witches , who blow on knots ,
but those who strive against our revelations , challenging , theirs will be a painful doom of wrath .
and believe not save one who followeth your religion . say thou : verily the guidance of allah - that is the guidance . envy ye that any one should be vouchsafed the like of that which was vouchsafed unto you or fear ye that those others may overcome you in contention before your lord ! say thou : verily the grace is in the hand of allah he vouchsafeth it unto whomsoever he will ; and allah is bounteous , knowing .
and it is he who created the stars for you , that you may be guided by them in the darkness of land and sea . we thus explain the revelations for people who know .
and remember you greatly .
do not cry out for help this day , for surely you shall not be helped by us .
, god , who has commanded you to follow the guidance of the quran , will certainly return you victoriously to your place of birth . say ,  my lord knows best who has brought guidance and who is in plain error . 
so they denied them bothand harun ] and became of those who were destroyed .
the righteous and pious of those who have pledged obedience to god and the messenger , after injury had befallen them , will receive a great reward .
then we split the earth properly .
 i am sent only to warn plainly in public . 
the multitude will be defeated , and they will turn their backs .
say : 'journey in the land and see what was the end of the sinners '
and his kin that sheltered him .
even though he offers his excuses .
the baptism of god ; and who is there that baptizes fairer than god ? him we are serving .
lo ! thy lord will judge between them of his wisdom , and he is the mighty , the wise .
you can not challenge god in the heavens or in the earth . no one besides god is your guardian or helper .
it is for allah to show the way . some swerve from it , but had he willed , he would have guided all of you .
and makeyour provision that you deny ?
the bedouins who lag behind in taking part in the battle say to you ,  ask forgiveness for us ; we were busy with our property and household .  they speak what is not in their hearts . , tell them ,  who will help you against god , if he intends to harm you , who will prevent him from benefitting you ? in fact , god is well aware of whatever you do  .
indeed , we know that your breast is straitened at what they say .
then we saved him and those with him in the ship , and made itas an ayahfor the 'alamin .
and when the magicians arrived , they said to pharaoh ,  is there indeed for us a reward if we are the predominant ? 
say ,  on the day of the final triumph , the faith of the disbelievers will be of no avail to them , nor will they be given any respite  .
i am only a clear warner . 
surely my guardian is allah , who revealed the book , and he befriends the good .
and that he only is the lord of the star sirius ?
allah had already given you the victory at badr , when ye were contemptible . so observe your duty to allah in order that ye may be thankful .
and we bestowed upon him ishaqand yaqub ; we guided all of them ; and we guided nooh before them and of his descendants , dawud and sulaiman and ayyub and yusuf and moosa and haroon ; and this is the way we reward the virtuous .
have you ) seen himwho prevents ,
and if only they had acted according to the taurat , the injeel , and what hasbeen sent down to them from their lord , they would surely have gotten provision from above them and from underneath their feet . there are from among them people who are on the right course , but many of them do evil deeds .
a servant when he prays ,
allah sends down water from the sky with which he revives the earth after its death . there is indeed a sign in that for a people who listen .
from the evil of darkness when it gathers ,
i am a trustworthy messengers .
and who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , or says , , 'to me it has been revealed ' , when naught has been revealed to him , or he who says , ' i will send down the like of what god has sent down ' ? if thou couldst only see when the evildoers are in the agonies of death , and the angels are stretching out their hands : 'give up your souls ! today you shall be recompensed with the chastisement of humiliation for what you said untruly about god , waxing proud against his signs . '
we have explained in various ways all things to men in this qur'an ; but of all things man is most contentious .
how ! are they still in doubt about the meeting with their lord ? lo ! is not he surrounding all things ?
none will eat it except the sinners .
we have put forth for men , in this qur'an every kind of parable , in order that they may receive admonition .
on that day , the inevitable event will take place
even if they were to see some fragments of the sky falling down they would still say : “ it is only a mass of cloud . ”
or do you , , ask them for payment ? but the reward of your lord is best , and he is the best of providers .
or have they contrived some matter ? we too are contriving .
do not forestallby acting in haste .
when they met goliath and his warriors , they said ,  our lord , bestow patience upon us , make us stand firm , and help us against those who deny the truth . 
then on that day , the resurrection will occur ,
in arrogance ; talking nonsense about the quran , and left him like one telling fables by night .
they pray to him whose bane is more imminent than his boon : how bad the protector and how bad the associate !
thamud rejected warnings
so enter the gates of hell , and dwell there for ever . how dreadful a dwelling for the haughty !
so when they went away with joseph and decided to cast him in the bottom of the dark pit , we revealed to joseph :  surely a time will come when you will remind them of their deed . they know nothing about the consequence of what they are doing . 
but for those who truly feared their lord , there will be tall mansions , built up storey upon storey , beneath which there will be rivers flowing . this is god 's promise : god never fails in his promise .
when he said to his people , “ do you not fear ? ”
and whosoever seeketh beyond that , then it is those who are the trespassers
: peace be unto you because ye persevered . ah , passing sweet will be the sequel of thehome .
not at all – but rather their earnings have heaped rust upon their hearts .
and when they havefulfilled their term , either retain them according to acceptable terms or part with them according to acceptable terms . and bring to witness two just men from among you and establish the testimony forallah . that is instructed to whoever should believe in allah and the last day . and whoever fears allah - he will make for him a way out
except for our first death , and we will not be punished ? 
the lord replied ,  moses , the prayer of your brother and yourself has been heard . both of you must be steadfastand must not follow the ignorant ones . 
he has power over his creatures , and appoints guardians to watch over them . when death comes to one of you , our messengers take away his soul , and do not falter .
when he become matured and grow to manhood , we granted him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the righteous ones .
have theytransmitted this saying to these ? nay , they are themselves a people transgressing beyond bounds !
and of abraham , who lived up to the trust ?
it will be the day when they are tormented at the fire .
and have patience , , for lo ! allah loseth not the wages of the good .
and settle you on the land to succeed them . that isfor anyone who is in awe of meeting me , and who heeds my warnings . 
if those are expelled , they will not go forth with them , and if they are fought against , they will not help them . even if they helped them , they would surely turn their backs , then they would not be helped .
then ask them :  are they stronger as creation , or thosewhom we have created ?  verily , we created them of a sticky clay .
and with fruit from that which they choose .
and then said , “ i am your most supreme lord . ”
and when she heard of their sly talk , she sent to them and prepared for them a cushioned couchand gave to every one of them a knife and said : come out unto them ! and when they saw him they exalted him and cut their hands , exclaiming : allah blameless ! this is no a human being . this is not other than some gracious angel .
firaun and the tribe of thamud .
now , allah has lightenedfor you , and he knows that among you is weakness . so if there are from you one hundredsteadfast , they will overcome two hundred . and if there are among you a thousand , they will overcome two thousand by permission of allah . and allah is with the steadfast .
those who do wrong will have their turn , like the turn of their counterparts , so let them not rush me .
ha , meem .
rather prostrate yourselves before allah and serve him .
by the night when it departs .
this is clear proofs for men , and a guidance , and a mercy to a people having sure faith .
'taste your trial . this is what you have sought to hasten '
the angels said :  o mary , indeed god has favoured you and made you immaculate , and chosen you from all the women of the world .
rather , they say like what the former peoples said .
allah effaces usury and nurtures charity . allah does not love any ungrateful sinner .
you alone we worship , and to you alone we turn for help .
they bartered their lives ill denying the revelation of god out of spite that god should bestow his grace among his votaries on whomsoever he will , and thus earned wrath upon wrath . the punishment for disbelievers is ignominious .
our lord ! do not make us a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! surely thou art the mighty , the wise .
alif . lam . ra . these are verses of the wise scripture .
so fear god and follow me .
blame lies on those who wrong people , and commit aggression in the land without right . these will have a painful punishment .
nor do i serve what you serve .
and kind to my mother , and he did not make me a disobedient rebel .
knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the wise .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ; most surely there is a sign in this for the believers .
said to the chief of her messengers who brought the present ] :  go back to them . we verily shall come to them with hosts that they can not resist , and we shall drive them out from there in disgrace , and they will be abased . 
those whom theyinvoke besides allah have not created anything , but are themselves created .
and to us belong the world and the hereafter .
and they say ,  what is this messenger that eats food and walks in the markets ? why was there not sent down to him an angel so he would be with him a warner ?
man is indeed in loss ,
when the pregnant camels are neglected ,
and ishmael , elisha , jonah , and lot whom we exalted over all people .
you are the best nation producedfor mankind . you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and believe in allah . if only the people of the scripture had believed , it would have been better for them . among them are believers , but most of them are defiantly disobedient .
 i will mislead them , and i will create in them false desires ; i will order them to slit the ears of cattle , and to deface thenature created by allah .  whoever , forsaking allah , takes satan for a friend , hath of a surety suffered a loss that is manifest .
so we took vengeance on them , and indeed the two of them are on an open highway .
never will their torment be lightened for them . they shall remain in utter despair .
the affair does not rest on your thoughts , nor the cravings of the people given the book ; whoever does wrong will get the recompense of it – and will not find , other than allah , any friend or any supporter .
those whom they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who are witness to the truth and who know .
they , , have said that their cattle and farms are dedicated to private idols and that no one can consumeexcept those whom we wanted , in their opinion . they prohibited the riding of certain animals and they ate the flesh of certain animals slaughtered without a mention of the name of god . instead , they ascribed falsehood to him . they will all be given an evil recompense for their sinful invention .
believers , turn to god in sincere repentance . your lord may well forgive your bad deeds and admit you into gardens watered by running streams , on a day when god will not abase the prophet and those who have believed with him . their light will shine out ahead of them and on their right , and they will say :  lord perfect our light for us , and forgive us ; you have power over all things . 
then we poured down upon them a rain . evil was that rain for those who had been warned !
the sinners were seized by a blast from heaven , and lay overturned in their homes in the morning ,
who is more wrong than he , who , when reminded of his lord ’ s revelations , turns away from them ? we will certainly wreak vengeance upon the criminals .
know they not that allah knows their secret ideas , and their najwa , and that allah is the all-knower of the unseen .
so when talut departed with the forces , he said : surely allah will try you with a river ; whoever then drinks from it , he is not of me , and whoever does not taste of it , he is surely of me , except he who takes with his hand as much of it as fills the hand ; but with the exception of a few of them they drank from it . so when he had crossed it , he and those who believed with him , they said : we have today no power against jalut and his forces . those who were sure that they would meet their lord said : how often has a small party vanquished a numerous host by allah 's permission , and allah is with the patient .
it was not becoming of the people of al-madinah and the bedouins of the neighbourhood to remain behind allah 's messengerandto prefer their own lives to his life . that is because they suffer neither thirst nor fatigue , nor hunger in the cause of allah , nor they take any step to raise the anger of disbelievers nor inflict any injury upon an enemy but is written to their credit as a deed of righteousness . surely , allah wastes not the reward of the muhsinun
they ask you about women 's menses . tell them ,  it is an ailment . avoid having carnal relations with them until their period is over .  then you may have carnal relations with them according to the rules of god . god loves those who repent and those who purify themselves .
enter hell now to abide in it . how woeful is the abode of those who wax proud !
and hehad no authority over them , except that we might test him , who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . and your lord is a hafiz over everything . .
indeed , we have adorned the nearest heaven with an adornment of stars
in that is a sign for him who fears the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind shall be gathered together , a day when all will be present .
peace be with abraham .
but if it gets known that these two were guilty of the sin , let two others stand forth in their places , - nearest in kin from among those who claim a lawful right : let them swear by allah :  we affirm that our witness is truer than that of those two , and that we have not trespassed : if we did , behold ! the wrong be upon us ! 
among his signs are your sleep , at night or in daytime , and your seeking his bounty . there truly are signs in this for people who hear .
i am your lord . take off your shoes ; you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they can not intercede without his permission . indeed they themselves stand in awe of him .
and a good land : its herbage cometh forth by the command of its lord ; and that which is vile , it cometh forth only scantily . in this wise we vary the signs for a people who return thanks .
no ! rather , the stain has covered their hearts of that which they were earning .
but they denied him , and we seized them with the torment of the day of shadowing . it was indeed the torment of a terrible day !
even as your lord caused you to go forth from your house with the truth , though a party of the believers were surely averse ;
they say ,  has invented itby himself .  say ,  had i invented it , you would not have been able to rescue me from god . he knows best what you say about it . he is our witness and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful  .
leave to me the one , whom i have created all by myself ,
those who listen to the word and then follow the best it contains , are the ones who have been guided by god , and are men of wisdom .
but when they became remorseful and realised they had gone astray , they said , ‘ should our lord have no mercy on us , and forgive us , we will be surely among the losers . ’
and by the sun and its brightness ;
say :  if you have knowledge , 'to whom belongs the earth ' and , 'whoever is in it ? ' 
the backbiter who goes about slandering ,
whoever seeks the harvest of the hereafter , we shall increase for him his harvest , and whoever seeks the harvest of this world , we shall give him thereof ; but he will have no share in the hereafter .
surely we bore you up in the ship when the water rose high ,
and when he made you , when ye met , see them with your eyes as few , and lessened you in their eyes , that allah might conclude a thing that must be done . unto allah all things are brought back .
and to him belongs greatness in the heavens and the earth , and he is the mighty , the wise .
the desert arabs who lagged behind will say to thee :  we were engaged inour flocks and herds , and our families : do thou then ask forgiveness for us .  they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts . say :  who then has any power at allon your behalf with allah , if his will is to give you some loss or to give you some profit ? but allah is well acquainted with all that ye do .
he said , ‘ certainly not ! let both of you go with our signs : we will indeed be with you , hearing .
we shall then rescue the pious – and leave the unjust in it , fallen on their knees .
those who are about to die and leave widows behind should bequeath for their wives the expenses of one year 's maintenance . the widows must not be expelled from the house for up to one year . it is no sin for the relatives of the deceased to permit the widows to leave the house before the appointed time and do what is reasonable . god is majestic and wise .
but whoever turns back and disbelieves ,
by the heaven and him who builded it ,
but he who is blind in this life , shall be blind in the everlasting life and will be further astray from the path .
whether we let you see some of that with which we promised them , or we call you to us , to us they shall return . allah is witness of the things they do .
there is no blame upon you for that to which youallude concerning a proposal to women or for what you conceal within yourselves . allah knows that you will have them in mind . but do not promise them secretly except for saying a proper saying . and do not determine to undertake a marriage contract until the decreed period reaches its end . and know that allah knows what is within yourselves , so beware of him . and know that allah is forgiving and forbearing .
each soul will know what it has readied .
or do you intend to ask your messenger as moses was asked before ? and whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has certainly strayed from the soundness of the way .
it is from solomon , and it is :  in the name of allah , the most merciful , the most compassionate . 
on the day when those who disbelieved are presented to the fire : “ is this not real ? ” they will say , “ yes , indeed , by our lord. ” he will say , “ then taste the suffering for having disbelieved . ”
these are the ayatof allah , which we recite to youwith truth . then in which speech after allah and his ayat will they believe ?
:  i am commanded to worship the lord of this land he has blessed , to whom all things belong ; and i am commanded to be one of those who submit ,
“ o you groups of jinns and men ! did not the noble messengers amongst you come to you reciting my verses and warning you of confronting this day ? ” they will say , “ we testify against ourselves ” – and the worldly life deceived them and they will testify against themselves that they were disbelievers .
if you obey most of those on the earth , they will lead you astray from the way of allah . they follow nothing but conjectures and they do nothing but surmise .
say to them ,  whoever is enemy to gabriel , should understand that he has , by allah 's command , revealed to your heart the qur'an which confirms what was revealed before it , and brings guidance and glad tidings to the believers .
those who deny our signs and the encounter of the hereafter , their works have failed . shall they not be requited for what they used to do ?
they are given to drink of a pure wine , sealed ,
now that god has eased your burden , he has found you to be weak . a hundred of your steadfast men would defeat two hundred of theirs and a thousand of yours would defeat two thousand of the unbelievers , by the will of god . god is with those who have patience .
indeed , to us they shall return ,
to lead people astray , they claimed their idols were equal to god . , tell them ,  enjoy yourselves and know that the only place for you to go will be hell fire . 
hesaid : ' i swear by your might , that i will seduce all of them
intercession will not avail with him save for him to whom he gives leave ; till , when terror is lifted from their hearts , they will say ,  what said your lord ? ' they will say , 'the truth ; and he is the all-high ; the all-great . '
o believers , fear god . let every soul consider what it has forwarded for the morrow . and fear god ; god is aware of the things you do .
indeed , the worst of living creatures in the sight of allah are those who have disbelieved , and they will notbelieve -
the horn shall be blown and all who are in heavens and earth shall swoon , except those whom allah wills . then , the horn will blow again and they shall stand and gaze .
﻿in the name of god , the most gracious , the most merciful .
then i took hold of those who disbelieved , and how terrible was my denial !
they rejoice in grace from god , and bounty , and that god will not waste the reward of the faithful .
and guarded them from every accursed satan
is such a personwho is obedient , and prostrates himself in the watches of the night , stands , is fearful of the hereafter , and looks forward to the mercy of his lord ? ask them : “ are those who know equal to those who do not know ? ” only those endowed with understanding take heed .
his people made no answer , and only said :  drive them out of the city . they profess to be pure . 
o you who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you , as it was prescribed for those before you , so that you may guard .
hast thou not regarded those who were forbidden to converse secretly together , then they return to that they were forbidden , and they converse secretly together in sin and enmity , and in disobedience to the messenger ? then , when they come to thee , they greet thee with a greeting god never greeted thee withal ; and they say within themselves , 'why does god not chastise us for what we say ? ' sufficient for them shall be gehenna , at which they , shall be roasted -- an evil homecoming !
said ,  o my people ! i am not in error . indeed , i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
surely the squanderers are the fellows of the shaitans and the shaitan is ever ungrateful to his lord .
so when our decree issued , we saved hud and those who believed with him , bygrace from ourselves : we saved them from a severe penalty .
those shall be rewarded with the highest apartment , because they persevered . and therein they shall be met with a greeting and salutation-
to abraham we gave the right guidance and we knew him very well .
they will make excuses to you when you return to them . say ,  do not make excuses , we will not believe you . god has already informed us about you . god will see your actions , as will his messenger . then you will be returned to the one who knows the seen and the unseen and he will tell you all that you used to do . 
put back in the order whom you wish among them and give your proximity to whomever you wish ; and if you incline towards one whom you had set aside , there is no sin upon you in it ; this command is closer to their eyes remaining soothed and not grieving , and all of them remaining happy with whatever you give them ; and allah knows what is in the hearts of you all ; and allah is all knowing , most forbearing .
verily , the rising by nightis very hard and most potent and good for governing , and most suitable forthe word .
await they but the hour , that it should come upon them on a sudden ? tokens thereof are already come , so how shall it be with them when there cometh unto them their admonition !
then , when the trumpet is sounded a single time .
did they not perceive that we had made the night so that they may repose in it and made the day clear and shining . surely there are signs in this for those who believe .
until we open on them a gate leading to a severe punishment : then lo ! they will be plunged in despair therein !
and created for them similar things to ride .
and whosoever disbelieveth , let not his disbelief afflict thee . unto us is their return , and we shall tell them what they did . lo ! allah is aware of what is in the breasts .
facing one another on thrones .
then he looked round ;
your lord knows best those who have gone astray from his path and those who are rightly guided .
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them know not .
and otherwhich you have not yet obtained , are within the compass of god , for god has power over everything .
say : 'indeed , if i rebel against my lord i fear the punishment of a dreadful day '
andmakes it black stubble .
they will be served around with golden dishes and goblets , and therein will be whatever the souls desire and eyes delight in . ‘ you will remain in it .
the shade and the torrid heat ;
so do they not see the camel – how it has been created ?
never did allah take to himself a son , and never was there with him anygod -- in that case would each god have certainly taken away what he created , and some of them would certainly have overpowered others ; glory be to allah above what they describe !
if they argue with you , say , “ i have surrendered myself to god , and those who follow me. ” and say to those who were given the scripture , and to the unlearned , “ have you surrendered ? ” if they have surrendered , then they are guided ; but if they turn away , then your duty is to convey . god is seeing of the servants .
and if you obey most of those on earth , they will mislead you far away from allah 's path . they follow nothing but conjectures , and they do nothing but lie .
do they say :  he has forged ?  say :  then bring ten surahs like it , and call anyone except god to help you , if what you say is true . 
in this world we laid our curse on them , and on the day of resurrection they shall be among the exiled .
wherewith allah guides all those who seek his good pleasure to ways of peace , and he brings them out of darkness by his will unto light and guides them to a straight way .
but allah was not going to send them a penalty whilst thou wast amongst them ; nor was he going to send it whilst they could ask for pardon .
“ my wealth did not in the least benefit me . ”
“ taste this ! indeed you are themighty and noble !
the heart in no way falsified that which he saw .
it would neither suit them nor would they be able .
ya sin
even as we have sent amidst you an apostle from amongst you , who rehearseth unto you our revelations and purifieth you , and teacheth you the book and wisdom , and teacheth you that which ye were not wont to know .
such are they whom allah curseth so that he deafeneth them and maketh blind their eyes .
and food that chokes , and a painful chastisement ,
there is no blame on you if ye divorce women before consummation or the fixation of their dower ; but bestow on them , the wealthy according to his means , and the poor according to his means ; - a gift of a reasonable amount is due from those who wish to do the right thing .
if they had intended to go outthey would surely have made preparations . but god did not like their setting forth , and they were held back and told :  stay at home with those who stay behind . 
it is god who revealed the book and the balance for a truthful purpose . you never know . perhaps the hour of doom is close at hand .
save those that believe , and do righteous deeds , and remember god oft , and help themselves after being wronged ; and those who do wrong shall surely know by what overturning they will he overturned .
even he who gives his wealth . to purify himself
but then your lord—for those who emigrated after being persecuted , then struggled and persevered—your lord thereafter is forgiving and merciful .
and they carry your loads to many a place which you would be unable to reach without much hardship . surely your lord is intensely loving , most merciful .
say , “ allah well knows how long they stayed ; for him only are the hidden of the heavens and the earth ; how well he sees and hears ! they do not have any supporter besides him ; and he does not associate anyone in his command . ”
and similarly the colours of men and beasts and cattle , are different ; among the bondmen of allah , only the people of knowledge fear him ; indeed allah is the most honourable , oft forgiving .
his is whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and obedience to him inevitably pervades the whole universe . will you , then , hold in awe any other than allah ?
and when he learns something of our signs , he takes them in jest : for such there will be a humiliating penalty .
so we answered him , and bestowed on him john , and we set his wife right for him ; truly they vied with one another , hastening to good works , and called upon us out of yearning and awe ; and they were humble to us .
allah , there is no god except he . he will gather you to the resurrection day , there is no doubt in it . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
but any that gains a hearing by stealth , is pursued by a flaming fire , bright .
when joseph heard this :  do you remember what you did to joseph and his brother when you were ignorant ? 
the originator of the heavens and the earth , he has appointed for you pairs of your own kind , and pairs also of cattle . thus does he multiply you . naught in the universe is like him . he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
o ye who believe ! seek help in steadfastness and prayer . lo ! allah is with the steadfast .
then pharaoh made a proclamation to his people : 'my people , is the kingdom of egypt not mine and these rivers which flow beneath me ? what , can you not see ?
allah created every animal from water . among them are some that creep upon their bellies , and among them are some that walk on two feet , and among them are some that walk on four . allah creates whatever he wishes . indeed allah has power over all things .
allah has sent down the best discourse , a book , consimilar in its oftrepeatedthat the skins of those who fear their lord tremble ; and thereafter their skins and hearts soften to the remembrance of allah . such is the guidance of allah , whereby he guides whosoever he will ; and whosoever allah leads astray , he has no guide .
nor am i serving what you have served ,
never will the jews or the christians be satisfied with thee unless thou follow their form of religion . say :  the guidance of allah , -that is theguidance .  wert thou to follow their desires after the knowledge which hath reached thee , then wouldst thou find neither protector nor helper against allah .
o men ! fear your lord who created you from a single being and out of it created its mate ; and out of the two spread many men and women . fear allah in whose name you plead for rights , and heed the ties of kinship . surely , allah is ever watchful over you .
by no means ! but they fear not the hereafter ,
he said : nay ! your selves have embellished for you an affair ; so seemly patience ! belike allah may bring them all unto me ; verily he ! only he is the knowing , the wise .
but if they cease , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and surely , we have created many of the jinns and mankind for hell . they have hearts wherewith they understand not , they have eyes wherewith they see not , and they have ears wherewith they hear not . they are like cattle , nay even more astray ; those ! they are the heedless ones .
when the magicians arrived , they said to the pharaoh :  is there a reward for us if we are victorious ?  --
and whatever calamity befalls you , is because of what your hands have earned – and there is a great deal he pardons !
where then are you going ?
he said , “ o satan , what kept you from being among those who prostrated themselves ? ”
and from each people we shall draw a witness , and shall say to them :  do produce your evidence now .  then they shall know that the truth is with allah alone , and the lies which they had invented will forsake them .
and he gave you much of what you seek ; and if you enumerate the favours of allah , you will never be able to count them ; indeed man is very unjust , most ungrateful .
he said :  my lord knows whatever is spoken in the heavens and the earth . he hears all and knows everything . 
our lord , forgive me and my parents and the believers the day the account is established . 
allah originates the creation , then he will bring it back , then you will be brought back to him .
together they will be presented before allah . then those who were weak will say to the arrogant , ‘ indeed we were your followers . so will you avail us against allah ’ s punishment in any wise ? ’ they will say , ‘ had allah guided us , surely we would have guided you . it is the same to us whether we are restless or patient : there is no escape for us . ’
have ye then considered al-lat and al-'uzza :
hameem .
how many gardens did they leave behind , and how many fountains
but he who does not respond to god 's calls can never eludeon earth , nor can he have any protector against him . such people have clearly gone far astray . 
then is he who creates like one who does not create ? so will you not be reminded ?
and it is not for any mortal that allah should speak to him except by revelation or from behind a veil , or by sending a messenger and revealing by his permission what he pleases ; surely he is high , wise .
take alms of their wealth , wherewith thou mayst purify them and mayst make them grow , and pray for them . lo ! thy prayer is an assuagement for them . allah is hearer , knower .
we ourselves made it for a reminder , and a boon to the desert-dwellers .
and tell of lot . he said to his people ,  will you commit evil knowingly ?
and when he reached it , he was called from the right side of the valley in the blessed field , from the tree : o moses ! lo ! i , even i , am allah , the lord of the worlds ;
then the easy runners ;
and of the satans some dived for him and did other work besides ; and we were watching over them .
the believing men and believing women are allies of one another . they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and establish prayer and give zakah and obey allah and his messenger . those - allah will have mercy upon them . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
he it is who sent among the unlettered ones a messengerfrom among themselves , reciting to them his verses , purifying them , and teaching them the bookand al-hikmah . and verily , they had been before in mainfest error ;
thee alone do we worship and of thee alone do we seek help ,
said he , 'my lord , i have indeed slain a living soul among them , and i fear that they will slay me .
so for one who gave and practised piety
andthose who believe and do good , and believe in what has been revealed to muhammad , and it is the very truth from their lord , he will remove their evil from them and improve their condition .
a revelation of the exalted in might , the merciful ,
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the messenger , and render not your actions vain .
when you see them , you see bliss , and a great kingdom .
they rejected him and we destroyed them .
permissionhas been given to those who are being fought , because they were wronged . and indeed , allah is competent to give them victory .
for none is secure from the punishment of their lord ,
he is the first , the last , the manifest , and the unseen and he knows all things .
indeed nothing is hidden from allah , neither in the earth nor in the heavens .
o you who believe ! fear god , and let every soul consider what it has forwarded for the morrow , and fear god . god is aware of what you do .
the works of those who deny their lord are like ashes which the wind scatters on a stormy day : they shall gain nothing from what they do . to act thus is to stray far into error .
woe , then , on that day to those who give the lie
for him are angels in succession , before him and behind him ; they guard him with allah 's command . verily allah altereth not that which is with a people until they alter that which is with themselves . and when allah intendeth evil unto a people there is no turning it back ; nor is for them , beside him , any patron .
he it is that has made you inheritors in the earth : if , then , any do reject , their rejectionagainst themselves : their rejection but adds to the odium for the unbelievers in the sight of their lord : their rejection but adds toundoing .
they said : pray for us unto thy lord that he make clear to us whatshe is . lo ! cows are much alike to us ; and lo ! if allah wills , we may be led aright .
thus do we treat the culprits .
we lay veils upon their hearts and heaviness in their ears , lest they understand it . when youmention your lord alone in the koran , they turn their backs in aversion .
 and o my people ! let not my dissentcause you to sin , lest ye suffer a fate similar to that of the people of noah or of hud or of salih , nor are the people of lut far off from you !
he created the heavens and the earth with deliberation , and gave you form , and shaped you well ; and to him is your returning .
indeed allah shall fulfil the true vision which he showed to his messenger hair shaved and cut short ] in very truth . certainly , you shall enter al-masjid-al-haram ; if allah wills , secure , having your heads shaved , andhaving your head hair cut short , having no fear . he knew what you knew not , and he granted besides that a near victory .
say : 'should we call in place of god one who can neither help nor do us harm , and turn back after having been guided by god , like a man beguiled by the devils who wanders perplexed in the wilderness while his friends call him back to the right path , saying : 'come to us , this way ? ' say :  god 's guidance isguidance , and we have been commanded to submit to the lord of all the worlds .
until there came to us the certainty . 
repelled—they will have a lingering torment .
butthey disbelieve therein , so they will come to know !
he shall be reckoned with by an easy reckoning ,
indeed we have brought the truth , to you , but most of you have a hatred for the truth .
we granted them our mercy and bestowed on them true and high renown .
then we changed their suffering into prosperity , until they grew and multiplied , and began to say :  our fatherswere touched by suffering and affluence  ... behold ! we called them to account of a sudden , while they realised not .
they replied ,  you are nothing but mortal men like us and the merciful god has not revealed anything . you are surely lying . 
purity is to him who created all pairs , from what the earth grows , and of themselves , and from the things they do not know .
the day , when they will see the angels , will not be a day of rejoicing for the criminals ; they will cry out ,  may allah save us ! 
and garden-closes of thick foliage
we never sent any messengers before you who did not eat food and walk in the market-place . we make some of you a means of trial for others , to see whether you are steadfast . your lord is all seeing .
those who patiently endured and who rely only upon their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor in their own creation . i do not seek the aid of those who lead people astray .
so when the magicians came , moses said to them ,  throw down whatever you will throw . 
they carry your loads to a land which you could not otherwise reach except by painful toil to oneself . your lord is the clement , the most merciful .
but your lord is forgiving , full of benevolence . if he had pleased to punish them for their doings he would have punished them immediately . but a term is fixed for them from which they will find no escape .
or do they say , 'he has forged it ' ? say : 'then bring you ten suras the like of it , forged ; and call upon whom you are able , apart from god , if you speak truly . '
is not allah the most just of judges ?
surely with us are heavy fetters and a flaming fire ,
and we showed pharaoh all our signs , but he did reject and refuse .
those who were given knowledge said , ‘ woe to you ! allah ’ s reward is better for someone who has faith and acts righteously , and no one will receive it except the patient . ’
i had no knowledge of the higher assembly when they discussed it among themselves .
 enter then among my votaries ,
what ! do you come to the males from among the creatures
and among them is one who gazes at you ; so will you guide the blind * even if they can not perceive ?
have you received the news of the enveloper ?
they invoke none but females besides him , and invoke none but a froward satan ,
in it are clear signs , the standing place of ibrahim , and whoever enters it shall be secure , and pilgrimage to the house is incumbent upon men for the sake of allah , every one who is able to undertake the journey to it ; and whoever disbelieves , then surely allah is self-sufficient , above any need of the worlds .
everything in the heavens and earth glorifies god -- he is the almighty , the wise .
indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day '
how many generations living before them did we destroy ? do you find anyone of them around or do you even hear any word from them ?
even so , we pardoned you that you may be grateful .
this is because allah is the supporter of the believers , whereas the disbelievers do not have any supporter .
or , do the people of those towns feel secure that our punishment will not come to them by daylight while they are at play ?
certainly allah turned clemently to the prophet and the emigrants and the helpers , who followed him in the hour of difficulty , after the hearts of a part of them were about to swerve . then he turned clemently to them—indeed , he is most kind and merciful to them
do these not know that they will be resurrected ?
and verily we shall make you to dwell in the land after them . this is for him who feareth my majesty and feareth my threats .
blessed be the name of your lord , the owner of majesty and honour .
and certainly did our messengers come to abraham with good tidings ; they said ,  peace .  he said ,  peace ,  and did not delay in bringinga roasted calf .
the one who produced pasture .
but if they dispute with you , say : i have submitted myself entirely to allah andevery one who follows me ; and say to those who have been given the book and the unlearned people : do you submit yourselves ? so if they submit then indeed they follow the right way ; and if they turn back , then upon you is only the delivery of the message and allah sees the servants .
what is the matter with them that they do not accept faith ?
and when it is recited unto them , they say : we believe in it . lo ! it is the truth from our lord . lo ! even before it we were of those who surrender .
o people of the book , believe in what we have revealed , which confirms what is already with you before we disfigure your visages and turn your faces about and curse you , as we did with those who had broken the sabbath ; and what god decrees comes to pass .
again and again will those who disbelieve , wish that they had bowedin islam .
serving them will be immortalized youth .
and hell is made to appear on that day . on that day shall man be mindful , and what shall being mindfulavail him ?
and those who regulate events .
leave them in their perplexity for a time .
and in the heaven is your provision and whatever you are promised .
noble messengers giving glad tidings and declaring warnings , in order that people may not have any argument against allah , after thenoble messengers ; and allah is almighty , wise .
over it are nineteen .
when their brother salih said to them : will you not guard ?
and if they had intended to march out , certainly , they would have made some preparation for it , but allah was averse to their being sent forth , so he made them lag behind , and it was said ,  sit you among those who sit . 
is not hewho created the heavens and the earth , and sendeth down for you water from the sky wherewith we cause to spring forth joyous orchards , whose trees it never hath been yours to cause to grow . is there any allah beside allah ? nay , but they are folk who ascribe equals !
therefore do not oppress the orphan .
he shapes you in the womb of the mother as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty and all-wise .
and if you punish them , they are surely your servants ; and if you forgive them , you are surely the mighty and wise . 
he set firm mountains on topand he blessed it . and in four days he ordained in it many provisions , equal to those who ask .
and guide him to the parting of the mountain ways ?
do not suppose those who brag about what they have done , and love to be praised for what they have not done—do not suppose them saved from punishment and there is a painful punishment for them .
loosen the knot in my tongue ,
and thence they shall not be allowed to be absent .
will not the disbelievers then be duly recompensed for their laughing at the believers ?
he said : get ye twain down therefrom together : some of you an enemy unto some others ; then if there cometh unto you from me guidance , whosoever followeth my guidance shall neither go astray nor be distressed .
and if we let him taste favour after harm has touched him , he says : 'all my ills are gone ' , and he suddenly becomes exultant and boastful ,
then are they restored unto allah , their lord , the just . surely his is the judgment . and he is the most swift of reckoners .
“ and did not urge to feed the needy . ”
peace be to him , the day he was born , and the day he dies , and the day he is raised alive !
and those who are faithless and deny our signs—for such there will be a humiliating punishment .
the state of those who disbelieve in their lord is that their deeds are like ashes which the strong wind blew away on a stormy day ; they got nothing from all that they earned ; this is the extreme error .
and there hath never been co-equal with him anyone .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
then after having seeing all the signs , they all decided that he should be imprisoned for some time .
sad , and by the qur'an full of exhortation !
turned away from them saying ,  alas , joseph is lost !  he wept continuously in his grief until , in suppressing his anger , his eyes turned white .
and certainly we gave wisdom to luqman , saying : be grateful to allah . and whoever is grateful , he is only grateful for his own soul ; and whoever is ungrateful , then surely allah is self-sufficient , praised .
lest you say , “ the scripture was revealed to two parties before us , and we were unaware of their teachings . ”
such is allah , your lord , the true . what , is there after truth , anything except error . then how are you turned around '
when the sky is ruptured .
my lord , then do not place me among the wrongdoing people . 
taught him articulate speech .
for , indeed , your sustainer is ever on the watch !
nay ! to him alone you call , and , if he will , he would remove thatfor which you call upon him , and you forget at that time whatever partners you joined with him !
he to whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth : who has begotten no son : who has no partner in his sovereignty : who created each and every thing and then ordained its destiny .
in fact , the disbelievers had always rejected .
when our lucid revelations are read out to them , the infidels say to those who believe :  which of the two groups is better in standing , and whose company is more excellent ? 
they know all that you do .
then what is wrong with them that they turn away from admonition ,
none belies it except every guilty sinner .
the adulterer can marry no one but an adulteress or his partner , and the adulteress can not marry any but an adulterer or her partner . this is forbidden the believers ,
shall i inform you upon whom do the devils descend ?
when the first of the two promises came true , we sent against you servants of ours , possessing great might , and they ransacked your homes . it was a promise fulfilled .
 orhas not a treasure been granted to him , or why has he not a garden whereof he may eat ?  and the zalimunsay :  you follow none but a man bewitched . 
when their brother lot said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
whoever of them should say ,  i am a deity besides him ,  shall be requited with hell . thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
it shall be no offense for you to divorce your wives as long as you have not touched them or obligated a right for them . provide for them with fairness ; the rich according to his means , and the restricted according to his . a right on the gooddoers .
and those in the fire say unto the guards of hell : entreat your lord that he relieve us of a day of the torment .
say : 'god gives you life , then makes you die , then he shall gather you to the day of resurrection , wherein is no doubt , but most men do not know . '
they say ,  shall we be brought to life again after we die and turn into dust and bones ?
indeed , on that day their lord will be aware of them !
and if allah had willed , he could have made them one nation , but he admits whom he wills to his mercy . and the zalimunwill have neither a walinor a helper .
and aid you with wealth and sons , and provide you with gardens and provide you with streams .
and hallow him morning and evening .
and they say : if only this qur'an had been revealed to some great man of the two towns ?
 because ofwhich yourhands sent forth ; for allah is never unjust to his servants :
and we inscribed for him in the tablets all kinds of enlightenments , and decisive explanation of all things . “ hold fast to them , and exhort your people to adopt the best of them . i will show you the fate of the sinners . ”
they swear by allah that they did not speak , and certainly they did speak , the word of unbelief , and disbelieved after their islam , and they had determined upon what they have not been able to effect , and they did not find fault except because allah and his apostle enriched them out of his grace ; therefore if they repent , it will be good for them ; and if they turn back , allah will chastise them with a painful chastisement in this world and the hereafter , and they shall not have in the land any guardian or a helper .
god prepared for them a terrible chastisement . so fear god , o men possessed of minds ! believers , god has sent down to you , for a remembrance ,
when the scrolls shall be unrolled ,
and cups set in place .
but he cried it lies , and he turned away ,
on a day whereon faces become whitened and faces become blackened . then as for those whose faces shall have become blackened : disbelieved ye after your profession of belief ! taste the torment for that ye have been disbelieving .
have they taken gods from the earth who raise the deed ?
the likeness of those who have been loaded with the torah then they have not carried it , is as the likeness of an ass carrying books . evil is the likeness of the people who have cried lies to god 's signs . god guides never the people of the evildoers .
when noah , their brother , said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
whoso disbelieves , his unbelief shall be charged against him ; and whosoever does righteousness for themselves they are making provision ,
'our lord , remove this punishment from us , we are believers '
markedwith your lord and it is not far off from the unjust .
he makes night run into day , the day run into night , and has harnessed the sun and the moon so that each runs to its determined course . this is god your lord ; his is the kingdom ; and those you invoke apart from him are not masters even of the film on a date-palm stone .
they said :  swear one to another by allah that we shall make a secret night attack on him and his household , and afterwards we will surely say to his near relatives : 'we witnessed not the destruction of his household , and verily ! we are telling the truth . ' 
say : 'let you be stones , or iron ,
and in the morning they went , having the power to prevent .
he felt afraid of them ; but they said :  have no fear ,  and gave him the good news of a wise son .
then we said : go together unto the folk who have denied our revelations . then we destroyed them , a complete destruction .
so were the people of noah before them for they wickedly transgressed .
then one of the two women came to him walking with shyness . she said ,  indeed , my father invites you that he may reward you for having watered for us .  so when he came to him and related to him the story , he said ,  fear not . you have escaped from the wrongdoing people . 
how can you disbelieve in allah ? seeing that you were dead and he gave you life . then he will give you death , then again will bring you to lifeand then unto him you will return .
he said : o my son ! recount not thine vision unto thy brethren , lest they plot a plot against thee ; verily the satan is unto man an enemy manifest .
while he has created you instagesthe quran ] .
as to the righteous , they shall drink of a cupmixed with kafur , -
and for those who reject faith and deny our signs , there will be a humiliating punishment .
and your movement among those who prostrate .
or do you think that you will be left alone , without god identifying which of you will strive , and take no supporters apart from god , his messenger , and the believers ? god is well aware of what you do .
they began to follow thatto which the devils falsely attributedthe kingdom of solomon . in fact solomon was never involved in any practice of disbelief , but the satans , who taught magic to the people were themselves guilty of disbelief . they were after that thing which was sent to harut and marut , the two angels at babylon . whenever these two angels taught black art to anyone , they would always give a clear warning beforehand , saying ,  we are merely a trial for you ; so you should not commit blasphemy . but in spite of this warning , those people used to learn from the angels the art which caused division between husband and wife . although it was obvious that they could not do any harm to anyone by means of this magic without allah 's permission , yet they learnt that art which could not be profitable even for them but was actually harmful . moreover , they knew it full well that anyone , who purchased that art , would have no share in the hereafter . what a vile commodity it was for which they sold off their souls , if they had but known it !
and they will say , “ we accept faith in it ” ; and how can they attain it from so far away ?
know theynot that allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal ?
so let man consider of what he is created :
all faces shall be humbled before the ever-living , the self-subsisting lord , and he who bears the burden of iniquity will have failed ;
perhaps allah will make friendship between you and those whom you hold as enemies . and allah has power , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
no indeed ! my revelations did come to you , but you rejected them : you showed arrogance , and were among those who deny the truth . 
we wished to favour those who were weak in the land and make them leaders and heirs ,
then , he will raise him when he wills .
and if allah had known any good in them he would have made them hear , and if he makes them hear they would turn back while they withdraw .
verily for the god-fearing , are with their lord gardens of delight .
or they are as shadows upon a sea obscure covered by a billow above which is a billow above which are clouds , shadows piled one upon another ; when he puts forth his hand , wellnigh he can not see it . and to whomsoever god assigns no light , no light has he .
wealth and children are an adornment of the life of the world , but lasting righteous deeds are better with your lord in reward and better in hope .
for the worst of beasts in the sight of allah are the deaf and the dumb , - those who understand not .
but man desires to continue in sin .
and when we appointed with moses forty nights then you took to yourselves the calf after him and you were evildoers ;
and when jesus perceived their leaning towards unbelief , he asked : 'who will be my helpers in the way of allah ? ' the disciples said : 'we are the helpers of allah . we believe in allah , and be our witness that we have submitted ourselves exclusively to allah .
never came there unto them a revelation of the revelations of allah but they did turn away from it .
it will be said to them : 'call on your associates ' and they will call on them , but they will not respond to them , and they shall see the punishment if only they had been guided .
o ye who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves and worship your lord , and do the good , that haply ye may thrive .
yet after that you turned away , but for the grace of allah and his mercy you would have surely been among the losers .
but they were succeeded by generations who lost the prayers and followed their appetites . they will meet perdition .
your lord is god who created the heavens and the earth in six spans , then assumed his power , dispensing all affairs . none can intercede with him except by his leave . he is god , your lord , so worship him . will you not be warned ?
the life of this world is nothing but game and distraction , but the home of the hereafter is better for those who are righteous . do you not understand ?
it is unlawful for you to consume the following as food : an animal that has not been properly slaughtered , blood , pork , an animal slaughtered and consecrated in the name of someone other than god , an animal killed by strangulation or a violent blow , an animal killed by falling down , an animal which has been gored to death , an animal partly eaten by a wild beast before being properly slaughtered , an animal which has been sacrificed on the stone blocks , and any flesh divided by casting superstitious and gambling arrows , which is a sin . today , the unbelievers have lost hope about your religion . do not be afraid of them but have fear of me . on this day i have perfected your religion , completed my favors to you , and have chosen islam as your religion . if anyone notinclined to sin is forced by hunger to eat unlawful substances instead of proper food , he may do so to spare his life . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
has there not been over man a long period of time , when he was nothing -mentioned ?
so they denied them – therefore became of those who were destroyed .
no ! but when the earth quakes and is pounded ,
and the mountains shall pass away passing away .
mocked weremessenger before thee ; but their scoffers were hemmed in by the thing that they mocked .
or do they who work evil think that they will escape us ? evil is it that they judge !
you will find others who wish to be safe from you , and from their own people , yet whenever they find an opportunity of inflicting harm , they plunge into it . so if they neither withdraw , nor offer you peace , nor restrain themselves from fighting you , seize and kill them wherever you encounter them . over such people we have given you clear authority .
and those who disbelieve , perdition is for them , and he will make their actions vain .
and other things of different shades has he produced on the earth for you . in this are signs for those who reflect .
call ye , then , upon allah with sincere devotion to him , even though the unbelievers may detest it .
worthy of not saying anything about allah except the truth : i have come to you indeed with clear proof from your lord , therefore send with me the children of israel
“ eat and enjoy yourselves a little ; you are indeed criminals . ”
if god helps you , none can overcome you ; but if he forsakes you , who then can help you after him ? therefore in god let the believers put all their trust .
the messengers whom we sent before you were mere mortals to whom we had sent with miracles and revelations . ask those who know about the heavenly books if you do not know about this .
did you not see how god sent down water from the sky with which we bring forth fruit of diverse colours . in the mountains there are streaks of various shades of white and red , and jet-black rocks ;
he said :  my lord ! i fear that they will brand me a liar .
thus do we explain our revelations to them . let them say ,  you have learnedfrom other people .  we want to explain our revelations only to those who have knowledge .
those who emigrate for god ’ s sake after being persecuted , we will settle them in a good place in this world ; but the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
but they turned their backs and went away from him .
on that day all will follow the summoning voice from which there is no escape ; and all voices will be hushed before the lord of mercy , and nothing will be heard except a subdued murmur .
if they belie you , other messengers have been belied before you . to allah all matters are returned .
when two groups among you were about to lose courage—though allah is their guardian , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
say : ' i have no power to benefit or harm myself except as allah wills . to every nation is a fixed term and when their term comes they can not delay it for an hour , nor can they bring it forward .
and that he might also know the hypocrites when it was said of them , 'come now , fight in the way of god , or repel ! ' they said , 'if only we knew how to fight , we would follow you . ' they that day were nearer to unbelief than to belief , saying with their mouths that which never was in their hearts ; and god knows very well the things they hide ;
they fulfill their vows , and dread a day whose ill is widespread .
or do they think that we hear not their secrets and their private conversations ? yes , , and our messengers are with them recording .
in thatthey will call out ;  glory be to you , o god !  , while their greeting in it will be :  peace !  and the close of their call will be ,  all praise is due to god , the lord of the universe ! 
the chiefs of those who were stiff-necked amongst his people said : surely we shall drive you forth , shu'aib ! and those who have believed with thee from our city , or else ye shall return unto our faith . he said : what ! even though we be averse !
surely allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and that when you judge between people you judge with justice ; surely allah admonishes you with what is excellent ; surely allah is seeing , hearing .
we raised him up to a high place .
lo ! i have rewarded them this day forasmuch as they were steadfast in that they , even they , are the triumphant .
we have granted to you , , a manifest victory ,
lo ! they who deny our revelations and scorn them , for them the gates of heaven will nor be opened not will they enter the garden until the camel goeth through the needle 's eye . thus do we requite the guilty .
they rejoice at the favours and bounties of allah , and at the awareness that allah will not cause the reward of the believers to be lost .
when they were told ,  there is no deity but god ,  they turned away with disdain ,
‘ what is the matter with you , that you do not desire honour from allah ? ’
say , ‘ tell me , if it is from allah and you disbelieve in it , who will be more astray than those who are in extreme defiance . ’
he raised its masses , and proportioned it .
 such as took their religion to be mere amusement and play , and were deceived by the life of the world .  that day shall we forget them as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs , and as they were wont to reject our signs .
indeed allah commands you to deliver the trusts to theirowners , and to judge with fairness when you judge between people . excellent indeed is what allah advises you . indeed allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and moses said , ‘ o pharaoh , i am indeed an apostle from the lord of all the worlds .
so when they neglected what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade evil and we overtook those who were unjust with an evil chastisement because they transgressed .
your god is only one , allah . there is no god , except he , alone . his knowledge encompasses all things .
o prophet , we have made lawful to you the wives to whom you have given dowries and those whom your right hand possesses , of whatever spoils of war that allah has given you ; and the daughters of your paternal uncles and paternal aunts , and of your paternal and maternal aunts who migrated with you ; and any believing woman who gives herself to the prophet , if the prophet wishes to take her in marriage . this is only for you and not any other believer . we know the duties we have imposed on them concerning their wives and those whom their right hand possesses , so that there should be no fault in you . allah is the forgiving and merciful .
we have certainly interspersed this quran with everyparable for the people , but most people are only intent on ingratitude .
they will suffer the heat of the blazing fire
wherefore put thy trust in allah ; verily thou art on manifest truth .
near which is the garden , the place to be resorted to .
do you marvel then at this discourse ?
when the victory of allah and the opening comes ,
aye ! we let these people and their fathers enjoy until there grew long upon them the life . behold they not that we come unto the land diminishing it by the borders thereof ? shall they then be the victors ?
does he suppose that no one sees him ?
but any of you that is devout in the service of allah and his messenger , and works righteousness , - to her shall we grant her reward twice : and we have prepared for her a generous sustenance .
and it is not for the believers to go forthall at once . for there should separate from every division of them a groupto obtain understanding in the religion and warn their people when they return to them that they might be cautious .
then we drowned the others .
and avoid it shall the most pious ,
do not marry mushrik women unless they believe ; a slave woman who believes is better than a free woman who does not believe , even though the latter may appear very attractive to you.do not wed your women to mushrik men unless they believe ; a slave man who believes is better than a free man who does not , even though he may be very pleasing to you . these mushrik people invite you to the fire while allah by his grace invites you to the garden and his pardon , and he makes his revelations plain to the people so that they should learn a lesson and follow the admonition .
o ye who believe ! when ye deal with each other , in transactions involving future obligations in a fixed period of time , reduce them to writing let a scribe write down faithfully as between the parties : let not the scribe refuse to write : as allah has taught him , so let him write . let him who incurs the liability dictate , but let him fear his lord allah , and not diminish aught of what he owes . if they party liable is mentally deficient , or weak , or unable himself to dictate , let his guardian dictate faithfully , and get two witnesses , out of your own men , and if there are not two men , then a man and two women , such as ye choose , for witnesses , so that if one of them errs , the other can remind her . the witnesses should not refuse when they are called on . disdain not to reduce to writingfor a future period , whether it be small or big : it is juster in the sight of allah , more suitable as evidence , and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves but if it be a transaction which ye carry out on the spot among yourselves , there is no blame on you if ye reduce it not to writing . but take witness whenever ye make a commercial contract ; and let neither scribe nor witness suffer harm . if ye do , it would be wickedness in you . so fear allah ; for it is good that teaches you . and allah is well acquainted with all things . if ye are on a journey , and can not find a scribe , a pledge with possession . and if one of you deposits a thing on trust with another , let the trusteedischarge his trust , and let him fear his lord conceal not evidence ; for whoever conceals it , - his heart is tainted with sin . and allah knoweth all that ye do .
children of israel , recall when we made a covenant with you , raised mount turabove you and told you to receive earnestly what we had given to you and bear it in mind so that you would protect yourselves against evil .
lest any soul should say : 'sadly , i have neglected my duty to allah and was of those that mocked '
'david , behold , we have appointed thee a viceroy in the earth ; therefore judge between men justly , and follow not caprice , lest it lead thee astray from the way of god . surely those who go astray from the way of god -- there awaits them a terrible chastisement , for that they have forgotten the day of reckoning . '
indeed allah wrongs none , not even as much as an atom 's weight . whenever a man does good , he multiplies it two-fold , and bestows out of his grace a mighty reward .
we have destroyed the likes of you ; is there any that will remember ?
barring those who have faith , do righteous deeds , and remember allah much often , and vindicate themselves after they have been wronged . and the wrongdoers will soon know at what goal they will end up .
therefore , flee to allah . i am a clear warner to you from him .
tell them , : “ i am only a human being like you . it is revealed to me that your god is one god ; so direct yourselves straight to him , and seek his forgiveness . woe to those who associate others with allah in his divinity ,
joseph 's brothers arrived and presented themselves before him . he recognized them , but they did not know him .
souls are reunited with their bodies ,
as often as they try to escape from its anguish they would be put back into , and taste the torment of burning .
when the waves , like shadows , envelop them , they call to allah making their religion sincerely his , but no sooner does he bring them safely to land then some of them are halfhearted . none denies our verses , except the ungrateful traitor .
and it is he who subjected the sea for you , so you eat fresh meat from it , and extract ornaments from it which you wear ; and you see ships ploughing through it and in order that you may seek his munificence and that you may give thanks .
god said ,  do not fear ; i am with you both . i hear and i see .
 eat and drink comfortably for that which you used to do .
and those who when they commit an indecency or do injustice to their souls remember allah and ask forgiveness for their faults -- and who forgives the faults but allah , anddo not knowingly persist in what they have done .
by the fig and the olive ,
rise not up against me , but come to me in surrender .  '
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the holy mountain 's side , and sent down on you the manna and the quails ,
far , far is that which you are threatened with .
their example is like one who kindled a fire , and when it lit all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darkness . they could not see .
and noah verily prayed unto us , and gracious was the hearer of his prayer
to him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and he is the all-high , the all-glorious .
he created the heavens and the earth in truth , wrapping night about the day , and wrapping the day about the night ; and he has subjected the sun and the moon , each of them running to a stated term . is not he the all-mighty , the all-forgiving ?
do they not ponder on the quran ? if it had been from anyone other than god , they would have found much inconsistency in it .
is he who prays devoutly to god in the hours of the night , prostrating himself and standing in prayer , who is ever mindful of the life to come and hopes for the mercy of his lord ? say ,  are those who know equal to those who do not know ?  truly , only those endowed with understanding will take heed .
he said :  you will not be able to bear with me .
so whoso wills may give heed to it .
he said ,  i am better than him . you have created me from fire and him out of clay  .
and the heaven will split asunder , for that day it , and torn up ,
and mohammedis purely * a noble messenger ; there have been noble messengers before him ; so if he departs or is martyred , will you turn back on your heels ? so whoever turns back on his heels does not cause any harm to allah ; and allah will soon reward the thankful .
foryou on that day who believed in my revelations and submitted .
and startle whomsoever of them thou canst with thy voice ; and rally against them thy horsemen and thy foot , and share with them in their wealth and their children , and promise them ! ' but satan promises them naught , except delusion .
and lo , they will all be in the open plain .
when you entered your garden , why did you not say , “ as god wills ; there is no power except through god ” ? although you see me inferior to you in wealth and children .
they said : we miss the king 's drinking cup , and he who shall bring it shall have a camel-load and i am responsible for it .
neither did the heavens weep for them , nor the earth , nor were they granted respite .
certainly we created you , then we formed you , then we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam. ’ so theyprostrated , but not iblis : he was not among those who prostrated .
on the other hand , for those who fear their lord , are gardens , with rivers flowing beneath ; therein are they to dwell , - a gift from the presence of allah ; and that which is in the presence of allah is the bestfor the righteous .
lo ! we subdued the hills to hymn the praiseswith him at nightfall and sunrise ,
those who break the qur'an into parts .
and recall what time ye were running off and would not look back on any one , albeit the apostle in your rear was calling unto you . wherefore he caused sorrow to overtake you for sorrow . that ye might not grieve for that which ye might lose nor for that which might befall you . and allah is aware of that which ye work .
for those who believe in allah and his messengers , and do not differentiate between them , we shall certainly give them their reward . allah is all-forgiving , all-compassionate
then on that day shall theevent befall ,
and their lord responded to them ,  never will i allow to be lost the work ofworker among you , whether male or female ; you are of one another . so those who emigrated or were evicted from their homes or were harmed in my cause or fought or were killed - i will surely remove from them their misdeeds , and i will surely admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow as reward from allah , and allah has with him the best reward . 
indeed ! on that day a barrier will be set between them and their lord ,
while he fears ,
no visual perception can encompass him , even though he encompasses all visual perception . he is the all-subtle , the all-aware .
people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in god 's signs , which you yourselves witness ?
thencried unto her from below her , saying : grieve not ! thy lord hath placed a rivulet beneath thee ,
the path of allah – the one to whom only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; pay heed ! towards allah only do all matters return .
and do not make mischief in the earth after its reformation , and call on him fearing and hoping ; surely the mercy of allah is nigh to those who do good .
our lord , i have settled some of my descendants in an uncultivated valley near your sacred house , our lord , that they may establish prayer . so make hearts among the people incline toward them and provide for them from the fruits that they might be grateful .
on the day of resurrection they will carry their own burden and some of the load of those they have led astray without any knowledge . oh , how evil a burden they will carry !
this will certainly never be the case ! in fact , they are not afraid of the day of judgment .
wives of the prophet ! any one of you who commits a flagrant act of misconduct shall be doubly punished . that is easy enough for god .
this is indeed an advice ; so whoever wishes may take the path towards his lord .
say , ‘ indeed my prayer and my worship , my life and my death are for the sake of allah , the lord of all the worlds .
the cords of the heavens , and look upon moses ' god ; for i think that he is a liar . ' so the evil of his deeds was decked out fair to pharaoh , and he was barred from the way , and pharaoh 's guile came only to ruin .
remember , when moses said to his people :  god demands that you sacrifice a cow ,  they said :  are you making fun of us ?  and he said :  god forbid that i be of the ignorant . 
o sons of adam , when apostles come to you from among you , who convey my messages , then those who take heed and amend will have neither fear nor regret .
none shall question him about what he does , but they shall be questioned .
the semblance of those who take protectors besides god is that of the spider . she arranges a house for herself , but the flimsiest of houses is the spider 's . if only they had sense !
and say : 'would you like to grow ?
we said ,  david , we have given you mastery over the land . judge fairly between people . do not follow your desires , lest they divert you from god 's path : those who wander from his path will have a severe punishment , because they ignore the day of reckoning . 
while weighing , use proper measurements in the exchange of your property . this is fair and will be better in the end .
fir'aunsaid to those around :  do you not hear ? 
praise be to god . he has sent the book to his servant and has made it a flawless guide
they have not estimated allah his rightful estimate ; verily , allah is all-strong , all-mighty .
everyone in the heavens and the earth depends on him . his task in preserving his creation is continuous .
so have faith in allah and his apostle and the light , which we have sent down , and allah is well aware of what you do .
and most surely he is a witness of that .
those who believe and do good deeds shall be lodged in the gardens of paradise as a reward for what they have done .
and thouwast not a reader of any scripture before it , nor didst thou write it with thy right hand , for then might those have doubted , who follow falsehood .
saleh therefore turned away from them and said , “ o my people ! indeed i did deliver my lord ’ s message to you and wished you good , but you do not want well-wishers . ”
but there was no host to help him , apart from god , and he was helpless .
and every time i called them that you may forgive them , they thrust their fingers into their ears , and covered themselves with their garments , and became wayward , and behaved with downright insolence .
if you turn away from my preaching , it will not harm me ; i shall receive my reward from god who has commanded me to become a muslim . 
and you can not guide the blind away from their error . you will only make hear those who believe in our verses so they are muslims .
had allah willed to take a son , he could have chosen whatsoever he pleased out of that which he hath created . hallowed be he ! he is allah the one , the subduer .
and that he might know the hypocrites , unto whom it was said : come , fight in the way of allah , or defend yourselves . they answered : if we knew aught of fighting we would follow you . on that day they were nearer disbelief than faith . they utter with their mouths a thing which is not in their hearts . allah is best aware of what they hide .
they listen eagerly , but most of them are liars .
qaf.are one of the miracles of the quran , and none but allahknows their meanings ] . by the glorious quran .
indeed it has been revealed to us that punishment shall befall those who impugn us and turn their backs . ’ ’ ’
hereplied : 'show us your sign , if you are of the truthful '
it is allah who has sent down the book in truth and the scale . and what will let you know ? the hour is near .
guide usto the path that is straight ,
nay , but whosoever submits his will to god , being a good-doer , his wage is with his lord , and no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
if evil befalls him he is perturbed ;
 my lord , you have given me the kingdom and taught me the meaning of dreams . you are the creator of the heavens and the earth . you are my guardian in this world and in the life to come . make me die as one who has submitted to the will of god and unite me with the righteous ones . 
penetrating forthwith as one into the midst ;
or has he taken to himself , from that he creates , daughters , and favoured you with sons ?
whensaw the sun rise all resplendent , he said :  my lord is surely this , and the greatest of them all .  but the sun also set , andsaid :  o my people , i am through with those you associate .
all praise be to god who has revealed to his votary the book which is free of all obliquity ,
then they found one of our slaves , unto whom we had bestowed mercy from us , and whom we had taught knowledge from us .
we shall gradually seize those who reject our signs from a place they do not recognize .
they rejoice at the favour of allah and his grace , and that verily allah wasteth not the hire of the believers .
and when there came to them a book from allah confirming that which was with them - although before they used to pray for victory against those who disbelieved - butwhen there came to them that which they recognized , they disbelieved in it ; so the curse of allah will be upon the disbelievers .
before you execute your deeds of this world and of the hereafter ; and they ask you the decree regarding orphans ; say , “ to do good towards them is better ; and if you combine your expenses with theirs , they are your brothers ” ; and allah knows very well the one who spoils from him who improves ; and if allah willed , he could have put you in hardship ; and allah is almighty , wise .
to fir'aun , haman and qarun , but they called :  a sorcerer , a liar ! 
'call on your lord ' they said , 'to make known to us which cow she shall be ; to us cows look alike . if allah wills , we shall be guided '
“ and there is none equal to him . ”
his are the keys of the heavens and the earth . he expandeth provision for whomsoever he will and stinteth . verily ; he is of everything the knower .
that is because allah ! he is the truth , because whatsoever they call upon beside him is falsehood , and because he is the exalted , the grand .
say , “ call upon those whom you claim besides god . they possess not an atom 's weight in the heavens or the earth , and they possess no share of either , and he has no backers from among them . ”
but he turned his back with his assembly , saying : 'he isa sorcerer or a mad man '
on thrones woven with gold and precious stones ,
this thought of yours about your lord has led to your perdition and you have become among the losers . ”
do they , then , not reflect on the qur'an ? or are there locks on their hearts ?
wherein they shall hear no vain talk .
we made jesus , son of mary , follow in the footstepsand confirm what existed in the torah in his time . we gave him the gospel containing guidance and light , as a confirmation of the torah and instruction and advice for the pious ones .
which weighed down thy back .
and a hurling into the blazing fire .
then when he saw the moon rising , he said : is this my lord ? so when it set , he said : if my lord had not guided me i should certainly be of the erring people .
and rely on the mighty , the merciful ,
all this will be theirs ; let them taste it -- a scalding , dark , foul fluid ,
in like manner , men , beasts , and cattle have their diverse hues too . only those of his servants , who possess knowledge , fear god . god is almighty and most forgiving .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them and with whom is knowledge of the hour and to whom you will be returned .
then he quickly turned his back .
 he ] said : verily ! i am a slave of allah , he has given me the scripture and made me a prophet ; 
lo ! we purified them with a pure thought , remembrance of the home .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
may both the hands of abu lahab be destroyed – and they are destroyed !
and they said , 'what , shall we believe two mortals like ourselves , whose people are our servants ? '
so let him call his associates ,
indeed your lord knows best those who stray from his way ; and he knows best those who are guided .
and when he had attained his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge : and thus do we reward those who do good .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ; if you people believe .
we never destroyed any town without pre-ordaining the fate of its people .
and when he saw the moon uprising , he exclaimed : this is my lord . but when it set , he said : unless my lord guide me , i surely shall become one of the folk who are astray .
and a tree that springeth forth from mount sinai that groweth oil and relish for the eaters .
he knows the treachery of the eyes , and what the breasts hide .
you are only a warner to him who has a fear of it .
your lord creates whatever he wishes and chooses : they have no choice . immaculate is allah and exalted aboveany partners that they ascribe .
o you who have believed , what iswith you that , when you are told to go forth in the cause of allah , you adhere heavily to the earth ? are you satisfied with the life of this world rather than the hereafter ? but what is the enjoyment of worldly life compared to the hereafter except alittle .
to bring them out of their graves and back to life on the earth 's surface .
and by the night when it is still ;
it has been revealed to us that punishment will befall him who denies and turns away .
those are the ones who refused to believe in the revelations of their lord and that they are bound to meet him . hence , all their deeds have come to naught , and we shall assign no weight to them on the day of resurrection .
and hell is advanced for whoever sees ,
and how could you take itwhile you have gone in unto each other , and they have taken from you a firm and strong covenant ?
he knows both what is hidden and what is manifest . he is the supreme one , the most high .
lord of the heavens and the earth , and everything between them ; and lord of the easts .
on the day god raises them all up from the dead , he will make them understand what they have done . god has taken everything into account , even though they have forgotten , for god is a witness to all things .
and if an interference of the shaitan should cause you mischief , seek refuge in allah ; surely he is the hearing , the knowing .
and every nation hath its term , and when its term cometh , they can not put it off an hour nor yet advance .
allah is he , than whom there is no other god ; - the sovereign , the holy one , the source of peace , the guardian of faith , the preserver of safety , the exalted in might , the irresistible , the supreme : glory to allah ! above the partners they attribute to him .
to david we gave solomon , - how excellent in our service ! ever did he turn !
and we gave them our revelations , but they were averse to them .
and allah hath given you wives of your own kind , and hath given you , from your wives , sons and grandsons , and hath made provision of good things for you . is it then in vanity that they believe and in the grace of allah that they disbelieve ?
no indeed ; this is only a reminder .
pharaoh pursued them with his hosts , but they were fully overwhelmed by the sea .
you were not there on the western sidewhen we gave the commandments to moses , nor were you witness .
it is indeed the speech of a noble apostle ,
and they followed what the shaitans chanted of sorcery in the reign of sulaiman , and sulaiman was not an unbeliever , but the shaitans disbelieved , they taught men sorcery and that was sent down to the two angels at babel , harut and marut , yet these two taught no man until they had said ,  surely we are only a trial , therefore do not be a disbeliever .  even then men learned from these two , magic by which they might cause a separation between a man and his wife ; and they can not hurt with it any one except with allah 's permission , and they learned what harmed them and did not profit them , and certainly they know that he who bought it should have no share of good in the hereafter and evil was the price for which they sold their souls ; had they but known this .
they called them liars and consequently were destroyed .
those who accuse their wives and do not have any witnesses except themselves , should swear four times in the name of god , the testimony of each such person being that he is speaking the truth ,
god will not guide those who do not believe in his miracles . they will suffer a painful punishment .
verily we ! we sent upon them a gravel-storm save the household of lut ; them we delivered at early dawn .
o muslims , do you then expect that these people will accept your invitation and become believers ? whereas there have always been among them some who have been hearing the word of god , understanding it well and then perverting and tampering with it knowingly .
and assuredly we tried sulaiman , and set upon his throne a mere body . thereafter he was penitent .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am an apostle from the lord of the worlds .
then  peace be unto thee  from those on the right hand .
those , we have given them the book , judgment , and prophethood . if these disbelieve it , we have entrusted it to others who do not disbelieve in it .
he said , “ are you aware of what you did to yusuf and his brother when you were unwise ? ”
he ] said :  throw you .  so when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck terror into them , and they displayed a great magic .
so they said ,  upon allah do we rely . our lord , make us nottrial for the wrongdoing people
as though bursting with rage . each time a group is cast into it , its keepers will ask them ,  did no warner come to you ? 
but when there comes the greatest overwhelming calamity -
and do not say , regarding anything , ' i am going to do that tomorrow , '
say : 'the ancients , and the later folk
said the eminent ones who were arrogant among his people to those who were oppressed - to those who believed among them ,  do youknow that salih is sent from his lord ?  they said ,  indeed we , in that with which he was sent , are believers . 
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth : and those who reject the signs of allah , - it is they who will be in loss .
but never did a prophet come at whom they did not scoff .
but as for him , whose deeds weigh light in the scales ,
though i have given them a respite , my plan against them is well established .
yet the only answer of his nation was that they said : 'expel the family of lot from your village , they are people who purified themselves '
whosoever seeketh the reward of this world , with allah is the reward of this world and of the hereafter ; and allah is ever hearing , beholding .
nor shall those who came to you to be provided with mounts . and when you said : ' i can find no mounts for you ' they turned back , their eyes streaming with tears grieving that they could not find the means to spend .
those who say , ‘ our lord is allah , ’ and then remain steadfast , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
so we shall let the unbelievers taste a terrible chastisement , and shall recompense them with the worst of what they were working .
and indeed we have created many jinns and men for hell ; they have hearts in which their is no understanding ; and the eyes they do not see with ; and the ears they do not hear with ; they are like cattle – in fact more astray ; it is they who are the neglectful .
and from among those who are round about you of the dwellers of the desert there are hypocrites , and from among the people of medina ; they are stubborn in hypocrisy ; you do not know them ; we know them ; we will chastise them twice then shall they be turned back to a grievous chastisement
then made it a blackening wrack .
but whoso cometh unto him a believer , having done good works , for such are the high stations ;
therein maidens good and comely --
those who believe andguard against evil ; -
then his lord answered to him , and averted their guile from him ; verily he ! he is the hearer , the knower !
this is the narrative of truth : there is no god but god . god is the mighty , the wise .
but in their pride they turn away from the commandment of their lord and the thunderbolt struck them whilst they were looking ;
and we covenanted with adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no resolve .
and as for those who will be gladthey will be in the garden , abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth endure save for that which thy lord willeth : a gift unfailing .
we surely showed him the way that he may either be grateful or deny .
allah has not instituted things like bahirahor a sa'ibah , or a wasilahor a ham . but those who disbelieve invent lies against allah , and most of them have no understanding .
allah said : get thee forth therefrom verify thou art driven away .
and in samood : when it was said to them : enjoy yourselves for a while .
that he may reward those who believe and do good works . for them is pardon and a rich provision .
, tell the disbelievers ,
allah 's judgement hascome ; do not , then , call for its speedy advent . holy is he , and far above their associating others with him in his divinity .
when the sun kuwwirat .
the day when the earth will be rent asunder , fromhurrying out : that will be a gathering together , - quite easy for us .
and when you see those who engage indiscourse concerning our verses , then turn away from them until they enter into another conversation . and if satan should cause you to forget , then do not remain after the reminder with the wrongdoing people .
and that upon him is another bringing forth .
and assuredly we know that thou straitenest thy breast by that which they say .
that is for that which your hands have sent on afore , for verily allah is not a wronger of his bondmen .
have you not seen how allah is exalted by those in the heavens and earth , and the birds with outspread wings ? he knows its prayers and its exaltations and allah has knowledge of the things they do .
behold , we turned towards thee a company of jinnslistening to the qur'an : when they stood in the presence thereof , they said ,  listen in silence !  when thewas finished , they returned to their people , to warn .
and should you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth ? they would most certainly say : allah . say : have you then considered that what you call upon besides allah , would they , if allah desire to afflict me with harm , be the removers of his harm , or , if allah desire to show me mercy , be the withholders of his mercy ? say : allah is sufficient for me ; on him do the reliant rely .
you will find others that wish to have security from you and security from their people . every time they are sent back to temptation , they yield thereto . if they withdraw not from you , nor offer you peace , nor restrain their hands , takeof them and kill them wherever you find them . in their case , we have provided you with a clear warrant against them .
, tell them ,  my lord has guided me to the right path , a well established religion and the upright tradition of abraham who was not a pagan  .
 and ye shall certainly know the truth of itafter a while . 
but if they decide upon divorce , god is all hearing and all knowing .
how many gardens and water-springs they left behind !
o you who have believed , do not enter the houses of the prophet except when you are permitted for a meal , without awaiting its readiness . but when you are invited , then enter ; and when you have eaten , disperse without seeking to remain for conversation . indeed , thatwas troubling the prophet , and he is shy ofyou . but allah is not shy of the truth . and when you askfor something , ask them from behind a partition . that is purer for your hearts and their hearts . and it is notfor you to harm the messenger of allah or to marry his wives after him , ever . indeed , that would be in the sight of allah an enormity .
musa said : that is that which we have been seeking . so they turned back upon their footsteps , retracing .
oh , but i call to witness the planets ,
but those who fear their lord : theirs shall be the gardens beneath which rivers flow and in which they will live forever : a hospitality from allah himself , and allah 's reward is best for the truly pious .
and have said to each other , 'do not give-up your idols . do not renounce wadd , suwa ` , yaghuth , ya ` uq and nasr .
we know indeed thy breast is straitened by the things they say .
our lord , bring us out of it . if we return , then we shall indeed be harmdoers '
it is they who will receive the grievous punishment—and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and would certainly guide them to the straight path .
and remember , when we made a covenant with you whereby you agreed you will neither shed blood among you nor turn your people out of their homes , you promised , and are witness to it too .
drinking from a boiling spring ,
and preferred the worldly life ,
then his lord chose him , and turned to him clemently , and guided him .
so we took vengeance upon them ; and behold how was the end of them that cried lies .
, this is how god , the majestic and all-wise , sends revelations to you and sent them to those who lived before you .
and enclosed gardens , dense with lofty trees ,
but they defied the command of their lord , so the lightning struck them as they looked on .
he said , “ so it is ; your lord has said , ‘ this is easy for me ’ ; and in order that we make him a sign for mankind and a mercy from us ; and this matter has been decreed . ”
sent down gradually from the all-mighty , the all-merciful
his are the treasures of the heavens and the earth ; he makes ample and straitens the means of subsistence for whom he pleases ; surely he is cognizant of all things .
and we delivered him and his followers from the mighty distress .
again ] said :  what then is the business on which you have come , o messengers ? 
covering the people ; this is a painful torment .
who were delivering the messages of allah , fearing him and fearing none except allah . allah suffices as a reckoner .
a day when the trumpet is blown and ye come in multitudes ,
they will have no power of intercession , except for someone who has an agreement with the most merciful .
if the hypocrites and perverts , and the rumour-mongers of madinah , do not desist even now , we shall rouse you against them , so they would not be able to live but a short time in the city with you .
so that god will reward their best deeds and give them more through his favors . god gives sustenance to whomever he wants without account .
we have sent no apostle but that he should be obeyed by the will of god . if they had come to you after wronging themselves and asked forgiveness of god , and you had also asked forgiveness for them , they would surely have found god forgiving and merciful .
evil has become rife on the land and at sea because of men 's deeds ; this in order that he may cause them to have a taste of some of their deeds ; perhaps they will turn back .
thus we make it pass through the hearts of the guilty .
also towards the three who were left behind . then , when the earth , as vast as it is , closed in on them , and their very souls closed in on them , and they realized that there was no refuge from god , except in him , he redeemed them , so that they may repent . god is the redeemer , the merciful .
hath there come unto thee the story of ibrahim 's honoured guests ?
he said : hast come to drive us out from our land by thy magic , o moses ?
and we certainly saved the children of israel from the humiliating torment -
and if they should see a portion of the heaven coming down , they would say : piled up clouds .
which the trusted spirit descended with
but if they turn away , thy duty is only to preach the clear message .
so he may cut off a part of the disbelievers , or disgrace them so that they return unsuccessful .
why did they not submit themselveswhen our torment struck them . instead , their hearts were hardened and satan made their evil deeds seem attractive to them .
to him among you who wishes to go forward or remain behind .
and know ye that your possessions and your progeny are but a trial ; and that it is allah with whom lies your highest reward .
and those who spend their wealth to be seen by people , and believe neither in allah nor in the last day . as for him who has satan for his companion—an evil companion is he !
allah does not commit even the least injustice ; and if there is a good deed , he doubles it and gives from himself a great reward .
allah has caused you to grow out of the earth ,
and have patience , for allah does not waste the wages of the righteous .
indeed among you is one who will certainly loiter behind ; then if some disaster were to befall you , he would say , “ it was allah ’ s grace upon me that i was not present with them ! ”
praise be to allah , who hath sent to his servant the book , and hath allowed therein no crookedness :
we sent noah to his people , and he said :  my people ! serve allah ; you have no deity other than he . do you have no fear ? 
hast thou not regarded those who have taken for friends a people against whom god is wrathful ? they belong neither to you nor to them ; and they swear upon falsehood , and that wittingly .
he said ,  my people , think . i have received authoritative evidence and mercy from my lord , so who will protect me from god if i disobey him ? you certainly want to destroy me .
whosoever calls upon another god , other than allah , having no proof his reckoning will be with his lord . the unbelievers shall never prosper .
it is they who rejected the communications of their lord , and the encounter with him . so their works are in vain . and on the day of resurrection , we will consider them of no weight .
they said : shall we put faith in thee , when the lowestfollow thee ?
it is not an offense for the blind , the lame , or the sick not to take part in the battle . whoever obeys god and his messenger will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow . god will make whoever turns away suffer a painful torment .
behold , you are those who have disputed greatly concerning matters which you knew ; why are you now disputing about matters that you know nothing about ? allah knows it whereas you do not know .
the unbelievers say :  why was the whole qur'an not sent down all at once to him ?  it was sent thus that we may keep your heart resolute . so we enunciated it by steps and distinctly .
and when our apostles came to ibrahim with the good news , they said : surely we are going to destroy the people of this town , for its people are unjust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed of greater magnitude than the creation of mankind ; but most men do not understand .
when hell is set ablaze ,
by the fig and the olive .
are these they about whom you swore that allah will not bestow mercy on them ? enter the garden ; you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve .
but those who disbelieve , and die disbelieving -- upon them shall rest the curse of god and the angels , and of men altogether ,
which mounts directed at the hearts .
rather , the prophet has come with the truth and confirmed themessengers .
we have indeed created man in the best of mould ,
those who disbelieved and denied our revelations will be the dwellers of hell .
he said , 'this is a she-camel ; to her a draught and to you a draught , on a day appointed ,
behold they not that we have appointed an inviolable sanctuary , while men are being snatched away round about them ? in falsehood then believe they , and unto the favour of allah will they be ingrate ?
apart from god , and guide them unto the path of hell !
with the idols that you worship besides god . so plan against me without delay .
and if they reject you as false , tell them : 'my deeds are for myself and your deeds for yourselves . you will not be held responsible for my deeds , nor i for your deeds .
, tell my servants who have committed injustice to themselves ,  do not despair of the mercy of god . god certainly forgives all sins . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . 
thereat she pointed to him . they said , ‘ how can we speak to one who is yet a baby in the cradle ? ’
the last hour draws near and the moon is split asunder .
it is god who made the earth a dwelling for you , and the sky a vaulted roof , who fashioned you and gave you excellent form and provided you with clean and wholesome things . he is god , your lord . so blessed be god , the lord of all the worlds .
originator of the heavens and the earth ! how should he have a son when there is for him no spouse ? and he hath created everything and he is knower of everything .
when it will see them from afar , they will hear its raging and roaring .
'in peace and security , enter them '
will be easy ,
whoso migrateth for the cause of allah will find much refuge and abundance in the earth , and whoso forsaketh his home , a fugitive unto allah and his messenger , and death overtaketh him , his reward is then incumbent on allah . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
had it not been for god 's favors and mercy upon you . god accepts repentance and he is all-wise .
as such we have made some of them a means for testing others , so that they should say : 'are those whom allah favors amongst us ' but does not allah best know the thankful ?
they say ,  when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? 
doubled for him on the day of resurrection is his punishment , and therein he shall live , humbled ,
 our lord ! make of us muslims , bowing to thy , and of our progeny a people muslim , bowing to thy ; and show us our place for the celebration ofrites ; and turn unto us ; for thou art the oft-returning , most merciful .
the day when they will hear ablast intruth : that will be the day of resurrection .
and strain not your eyes in longing for the things we have given for enjoyment to various groups of them , the splendour of the life of this world that we may test them thereby . but the provisionof your lord is better and more lasting .
as though they had never lived there at all . beware ! the people of thamud turned away from their lord . beware ! accursed are the people of thamud .
say , “ show me those you have attached to him as associates . no indeed ! but he is god , the powerful , the wise . ”
and let not those grieve you who fall into unbelief hastily ; surely they can do no harm to allah at all ; allah intends that he should not give them any portion in the hereafter , and they shall have a grievous chastisement .
that they may eat of his fruit . and their hands have not produced it , so will they not be grateful ?
but yes ! indeed , his lord was ever of him , seeing .
indeed we have sent down to you the book with the truth , so that you may judge between the people by what allah has shown you ; do not be an advocate for the traitors ,
the angels and the ruh ] ascend to him in a day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years ,
o you who have faith ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when the hosts came at you , and we sent against them a gale and hosts whom you did not see , and allah sees best what you do .
however , on that day the faces of other people will be happy .
then , we would surely have cut from him the aorta
and wert thou to ask them . : who hath created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon they would surely say : allah . how then are they deviating ?
those who were left behind rejoiced in tarrying behind the messenger of god , and were averse to struggle with their possessions and their selves in the way of god . they said , 'go not forth in the heat . ' say : 'gehenna 's fire is hotter , did they but understand . '
and remember when ye met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear as contemptible in their eyes : that allah might accomplish a matter already enacted . for to allah do all questions go back .
except with their wives , and what their right hands possess -- for then they are free from blame ,
to those who were unjustly expelled from their homes only because they said ,  god is our lord .  had it not been for god 's repelling some people through the might of the others , the monasteries , churches , synagogues , and mosques in which god is very often worshipped would have been utterly destroyed . god shall certainly help those who help him . he is all-powerful and majestic .
on that day mankind shall issue in scatterings to see their deeds .
if there hath befallen you a sore , a sore like thereunto hath already befallen that people . these are the haps that we change about among man kind , that allah may know those who believe and may take martyrs from among you and allah loveth not the wrong doers .
and  o adam , dwell , you and your wife , in paradise and eat from wherever you will but do not approach this tree , lest you be among the wrongdoers . 
and she , in whose house he was , asked of him an evil act . she bolted the doors and said : come ! he said : i seek refuge in allah ! lo ! he is my lord , who hath treated me honourably . lo ! wrong-doers never prosper .
and they followed what the devils taught during the reign of salomon . it was not solomon who disbelieved , but it was the devils who disbelieved . they taught the people witchcraft and what was revealed in babylon to the two angels harut and marut . they did not teach anybody until they had said , “ we are a test , so do not lose faith. ” but they learned from them the means to cause separation between man and his wife . but they can not harm anyone except with god 's permission . and they learned what would harm them and not benefit them . yet they knew that whoever deals in it will have no share in the hereafter . miserable is what they sold their souls for , if they only knew .
he has made its nights dark and its days bright .
no nation can advance its time nor can it defer it .
and most surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron . 
and when we made with you a covenant and caused the mount to tower above you , : hold fast by that which we have given you , and hear , they said : we hear and we rebel . andthe calf was made to sink into their hearts because of their rejection . say : evil is that which your belief enjoineth on you , if ye are believers .
and be not like unto those who separated and differed among themselves after there had come unto them evidences . these ! for them shall be a torment mighty .
how sharp of hearing , how sharp of sight they will be when they come to us . but today , these evil-doers are obviously lost in error .
whatever is in the heavens and on the earth glorifies god , the sovereign lord , the holy one , the mighty , the wise .
had your lord wanted , he would have made all people one united nation . they still have different beliefs
so they put them to flight by allah 's permission . and dawood slew jalut , and allah gave him kingdom and wisdom , and taught him of what he pleased . and were it not for allah 's repelling some men with others , the earth would certainly be in a state of disorder ; but allah is gracious to the creatures .
and keep vigil for a part of the night , as a supererogatoryfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to a praiseworthy station .
and why , when you heard it , did you not say ,  it is not for us to speak of this . exalted are you , ; this is a great slander  ?
they say :  when will this promise come to pass , if ye are telling the truth ? 
and fruit ; that they may choose .
the building they have built will never cease to bedisquiet in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius ,
say ye :  we believe in allah , and the revelation given to us , and to abraham , isma'il , isaac , jacob , and the tribes , and that given to moses and jesus , and that given toprophets from their lord : we make no difference between one and another of them : and we bow to allah . 
he turned to their gods and said ,  do you not eat ?
said : 'my lord , for your perverting me , i shall makein the earth seem most fair to them and i shall pervert all ,
after i have shaped him and breathed of my spiritinto him , fall down prostrate before him '
should they gain the upper hand over you , they would behave to you as enemies , and stretch forth their hands and their tongues against you with evil , and they desire that you should disbelieve .
yet when news of the birth of a daughter reaches one of them , his face is darkened , and he is overwhelmed with silent grief ,
although they have no knowledge regarding that . they only follow their conjecture and conjecture can never take the place of the truth .
whenglorify your lord with his praise and prostrate yourself before him ,
i have taken refuge with my lord and your lord lest you should attack me with stones .
when they are told , ‘ follow what allah has sent down , ’ they say , ‘ no , we will follow what we have found our fathers following. ’ what , even if their fathers neither exercised their reason nor were guided ? !
do you see how all things in heavens and the earth , the sun , the moon , the stars , the mountains , trees and beasts , and men in abundance , pay homage to god ? yet there are many who deserve the punishment . and whosoever god disgraces will have none to raise him up in honour . god does verily as he will .
remember the one who guarded her chastity ; so we breathed our spirit into her , and made her and her son a sign for all people .
or a little more , and recite the qur'an slowly and distinctly .
that is allah ’ s guidance : with it , he guides whomever he wishes of his servants . but were they to ascribe any partners , what they used to do would not avail them .
the messengers replied ,  we are certainly mere mortals like you , but god bestows his favors on whichever of his servants he wants . we can not bring you authority without the permission of god . the faithful should trust in god alone .
we had assigned companions for them , who glamorized to them what was in front of them , and what was behind them . and the word proved true against them in communities of jinn and humans that have passed away before them . they were losers .
and thus we have revealed to you an arabic qur'an that you may warn the mother of citiesand those around it and warn of the day of assembly , about which there is no doubt . a party will be in paradise and a party in the blaze .
but if they do not respond to you , then know that thisis sent down with god 's knowledge and that there is no deity but him . will you then surrender yourselves to him ?
this will be a gushing spring wherefrom allah 's servants shall drink wine , a spring from which they will take out channels wherever they wish .
so be patient with what they say , and celebrate the praise of your lord before the rising of the sun and before the sunset , and glorify him in watches of the night and at the day ’ s ends , that you may be pleased .
those among you who have proclaimed their wives as their mothers – so their wives are not their mothers ; their mothers are only those that gave them birth ; and undoubtedly they utter evil and a blatant lie ; and indeed allah is most pardoning , oft forgiving .
they sought a judgment , then every tyrant was disappointed .
“ we bring you the truth , and we are truthful . ”
do you see how he has denied the truth and turned away from it ?
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? certainly . he is the supreme all-knowing creator .
draws near for mankind their reckoning , while they turn away in heedlessness .
do they not look at the earth , how we caused a variety of fine vegetation to grow from it ?
 then you will fill your bellies therewith ,
that allah forgives your past and future sins , and completes his favor to you , and guides you on a straight path ,
who brought forth the pasture ,
a day when mankind shall stand before the lord of all being ?
when they came to abraham they said :  peace be upon you !  he replied :  indeed we feel afraid of you . 
and upon the day of resurrection thou shalt see those who lied against god , their faces blackened ; is there not in gehenna a lodging for those that are proud ?
a scripture whereof the verses are expounded , a lecture in arabic for people who have knowledge ,
and suffer the heat of the great fire
fleeing from a lion !
and raised high your fame ?
and you havebenefits from them , and that you may reach by their means a desire that is in your breasts , and on them and on ships you are carried .
surely , they that believe , and those of jewry , the sabaeans , the nazarenes , the magians , and the unbelievers , allah will judge them on the day of resurrection . surely , allah is witness over everything .
but he turned away with his forces and said : a magician or a mad man .
whosoever obeys the messenger , indeed he has obeyed allah . as for those who turn away , we have not sent you to be their protector .
and among his signs is this , that he sends the winds as glad tidings , giving you a taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , in order that you may be thankful .
on the day that man remembers what he strove for
in the qur'an we have explained things to people in myriad ways . but no matter what sign you bring to them , those who are resolved upon denying the truth will say : “ you are given to falsehood . ”
imagine such men not that they shall be raised up ?
unto him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth , and religion is his for ever . will ye then fear any other than allah ?
on that day we shall present gehennato the unbelievers ,
abiding therein forever—it is an excellent residence and destination .
surely , he who bears patiently and forgives indeed that is true constancy .
it is he who enables you to travel over land and sea . when you sail in ships in a favourable breeze , you rejoice . but when a gale begins to blow and the waves dash against them from every side they realise that they have been caught in it , they call on god in all faith :  if you save us from this we shall ever be grateful . 
cast down your staff ' and when he saw his staff writhing as though it were a serpent , he turned about in retreat , and did not turn back . ' o moses , approach and have no fear . you are surely safe .
then , when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ o emir ! distress has befallen us and our family , and we have broughta meagre sum . yet grant us the full measure , and be charitable to us ! indeed allah rewards the charitable . ’
and when those who disbelieve behold thee , they but choose thee out for mockery , : is this he who maketh mention of your gods ? and they would deny all mention of the beneficent .
whosoever disbelieves will suffer from his disbelief , and whosoever does righteous good deeds , then such will prepare a good placefor themselves .
indeed yes , we are able to shape his fingerstips yet again !
allah originateth the creation , then he shall restore it , then unto him ye shall be returned .
'how shall i have a son , lord ' he asked , 'when my wife is barren , and i am advanced in years '
and we have not created the heaven and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain in vain .  that is the opinion of those who disbelieve . and woe unto those who disbelieve the fire . 
as for unbelievers , if they possess the riches of the whole earth , and two times more , and offer it as ransom for release from the torments of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and their punishment will surely be painful .
then he went forth unto his people in his pomp . those who sought the life of the world said : would that we had the like of that which hath been vouchsafed unto qarun ! verily he is the owner of a very great fortune .
and make not your oaths a means of discord amongst you lest a foot may slip after the fixture thereof , and ye may taste evil for having hindered others from the way of allah , and unto you there shall be a torment mighty .
he who does good does it for himself ; and he who does evil does so against it . your lord never wrongs his worshipers .
they claim that angels , who are allah 's chosen servants , are females . did they witness how their body is constituted ? their testimony shall be written and they shall be called to account .
those whose lives the angels take in a state of purity , saying ,  peace be on you ; enter the garden , because ofwhich you did . 
god has indeed heard the words of those who said :  god is a pauper whereas we are rich .  we shall make a note of their words , and the murders of the prophets they committed unjustly , and say to them :  now taste the agony of burning . 
so respite the unbelievers ; delay with them awhile .
from following me ? did you disobey my command ? ”
say : call upon those whom you assert besides allah ; they do not control the weight of an atom in the heavens or in the earth nor have they any partnership in either , nor has he among them any one to backup .
say : 'if you possessed the treasuries of my lord 's mercy , yet would you hold back for fear of expending ; and man is ever niggardly . '
'allah has begotten ' they are truly liars .
the more upright of the two said ,  did i not bid you to glorify god ? 
look how they strike for you comparisons ; but they have strayed , so they cannota way .
remember , whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god . those who call on others they associate with god , follow nothing but conjecture , and only guess .
such people will dwell in hell fire from which they will not be able to escape .
surely we will ease his way unto the state of ease .
assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind ; but most of mankind know not .
the messengers who lived before you were also accused of lying , but they exercised patience . they were cruelly persecuted before we gave them victory . no one can change the words of god . you have already received news about the messengers .
verily allah has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blazing fire , -
the pharaoh asked them ,  who is your lord ? 
and we gave the wind in sulaiman ’ s control – its morning journey equal to a month ’ s course and the evening journey equal to a month ’ s course ; and we sprung a stream of molten copper for him ; and from the jinns , who worked before him by the command of his lord ; and those among them who turned away from our command – we shall make them taste the punishment of the blazing fire .
he it is who hath created you ; then of you some are infidels and of you some are believers ; and allah is of that which ye work beholder .
bethinkest thou him who forbiddeth ,
it will only be a single blast ,
“ therefore fear allah and obey me . ”
o you who believe ! turn to allah with sincere repentance ! it may be that your lord will remit from you your sins , and admit you into gardens under which rivers flowthe day that allah will not disgrace the prophetand those who believe with him , their light will run forward before them and within their right hands they will say :  our lord ! keep perfect our light for ussafely ] and grant us forgiveness . verily , you are able to do all things . 
again , it is worthy of you , altogether worthy .
moses said ,  you throw down first .  suddenly their ropes and staffs appeared to him , by their magic , to be moving about rapidly ,
indeed , their knowledge of the life to come stops short of the truth : they arein doubt as to its reality : in fact , they are blind to it .
he who hopes to meet godthat god 's appointed time will surely come . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
your companion is not possessed ;
so set your heart as a person of pure faith on this religion , the original nature endowed by allah according to which he originated mankind
but on account of mercy from your lord -- surely his grace to you is abundant .
he belied the truth and turned away ;
verily , your lord knows that you do standa little less than two-thirds of the night , or half the night , or a third of the night , and so do a party of those with you , and allah measures the night and the day . he knows that you are unable to pray the whole night , so he has turned to you . so , recite you of the quran as much as may be easy for you . he knows that there will be some among you sick , others travelling through the land , seeking of allah 's bounty ; yet others fighting in allah 's cause . so recite as much of the quran as may be easy , and perform as-salatand give zakat , and lend to allah a goodly loan , and whatever good you send before you for yourselves , , you will certainly find it with allah , better and greater in reward . and seek forgiveness of allah . verily , allah is oft-forgiving , most-merciful .
say :  i am not a new messenger to come , nor do i know what is to be done to me or you . i only follow what is revealed to me . my duty is only to warn you clearly . 
the hypocrites are apprehensive lest a surah should be sent down against them , informing them about what is in their hearts . say , ‘ go on deriding . allah will indeed bring out what you are apprehensive of . ’
or have you a book through which you learn .
o mankind , fear theyour lord ! indeed , the earthquake of the hourwill be an awesome thing .
they said ,  build him a furnace , and throw him into the blazing fire ! 
on that day , they will follow the summoner , who is not crooked , their voices hushed before the merciful , and you shall hear nothing except a murmuring .
o ye who believe ! there are indeed many among the priests and anchorites , who in falsehood devour the substance of men and hinderfrom the way of allah . and there are those who bury gold and silver and spend it not in the way of allah : announce unto them a most grievous penalty-
as for those of your women who are guilty of lewdness , call to witness four of you against them . and if they testifythen confine them to the houses until death take them orallah appoint for them a way .
there is not a soul but over it is a keeper .
be wakeful of your service of prayer , and the midmost service ; and honour god by standing before him in devotion .
indeed those who split up their religion and became sects , you will not have anything to do with them . their matter rests only with allah ; then he will inform them concerning what they used to do .
and he is sure that it is theparting
so turn from those who turn away from our remembrance and only desire this present life .
no , that is not like that ! verily , we have created them out of that which they know !
the elite of his people who were faithless said , ‘ indeed we see you to be in folly , and indeed we consider you to be a liar . ’
there are eight pairs , two of the species of sheep and two of goats . ask them which has he forbidden , the two males or the two females , or what the females carry in their wombs ? produce the sanction if you are truthful .
they make a shelter of their oaths and turnfrom the way of allah ; so theirs will be a shameful doom .
but whoever has been blind in this , will be blind in the hereafter , andmore astray from theway .
and tomadyan , we sent their brother shu'aib . he said :  o my people ! worship allah , and hope forthe last day , and commit no mischief on the earth as mufsidun .
we have expoundedin diverse ways in this qur'an that they might take it to heart but all this only aggravates their aversion .
soon wilt thou see , and they will see ,
they said ,  our lord , indeed we are afraid that he will hastenagainst us or that he will transgress . 
as a command from before us . verily we were to become senders :
said allah , “ this path * leads straight towards me . ”
then he slipped away to his family , and brought a fatted calf .
allah has heard the saying of those who said : 'allah is poor , but we are rich ' we will write down what they have said , and their slaying of the prophets without right . and we shall say : 'taste the punishment of the burning '
why , what would it harm them , if they believed in god and the last day , and expended of that god has provided them ? god knows them .
people ask you about the hour . say :  only god has knowledge of it . who knows ? the hour may be close at hand . 
and they have claimed between him and the jinn a lineage , but the jinn have already known that theywill be brought to .
on that day , it will tell its tales .
lo ! their reckoning is my lord 's concern , if ye but knew ;
and relieve you of the burden –
and when there came unto them a book from before allah confirming that which was with them , -- and afore they were entreating god for victory over these who disbelieved , -then when there came unto them that which they recognised . they disbelieved therein wherefore allah 's curse be on the infidels !
then they can not make bequest , nor can they return to their own folk .
and we indeed sent down the word continuously for them , so that they may ponder .
' o adam , inherit , thou and thy wife , the garden , and eat of where you will , but come not nigh this tree , lest you be of the evildoers . '
it is not for you to decide whether he will accept their repentance or chastise them , for they surely are wrongdoers .
that he may know that they have indeed conveyed the messages of their lord . he surroundeth all their doings , and he keepeth count of all things .
and said ,  should we give up our idols for the sake of an insane poet  .
and who have said : ye shall not leave your gods ; nor shall ye leave wadd nor suwa ' , nor yaghuth , nor ya'uq nor nasr .
the palm-trees that you cut down or those that you left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave that you did so.in order that he might humiliate the evil-doers .
it is the freeing of a slave ;
straight to give warningof a severe punishment from him , and to give glad tidings to the believers , who work righteous deeds , that they shall have a fair reward .
and when we let men taste mercy , they rejoice in it ; but if some evil befalls them for that their own hands have forwarded , behold , they despair .
when he will you bring you together for the day of gathering , it will be a day of privation . as for those who have faith in allah and act righteously , he shall absolve them of their misdeeds and admit them into gardens with streams running in them , to remain in them forever . that is the great success .
he it is who did create you from a single soul , and therefrom did make his mate that he might take rest in her . and when he covered her she bore a light burden , and she passedwith it , but when it became heavy they cried unto allah , their lord , saying : if thou givest unto us aright we shall be of the thankful .
have you not seen that god has sent water from the sky and has made the earth green all over . he is kind and all-aware .
wherein are all the right ordinances .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seeing and the hearing : are they equal in condition ? will you not then mind ?
there will be a veil between them , and on the wall will be the menwho will recognise everyone by their distinguishing marks , and will call to the inmates of paradise :  peace on you ,  without having entered it themselves though hoping to do so .
verily they found their fathers gone astray .
it will be said , “ enter the gates of hell , to abide therein eternally. ” how wretched is the destination of the arrogant .
and they say , “ none will enter heaven unless he is a jew or a christian. ” these are their wishes . say , “ produce your proof , if you are truthful . ”
then allah sent a crow searching in the ground to show him how to hide the disgrace of his brother . he said ,  o woe to me ! have i failed to be like this crow and hide the body of my brother ?  and he became of the regretful .
and the brothers of joseph came , and they entered upon him ; and he recognized them , but he was to them unknown .
of the believers are men who are true to that which they covenanted with allah . some of them have paid their vow by death , and some of them still are waiting ; and they have not altered in the least ;
nay ; every one of them desires that he may be given pages spread out ;
and indeed , it will beregret upon the disbelievers .
then we drowned the others .
test the faith of the believers , and deprive the unbelievers ofblessings .
for them is torment in the life of the word , and surely the torment of the hereafter is harder ; and from allah there is for them no protector .
and at night . do you not understand ?
and no bearer of burdens shall bear another 's burden , and if one heavily laden calls another tohis load , nothing of it will be lifted even though he be near of kin . youcan warn only those who fear their lord unseen , and perform as-salat . and he who purifies himself , then he purifies only for the benefit of his ownself . and to allah is thereturn .
yet those who do wrong , then repent and believe , are forgiven , for your lord is forgiving and kind .
those who accepted the faith later , left their homes and strove with you for the cause of god are also your people . they relatives are nearer to each other according to the book of god . god has knowledge of all things .
and when the writs shall be lain open ,
indeed , for the unbelievers we have prepared chains , fetters and a blazing .
and recall what time allah took a bond from those who were vouchsafed the book : ye shall surely expound it to the people and ye shall hide it not ; whereafter they cast it behind their backs , and bartered it for a small price . vile is that wherewith they have bartered .
on a straight way .
the trustworthy spirit brought it down .
and those who disbelieve and deny our signs - those will be companions of the fire ; they will abide therein eternally . 
not one of them but belied the messengers , therefore my torment was justified ,
and scouring to the raid at dawn ,
thinking that his wealth has made him immortal .
to those who make display
by oath oftur .
and even so we made them stumble upon them , that they might know that god 's promise is true , and that the hour -- there is no doubt of it . when they were contending among themselves of their affair then they said , 'build over them a building ; their lord knows of them very well . ' said those who prevailed over their affair , 'we will raise over them a place of worship . '
hearken to your lord before there comes the day from allah for which there shall be no averting ; you shall have no refuge on that day , nor shall it be yours to make a denial .
and we gave moses the scripture , and made it a guide for the children of israel : take none for protector other than me .
it is he who drove the disbelievers among the followers of the bible out of their homesas the first time exiles . you did not think that they would leave their homes and they thought that their fortresses would save them from god . the decree of god came upon them in a way that even they did not expect . he caused such terror to enter their hearts that they started to destroy their own homes by their own hands and by those of the believers . people of vision , learn from this a lesson .
or , do you think the companions of the cave and the tomb stone were a wonder among our signs ?
surely we have revealed it -- an arabic quran -- that you may understand .
the one of vigor . he settled .
and did the news of the two disputants reach you ? when they scaled over the wall into dawud ’ s mosque .
, ask them ,  shall i tell you what is far superior to worldly pleasures ? those who have fear of god will havegardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever with their purified spouses and with the consent of god . god knows all about his servants . 
they said , “ in fact we found our forefathers doing likewise . ”
it is he who has sent among the unlettered a messenger from themselves reciting to them his verses and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom - although they were before in clear error -
o prophet fear god and do not follow the unbelievers and the hypocrites .
said :  thisis indeed a way that leads straight to me .
“ whoever is an enemy to allah , and his angels and his noble messengers , and jibreel and mikaeel- , then , allah is an enemy of the disbelievers . ”
shaitan threatens you with poverty and enjoins you to be niggardly , and allah promises you forgiveness from himself and abundance ; and allah is ample-giving , knowing .
so when he brought the truth from our presence to them , they said , “ kill the sons of those who believe in him , and keep their women alive ” ; and the evil scheme of the disbelievers only keeps wandering astray .
o believers , devour not usury , doubled and redoubled , and fear you god ; haply so you will prosper .
and did we not exalt your fame ?
surely your lord will judge among them on the day of resurrection concerning the matters about which the children of israel used to differ .
and indeed , we will make that which is upon ita barren ground .
as a favour from us . thus do we reward those who give thanks .
that you shall have all that you choose ?
so consume what you have taken of war bootylawful and good , and fear allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
 verily ! we really hope that our lord will forgive us our sins , as we are the first of the believersand in the monotheism which he has brought from allah ] . 
but all my calling doth but add to their repugnance ;
and there is none from the people of the scripture but that he will surely believe in jesus before his death . and on the day of resurrection he will be against them a witness .
and the magicians fell down prostrating .
the guilty will be known by their marks , and will be taken by the forelocks and the feet .
they said ,  have you come to us to turn us away from that upon which we found our fathers and so that you two may have grandeur in the land ? and we are not believers in you . 
they shall pass therein from one to another a cup wherein there shall be nothing vain nor any sin .
so glorify the praises of your lord and be of those who prostrate themselves .
there does not come to them any new reminder from their lord but they listen to it as they play around ,
and he is allahof the heavens and in the earth ; he knows all , your secrets and your disclosures , and he knows your deeds .
this is the fire which ye were wont to believe .
a mercy from your lord ; indeed he only is the all hearing , the all knowing .
and the day we shall raise up from every nation a witness , then to the unbelievers no leave shall be given , nor shall they be suffered to make amends .
when god is mentioned alone , then shudder the hearts of those who believe not in the hereafter , but when those apart from him are mentioned behold , they rejoice .
your lord is all-sufficient and full of benevolence . he can take you away if he please , and make whom he will succeed you , as he had raised you from the progeny of others .
saying : deliver to me the servants of allah , surely i am a faithful apostle to you ,
what , have they not journeyed in the land so that they have hearts to understand with or ears to hear with ? it is not the eyes that are blind , but blind are the hearts within the breasts .
had we not given you stability , you might have inclined towards them a little .
this is the day of judgment which ye were wont to belie .
we have not created but with reason the heavens and the earth and all that lies within them . the houris certain to come . so turn awaywith a grace .
readin the name of your lord who created ,
do not ever think that the disbelievers can escape from our control in the land ; and their destination is the fire ; and indeed what a wretched outcome !
said moses to his people , 'pray for succour to god , and be patient ; surely the earth is god 's and he bequeaths it to whom he will among his servants . the issue ultimate is to the godfearing . '
the one who gave them food in hunger , and bestowed them safety from a great fear .
say : 'our lord will bring us all together , then , with truth , he will rightly judge between us . he is the opener , the knower .
it is the same whether you have warned them or you have not warned them , they do not believe .
say ,  my lord , judge with truth . our lord is the gracious one whose help we seek against what you utter . 
two youth entered the prison with him . one of them said , “ i see myself pressing wine. ” the other said , “ i see myself carrying bread on my head , from which the birds are eating . tell us their interpretation—we see that you are one of the righteous . ”
we have not sent down on thee the qur'an that thou shouldst be distressed . * chapter : 20
but when we decreed death for him , naught showed them his death but a creature of the earth that ate away his staff ; and when it fell down , the jinn came to know plainly that if they had known the unseen , they would not have tarried in abasing torment .
whatever allah has taken away from them and bestowedon his messenger for which you spurred neither horses nor camels ; but allah grants authority to his messengers over whomsoever he pleases . allah has power over everything .
they said ,  we will attempt to dissuade his father fromhim , and indeed , we will do . 
and how shall they ask thee for judgement , whereas with them is the taurat wherein is allah 's judgement ? and they turn away thereafter ? and those are no believers .
 of all the creatures in the world , will ye approach males ,
running before our eyes-a recompense for him denied .
this is the book about which there is no doubt , a guidance for those conscious of allah -
worldly life has been glamorized for the faithless , and they ridicule the faithful . but those who are godwary shall be above them on the day of resurrection , and allah provides for whomever he wishes without any reckoning .
by no means ! we shall write down that which he saith ; and we shall lengthen for him of the torment a length . * chapter : 19
have we not made the earth as a place to rest
had we sent down this qur'an upon a mountain you would indeed have seen it humbling itself and breaking asunder out of fear of allah . we propound such parables to people that they may reflect .
o you who have faith ! indeed many of the scribes and monks wrongfully eat up the people ’ s wealth , and barfrom the way of allah . those who treasure up gold and silver , and do not spend it in the way of allah , inform them of a painful punishment
and thou wilt find them greediest of mankind for life andthan the idolaters.one of them would like to be allowed to live a thousand years . and to livewould be no means remove him from the doom . allah is seer of what they do .
so do they desire a religion other than the religion of allah , whereas to him has submitted whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or grudgingly , and it is to him they will return ?
we made an appointment with moses for thirty nights , and completed them with ten ; thus the tryst of his lord was completed in forty nights . and moses said to aaron , his brother , ‘ be my successor among my people , and set things right and do not follow the way of the agents of corruption . ’
those who disbelieve , surely neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them in the least against allah ; and these are the inmates of the fire ; therein they shall abide .
he singleth out for his mercy whomsoever he will ; and allah is the owner of mighty grace .
o children of israel , remember the favours i bestowed on you , and made you exalted among the nations of the world .
those to whom we have given the book rejoice in what is sent down to you , while some factions reject a part of it . say : ' i am commanded to worship allah and to associate none with him . to him i supplicate , and to him i turn '
how many a generation we destroyed before them , and they called , but time was none to escape .
and i seek refuge with thee , my lord ! lest they may be present with me
“ o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has decreed for you and do not turn back , for you will turn back as losers . ”
by allah , i will devise a stratagem against your idols after you have gone away . ’
the hypocrites and those whose hearts are sick , say ,  thereligion has deceived them .  those who trust in god will find him majestic and all-wise .
those who fear their lord in their most secret thoughts , and who hold the hourin awe .
and thou shalt see them , as they are exposed to it , abject in humbleness , looking with furtive glance ; and the believers shall say , 'surely the losers are they who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection ; surely the evildoers are in lasting chastisement .
a gulf will exist between them and their desires on the day of judgment like the similar people who lived before . they , too , had lived in doubt and uncertainty .
ha mim
and he drew out his hand ; thereupon it was white for the observers .
o my two mates of the prison ! are sundry lords better or allah the one , the supreme ?
andwhen you said ,  o moses , we will never believe you until we see allah outright  ; so the thunderbolt took you while you were looking on .
those who believe not in the signs of allah , - allah will not guide them , and theirs will be a grievous penalty .
the day we shall raise a witness from every nation , the faithless will not be permitted , nor will they be asked to propitiate .
and when he had furnished them forth with provisions , he said :  bring me a brother of yours from your father ; . see you not that i give full measure , and that i am the best of the hosts ?
then the people who committed wrong were cut off completely . and all praise is unto allah , the lord of the worlds .
those who prefer the life of this world instead of the hereafter , and hinderfrom the path of allahand seek crookedness therein - they are far astray .
and did the news of moosa reach you ?
then we take it to ourselves , taking little by little .
he answered , “ it does not befit me to prostrate myself to a human whom you have created from sounding clay made out of black smelly mud . ”
so whoever is given his book in his right hand – he will say , “ take , read my account ! ”
so be patient for the decision of your lord and do not obey from among them a sinner or ungrateful .
a home for the rebellious .
god has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing , and over their vision is a veil . they will have a severe torment .
and those whom they call upon besides him have no authority for intercession , but he who bears witness of the truth and they know .
and rush towards forgiveness from your lord , and towards a paradise that can hold all the heavens and the earth in its width – prepared for the pious .
every soul will be a pledge for that which it hath earned ,
those who convey the messages of allah and fear him and do not fear anyone but allah . and sufficient is allah as accountant .
and if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will say , “ god. ” say , “ praise be to god. ” but most of them do not know .
when that covered the lote-tree which did cover it !
o you people , remember the favours of god to you . is there any creator other than god who gives you food from the heavens and the earth ? there is no god but he : how then can you turn aside ?
who made the earth a resting place for you and the heaven a canopy andsends down rain from the cloud , then brings forth with it subsistence for you of the fruits ; therefore do not set up rivals to allah while you know .
when that day comes , will be separated from one another .
on that day , god will pay them their account in full , and they will know that god is the evident reality .
:  we are indeed mughramun !
said : produce it then , if thou art of the truthful !
all praise belongs to allah , lord of all the worlds .
yet instead of god , they worship something for which god has sent no authority and about which they have no knowledge . the wrongdoers will have no helper .
they will say :  in fact , it is you who will have no welcome . it is you who brought this upon us . what an evil place of rest ! 
said ,  the truth , and the truth i say -
of these messengers , we have given something additional among them . there are some to whom god spoke directly and others he exalted in rank . we gave jesus , son of mary clear signs , and strengthened him with the holy spirit . had god pleased , those who succeeded them would not have fought against one another after the clear signs had come to them . but they disagreed among themselves ; some believed , while others did not . yet had god willed , they would not have fought against one another ; but god does whatever he wills .
 when we have died and become dust and bones , will we be raised up again ?
yea ! if you remain patient and are on your guard , and they come upon you in a headlong manner , your lord will assist you with five thousand of the havoc-making angels .
recall what time we delivered him and his household , all .
and ornaments ; surely all this is but the enjoyment of the present life , and the world to come with thy lord is for the godfearing .
say : who is it that delivers you from the dangers of the land and the seayou call upon himhumiliating yourselves , and in secret : if he delivers us from this , we should certainly be of the grateful ones .
indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter name the angels female names ,
: 'that is because you disbelieved when allah alone was supplicated to , but when others were associated with him you believed . ' judgement belongs to allah , the most high , the great .
nay ! say they : medleys of dreams ; nay ! he has forged it ; nay ! he is a poet ; so let him bring to us a sign as the formerwere sent .
and when one of them is given news of that of which he sets up as a likeness for the beneficent allah , his face becomes black and he is full of rage .
there is not a creature that moves on the earth whose nourishment is not provided by god , whose place of sojourning and depositing is not known to him . all things conform to a manifest law .
then if any man changes it after hearing it , the sin shall rest upon those who change it ; surely god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and whose way of life could be better than that of he who submits his whole being to allah , does good , and follows exclusively the way of abraham whom allah took for a friend ?
nor is this the word of an outcast devil .
 do you want me to seek for you ,  he said ,  a god other than god , when he has exalted you over all the nations of the world ?
and the hills , how they are set up ?
in the earth there is evidencefor those who have strong faith .
it is only as regards those who fought against you on account of religion , and have driven you out of your homes , and helped to drive you out , that allah forbids you to befriend them . and whosoever will befriend them , then such are the zalimun .
and for the evildoing of those of jewry , we have forbidden them certain good things that were permitted to them , and for their barring from god 's way many ,
which no one will eat except the sinners .
we allow them to enjoy themselves a while in the world and then we shall drive them in utter helplessness to a harsh chastisement .
o people given the book ! indeed this noble messengerof ours has come to you , revealing to you our commands , after the noble messengers had stopped arriving for ages , for you might claim , “ never did any harbinger of glad tidings or herald of warning come to us ” – so this harbinger of glad tidings and herald of warning has come to you ; and allah is able to do all things .
satan seeketh only to cast among you enmity and hatred by means of strong drink and games of chance , and to turn you from remembrance of allah and fromworship . will ye then have done ?
said he : if you will take a god besides me , i will most certainly make you one of the imprisoned .
no , indeed ! it is god who is your protector : he is the best supporter .
she said : ' o my lord ! how shall i have a son when no man has ever touched me ? ' the angel answered : thus shall it be . allah creates whatever he wills . when he decides something , he merely says :  be  and it is .
and allah 's is the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and the affair of the hour will be not but as a flash of the eye , or it is even nearer , verily allah is over everything potent .
and among men is one who sells himself to seek the pleasure of allah ; and allah is most compassionate towards the bondmen .
if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth , they will reply : 'allah ' say : 'do you think that , if allah wills to afflict me those you call upon , other than him , could remove his affliction , or , that if he wills to let me have mercy , they could withhold his mercy ' say : 'allah suffices me . those who put their trust , put their trust in him '
it is he who created you from a single soul , then there is theabode and the place of temporary lodging . we have certainly elaborated the signs for a people who understand .
a fire vehemently hot !
say , ‘ travel over the land , and then observe how was the fate of the deniers . ’
if you leave them , they will lead astray your servants , and will beget none except vicious ingrates .
the one who had believed said , “ o my people , follow me , and i will guide you to the path of rectitude . ”
does it not dawn upon them how many generations we have destroyed before them , amidwhose dwellings they walk ? there are indeed signs in that . will they not then listen ?
and those who disbelieve in our signs , they are the companions of the left hand ;
so if he is one of those who are near-stationed ,
and of his signs are the night and day and the sun and moon . do not prostrate to the sun or to the moon , but prostate to allah , who created them , if it should be him that you worship .
how is it with you , that you expend not in the way of god , and to god belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth ? not equal is he among you who spent , and who fought before the victory ; those are mightier in rank than they who spent and fought afterwards ; and unto each god has promised the reward most fair ; and god is aware of the things you do .
‘ we certainly brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth . ’
if you turn away from him , he will replace you with another nation . you can not harm him the least . my lord is the protector of all things . 
failing is he who corrupts it .
and conceal your speech or publicize it ; indeed , he is knowing of that within the breasts .
he again pursued a purpose .
incumbent it is upon me that i speak naught respecting allah save the truth ; surely i have brought you an evidence from your lord ; wherefore let then go with me the children of isra'il .
if only you could see them standing in the fire saying ,  would that we could return to the worldly life . we would never reject any of our lord 's revelations and we would be true believers . 
are they waiting for the fulfilment of its warning ? on the day that warning is fulfilled , those that have neglected it before will say : 'the messengers of our lord did indeed bring forth the truth . are there any intercessors who will now plead on our behalf ? or , can we be restored to life that we might perform differently from that which we did ? ' they surely ended in utter loss , and the lies they had fabricated failed them .
 and the places of worship are for allah : so invoke not any one along with allah ;
exalted be your lord , the lord of glory , above what they attribute to him ,
the day when no protector can avail his client in aught , and no help can they receive ,
and he completed them as seven heavens within two days and inspired in each heaven its command . and we adorned the nearest heaven with lamps and as protection . that is the determination of the exalted in might , the knowing .
and among his signs is that you see the earth lying neglected , so when we sent down water on it , it freshened up and grew forth ; indeed he who gave it life , will revive the dead ; indeed he is able to do all things .
and you , , were not on the western sidewhen we revealed to moses the command , and you were not among the witnesses .
say ,  should i tell you who will receive the worst punishment from god ? those whom god has condemned , afflicted with his anger , made apes out of them , swine and worshippers of satan , will have the worst dwelling and will wander far away from the right path . 
so he threw his staff , and it was an apparent serpent .
they said ,  in god we put our trust . our lord , make us not a trialfor the oppressors .
or did we create the angels as females while they were witnesses ? 
whereinthe good and beautiful -
“ and the one who feeds me and gives me to drink . ”
or enjoins true piety ?
god has made a promise of forgiveness and the highest reward to those who believe and perform good deeds .
but when they reached the junction of the two seas , they forgot their fish , and it took its way through the sea as in a tunnel .
nay , but when the life cometh up to the throat
does every man of them desire that he should be made to enter the garden of bliss ?
so this day it is the believers who laugh at the disbelievers .
then he said to his attendants : 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags , hopefully they will recognize it when they return to their people . perhaps they will come back '
then see what was the end of their plot ! - this , that we destroyed them and their people , all .
and we have sent down this blessed book . follow it and be cautious in order that you receive mercy ,
as for those who turn back in their footsteps after the guidance of allah has become clear to them , it was satan who tempted them , and allah has respited them .
so when we have read it , you should thereupon follow what is read .
and verily they are on a pathway lasting .
he propoundeth unto you a similitude taken from yourselves . have you , from among those whom your right hands own , partners in that wherewith we have provided you , so that ye are equal in respect thereof , and ye fear them as ye fear each other ? in this wise we detail the signs for a people who reflect .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger . whoso opposeth allah and his messenger , lo ! allah is severe in punishment .
we certainly know that some of you have rejected it
with goblets set ,
but as for he who feared the position of his lord and prevented the soul frominclination ,
they demand that you hasten the punishment ! but had it not been for the stated term , the punishment would come to them ; it will come upon them suddenly when they are unaware .
he it is who has stretched out the earth and has placed in it firm mountains and has caused the rivers to flow . he has made every fruit in pairs , two and two , and he it is who causes the night to cover the day . surely there are signs in these for those who reflect .
and many a township did we destroy – so our punishment came to them at night or while they were sleeping at noon .
and the clouds bearing a load .
he said ,  thus ; your lord says , 'it is easy for me , and we will make him a sign to the people and a mercy from us . and it is a matterdecreed . ' 
and solomon was david 's heir . he said :  o ye people ! we have been taught the speech of birds , and on us has been bestowedof all things : this is indeed grace manifest 
they say , ‘ why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? ’ has there not come to them a clear proof in that which is in the former scriptures ?
and dutiful towards his parents , and he was neither an arrogant nor disobedient .
and the hills will be light as wool .
the thamud accused the messengers of lies .
except for those on whom your lord has mercy . and it is for thisthat he has created them . and the word of your lord was fulfilled : 'indeed i will fill the hell , with men and jinn , altogether . '
allah 's is the dominion of the heavens and the earth . and allah is over everything potent .
they plotted and we planned without their knowledge . consider the result of their plot .
zakariya , yahya , isaand ilyas : each one of them was of the righteous .
when moses returned to his people , indignant and grieved , he said :  how wickedly you behaved in my absence . why must you hasten the decree of your lord ?  and he cast aside the tablets , and pulled his brother by the hair .  o son of my mother ,  said ,  these people took advantage of my weakness and almost killed me . do not let my enemies rejoice at my plight , and do not put me down among transgressors . 
his companion said to him , in the course of the argument with him :  dost thou deny him who created thee out of dust , then out of a sperm-drop , then fashioned thee into a man ?
 did we not restrain you ,  they said ,  fromcreatures from the outside world ? 
and the sinners will see the fire , and will realize that they will tumble into it . they will find no deliverance from it .
they will plead on oath that you accept them . even if you accept them , remember god does not accept people who are disobedient .
therefore , we seized him and his hosts , and cast them into the sea . see how was the end of the harmdoers .
each person will arrive attended by anto drive him on and another to bear witness .
as for your women past the age of bearing children , who have no hope of marriage , there is no harm if they take off their outer garments , but in such a way that they do not display their charms ; yet if they avoid this it would be better for them . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
they say , 'when will this promise be , if you speak truly ? '
the daywhen you shall see believing men and women with their light running before them on their right hands , : 'glad tidings for you this day . you shall live for ever in gardens underneath which rivers flow ! that is indeed the mighty triumph .
ibrahimwas neither a jew nor a christian , but he was a true muslim hanifaand he was not of al-mushrikun .
as for those who are guided , he increases them in guidance , and he has granted them their righteousness .
they do not value god as he should be valued , when they say , “ god did not reveal anything to any human being. ” say , “ who revealed the scripture which moses brought—a light and guidance for humanity ? ” you put it on scrolls , displaying them , yet concealing much . and you were taught what you did not know—neither you , nor your ancestors . say , “ god ; ” then leave them toying away in their speculation .
o ye who believe ! follow not satan 's footsteps : if any will follow the footsteps of satan , he willcommand what is shameful and wrong : and were it not for the grace and mercy of allah on you , not one of you would ever have been pure : but allah doth purify whom he pleases : and allah is one who hears and knows .
such was jesus , son of mary : a statement of the truth concerning which they doubt .
all praise is due to allah , who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light ; yet those who disbelieve set up equals with their lord .
believers , do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , do not be too loud in speaking to him , lest your deeds will be made devoid of all virtue without your realizing it .
but as for the ungodly , their refuge shall be the fire ; as often as they desire to come forth from it , they shall be restored into it , and it shall be said to them , 'taste the chastisement of the fire , which you cried lies to . '
there will be circulated among them a cupfrom a flowing spring ,
he wants to drive you out of your land by his magic , so what do you advise ? 
joseph , disregard this . and you - woman - ask forgiveness for your sin , for indeed it is you who has been at fault . 
and have sent down out of the rainclouds water cascading
and indeed the hereafter is better for you than the present .
then all are restored to allah , their true protector . behold , his is the judgement . he is the swiftest of those who take account . '
unto pharaoh and his chiefs , but they scornedand they were despotic folk .
it is they who will receive blessings and mercy from god and who follow the right guidance .
but whenever prosperity came their way , they said : 'this is our due . ' and whatever hardship befell them , they attributed it to the misfortune of moses and those who followed him . surely , their misfortune had been decreed by allah - but most of them do not know that .
hast thou then seen , if we content them foryears ,
on the day when they see it , it will seem to them as though they had only lived in the world for a morning and an afternoon .
and those they call upon , apart from god , created nothing , and themselves are created ,
it is he who produced for you hearing , and eyes , and hearts ; little thanks you show .
and we caused to grow over him a tree of gourds .
where they will recline on couches feeling neither heat of the sun nor intense cold .
and they expend not an expending , small or great , or transverse a vale , but it is written down unto them , so that allah may recompense them with the best for that which they have been working .
indeed , those who reject the message after their belief and then increase in disbelief - never will theirrepentance be accepted , and they are the ones astray .
and do not exalt yourselves in defiance of allah . i have come to you with a clear authority .
verily we long that our lord shall forgive us our faults because we have been the first of the believers
and for divorced women , maintenanceon reasonable . this is a duty on al-muttaqun .
they want to extinguish god ’ s light with their mouths , but god refuses except to complete his light , even though the disbelievers dislike it .
thereupon the magicians fell down in prostration ,
we did not teach him poetry , nor does it behoove him . this is just a reminder and a manifest quran ,
exalted be your lord , the lord of glory , beyond their allegations .
hen she conceived him , and she retired with him to a place far-off .
rather , prostrate to allah and worship him .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord will be the torment of hell ; and a hapless destination !
and when ye have divorced women and they have attained their period ; straiten them not so that they wed not their husbands when they have agreed between themselves reputably ; hereby is exhorted he among you who believeth in allah and the last day : this is cleanest for you and purest . allah knoweth and ye know not .
do not let those of you who possess bounty and plenty swear not to give kinsmen , and the poor , and those who emigrate in the way of allah . let them pardon and forgive . do you not yearn that allah forgives you ? and allah is the forgiver , the most merciful .
there is indeed in this a proclamation for a devout people .
 and indeed we conferred a favour on you another time .
 i found a woman ruling over them , and she has been given all things that could be possessed by any ruler of the earth , and she has a great throne .
say : ' i am only a human like you , revealed to me is that your god is one god . let him who hopes for the encounter with his lord do good work , and not associate anyone with the worship of his lord '
and we appoint the night and the day two portents . then we make dark the portent of the night , and we make the portent of the day sight-giving , that ye may seek bounty from your lord , and that ye may know the computation of the years , and the reckoning ; and everything have we expounded with a clear expounding .
on a great day ,
observe the full measure , and do not be of those who give short measure .
he granteth wisdom to whom he pleaseth ; and he to whom wisdom is granted receiveth indeed a benefit overflowing ; but none will grasp the message but men of understanding .
and when he provided them with their provisions he said , “ bring your step-brother to me ; do you not see that i measure in full and that i am the best host ? ”
and faint not , nor grieve ; ye shall overcome , if ye are believers .
for that they were wont to be indulged , before that , in wealth ,
on that day man will say :  whereto flee ? 
“ and he will give me death , then resurrect me . ”
whatever you pay as interest so that it may increase the wealth of people does not increase in the sight of allah . as for the zakah that you give , seeking with it allah 's good pleasure , that is multiplied manifold .
they said :  let us swear by god that we will attack saleh and his family at night , and later tell his heirs : 'we did not see his family destroyed , and we speak the truth . ' 
we sent him to ahundred thousand or more ,
she said ,  indeed , i seek refuge in the most merciful from you , , if you should be fearing of allah . 
then they both ate of the tree , and so their private parts appeared to them , and they began to stick on themselves the leaves from paradise for their covering . thus did adam disobey his lord , so he went astray .
and allah did not make it but as good news for you , and that your hearts might be at ease thereby , and victory is only from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then adam received words from his lord , so he relented towards him . he is the relenting , the merciful .
if you ask them who created them , they will answer :  god .  how then can they turn away ?
o mankind ! remember the grace of allah upon you ! is there any creator other than allah who provides for you from the skyand the earth ? la ilaha illa huwa . how then are you turning away ?
he saith : enter into the fire among nations of the jinn and humankind who passed away before you . every time a nation entereth , it curseth its sistertill , when they have all been made to follow one another thither , the last of them saith unto the first of them : our lord ! these led us astray , so give them double torment of the fire . he saith : for each one there is double , but ye know not .
they said , 'moses , we will never enter it so long as they are in it . go forth , thou and thy lord , and do battle ; we will be sitting here . '
when joseph attained his full manhood , we gave him power and knowledge : thus do we reward those who do right .
and most certainly i will lead them astray and excite in them vain desires , and bid them so that they shall slit the ears of the cattle , and most certainly i will bid them so that they shall alter allah 's creation ; and whoever takes the shaitan for a guardian rather than allah he indeed shall suffer a manifest loss .
when you see them their bodies please you , but when they speak and you listen to their sayings , they are like proppedup timber . every shoutthey take it to be against them . they are the enemy be wary of them . allah kills them ! how perverse they are !
there remaineth but the countenance of thy lord of might and glory .
by no means ! they know that which we have created them from .
when they are cast into it they will hear it sighing , the while it boils
had it been our will to find a pastime , we would have found one near at hand ; if at all we were inclined to do so .
and we have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them , then we have covered them over so that they do not see .
and they say , ‘ no one will enter paradise except one who is a jew or christian. ’ those are theirhopes ! say , ‘ produce your evidence , should you be truthful . ’
and in your own souls ; will you not then see ?
the most beautiful names belong to allah : so call on him by them ; but shun such men as use profanity in his names : for what they do , they will soon be requited .
and when our verses are recited to him he haughtily turns away as if he did not hear them – as if there is deafness in his ears ; so give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
our word for a thing when we intend it , is only that we say to it , be , and it is .
those who join together those things which allah hath commanded to be joined , hold their lord in awe , and fear the terrible reckoning ;
but nothing will avail you on that day , for you were unjust , and you will be partners in the punishment .
has he then taken daughters out of his own creation and chosen sons for you ?
the revelation of the qur'an is from allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
god received a pledge from those who were given the scripture : “ you shall proclaim it to the people , and not conceal it. ” but they disregarded it behind their backs , and exchanged it for a small price . what a miserable exchange they made .
those who were proud say : lo ! we are allherein . lo ! allah hath judged betweenslaves .
woe to every slanderer , back-biter ,
unto him belongeth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and he is the sublime , the tremendous .
and we brought the people of israel across the sea , but the pharaoh and his army pursued them wickedly and maliciously till he was on the point of drowning , and he said :  i believe that there is no god but he in whom the people of israel believe , and i submit to him . 
indeed we sent our messengers with clear signs , and sent down with them the book and the balance that people may uphold justice . and we sent down iron , wherein there is awesome power and many benefits for people , so that allah may know who , without even having seen him , helps him and his messengers . surely allah is most strong , most mighty .
anyone whom god guides has been rightly guided ; while those he lets go astray will surely be the losers .
they will be served by immortal youths who look like scattered pearls .
you are but a man like ourselves , and indeed , we think you are among the liars .
after this , it is you who kill one another and drive out a party of you from their homes , assistagainst them , in sin and transgression . and if they come to you as captives , you ransom them , although their expulsion was forbidden to you . then do you believe in a part of the scripture and reject the rest ? then what is the recompense of those who do so among you , except disgrace in the life of this world , and on the day of resurrection they shall be consigned to the most grievous torment . and allah is not unaware of what you do .
but as for those unto whom already the reward most fair has gone forth from us ,
they are deaf ; they are dumb ; they are blind so they will not return .
lo ! those who keep from evil will dwell amid gardens and watersprings ,
they will say ,  ah ! woe to us ! this is the day of judgment ! 
and by the night as it closes in
or do ye feel secure that he who is in heaven will not send against you a violent tornado , so that ye shall know howwas my warning ?
worship none except allah . i am for you , a warner sent from him and a bearer of glad tidings .
have you not seen how those who were forbidden to hold secret counsels yet revert to that which they were forbidden to do ? and they conspire to indulge in wrongdoing , aggressive behaviour and disobedience to the messenger . when they come to you , they greet you , but not in the words god would use , and inwardly they wonder ,  why does god not punish us for what we say ?  hell will be a fitting punishment for them : they will burn in its flames -- a wretched fate !
fruits were all destroyed and he began to wring his hands in grief for all that he had invested in his garden . he found his garden tumbled to its trellises and said ,  would that i had not considered anything equal to my lord  .
the god-conscious will find themselves in gardens and rivers ,
do you not see that allah causes the night to enter the day and causes the day to enter the night and has subjected the sun and the moon , each runningfor a specified term , and that allah , with whatever you do , is acquainted ?
and they plotted , and allah plotted , and allah is the best of plotters .
on the day the earth will be replaced by another earth , and the heavens , and all creatures will come out before allah , the one , the prevailing .
they said : woe unto us ! verily we ! we have been arrogant .
and moses said :  what if you and all the people of the world deny , god is unconcerned and worthy of praise . 
so devote yourself to the religion of monotheism—the natural instinct god has instilled in mankind . there is no altering god ’ s creation . this is the true religion , but most people do not know .
and we said thereafter to the children of israel ,  dwell securely in the land  : but when the second of the warnings came to pass , we gathered you together in a mingled crowd .
the recompense for the evil deeds will be equally eviland the faces of the evil-doers will suffer from disgrace . no one can protect them from the wrath of god . their faces will become dark as if covered by the pitch-darkness of night . they will be the dwellers of hell wherein they will remain forever .
the egyptian who bought him said to his wife ,  be kind to him , perhaps he will be of some benefit to us or we may adopt him .  thus , we settled joseph in the land so that we could teach him the interpretation of dreams . god has full control over his affairs but most people do not know .
allah has promised that you take many spoils . he has hastened this to you , and restrained the hands of people from you so that he makes it a sign to the believers and to guide you on a straight path .
they will ask you what they should spend on others . say ,  whatever you give should be for parents , close relatives , orphans , the needy , and travellers . god is well aware of whatever good you do . 
every time they seek to get away therefrom , from anguish , they will be driven back therein , andsaid to them :  taste the torment of burning ! 
has god chosen to give you sons , and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? you utter grievous things indeed !
thamud impugned the apostles
said one who had knowledge from the scripture ,  i will bring it to you before your glance returns to you .  and whensaw it placed before him , he said ,  this is from the favor of my lord to test me whether i will be grateful or ungrateful . and whoever is grateful - his gratitude is only forhimself . and whoever is ungrateful - then indeed , my lord is free of need and generous . 
and we did not give prophet muhammad , knowledge of poetry , nor is it befitting for him . it is not but a message and a clear qur'an
because he had wealth and children .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
have you seen the one who calls the religion a lie ?
and we did certainly create man out of clay from an altered black mud .
a fountain at which do drink those brought nigh .
this isfor the deeds you had committed , for god is not unjust to any of his creatures .
and allah knoweth that which ye keep hidden and that which ye proclaim .
and pleasant things wherein they took delight !
far-fetched , far-fetched is what you are promised !
he said , “ indeed the punishment and the wrath of your lord have fallen upon you ; what ! you needlessly dispute with me regarding the names you and your ancestors have fabricated ? allah has not sent down any proof concerning them ; therefore wait – i too await with you . ”
an account of your lord ’ s mercy on his servant , zechariah ,
does he have daughters while you have sons ?
and in your creation , and all the creatures he scatters in the earth – in them are signs for the people who are certain .
then covered them with that which covered them .
he is merciful to whom he will ; but , for the harmdoers he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
he taught adam all the names , then he set them before the angels and said ,  tell me the names of these , if what you say be true . 
they are utterly niggardly . whenever there is danger , you will see them looking at you , their eyes rolling as though they were on the verge of fainting at the approach of death . but when the danger passes away , their greed for wealth prompts them to greet you with their sharp , scissor-like tongues . these are the ones who never truly believed , and so allah has caused their deeds to be reduced to naught . that is easy enough for allah .
does he think that none has power over him !
verily , those who disbelieve , neither their properties nor their offspring will avail them whatsoever against allah ; and it is they who will be fuel of the fire .
he will admit them an admittance that will please them . god is knowing and clement .
and then makes it dark stubble .
and she said to his ] sister :  follow him .  so shewatched him from a far place secretly , while they perceived not .
you shall not find a people who believe in allah and the latter day befriending those who act in opposition to allah and his apostle , even though they were theirfathers , or their sons , or their brothers , or their kinsfolk ; these are they into whose hearts he has impressed faith , and whom he has strengthened with an inspiration from him : and he will cause them to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein ; allah is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with him these are allah 's party : now surely the party of allah are the successful ones .
and at daybreak a determined punishment came upon them .
and chosen goblets .
the fools among the people will say :  what hath turned them from the qibla to which they were used ?  say : to allah belong both east and west : he guideth whom he will to a way that is straight .
proceeding from between the back-bone and the ribs ,
say to the desert-arabs who lagged behind , “ you will be called against a people of great might ; you will fight them , unless they submit . if you obey , god will give you a fine reward . but if you turn away , as you turned away before , he will punish you with a painful punishment . ”
among the people of the scriptureis he who , if entrusted with a cantar , will readily pay it back ; and among them there is he who , if entrusted with a single silver coin , will not repay it unless you constantly stand demanding , because they say :  there is no blame on us to betray and take the properties of the illiterates .  but they tell a lie against allah while they know it .
and that upon him is the next existence .
after all that time , the one of the two who had been saved remembered , he said : ' i will interpret it for you , so let me go '
 this , in order that he may know that i have never been false to him in his absence , and that allah will never guide the snare of the false ones .
said ,  no one will blame you on this day . god will forgive you ; he is more merciful than others .
we certainly created man in the best of forms ;
said they : then bring him before the eyes of the people , perhaps they may bear witness .
' o adam dwell with your wife in paradise , and eat from whatever you please ; but never approach this tree or you shall both become harmdoers '
o man , you are striving unto your lord and you will meet him .
he replied ,  throw yours first .  their great magic bewitched people 's eyes and terrified them .
as for those of you who die leaving wives , they shall wait by themselves four months and ten days , and when they complete their term , there will be no sin upon you in respect of what they may do with themselves in accordance with honourable norms . and allah is well aware of what you do .
dolorous for the unbelievers .
those who follow the messenger , the prophet who can neither read nor write , whom they will find described in the torah and the gospelwith them . he will enjoin on them that which is right and forbid them that which is wrong . he will make lawful for them all good things and prohibit for them only the foul ; and he will relieve them of their burden and the fetters that they used to wear . then those who believe in him , and honour him , and help him , and follow the light which is sent down with him : they are the successful .
hesaid , ‘ do you profess faith in him before i should permit you ? he is indeed your chief who has taught you magic ! soon you will know ! i will cut off your hands and feet from opposite sides , and i will crucify you all . ’
it is he who sends his blessings on you , ashis angels , that he may lead you out of darkness into light , for he is benevolent to the believers .
he is the lord of the heavens , the earth , and all that is between them , the majestic and all-forgiving  .
god thus explains his revelations to you , so that you may understand .
all the parts of the body to be placed on the ground during prostration belong to god .
and indeed the noble messengers came to the people of firaun .
those who disbelieve in the verses of allah , allah does not guide them for them is a painful punishment .
did they create the heavens and the earth ? rather , they have no certainty !
do they have feet to walk on , or hands to hold with , or eyes to see and ears to hear with ? say to them :  call your compeers , and work out a plot against me , and do not give me time .
when the young men fled for refugeto the cave , they said :  our lord ! bestow on us mercy from yourself , and facilitate for us our affair in the right way ! 
say : is thatbetter or the garden of immortality which is promised unto those who ward off ? it will be their reward and journey 's end .
as they are given sight of them . the sinner will wish that he might ransom himself from the chastisement of that day even by his sons ,
our lord , make us not a temptation to those who disbelieve ; and forgive us . our . lord , thou art the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
that it is he who granteth death and life ;
your lord creates what he will and chooseswhomsoever he will . it is not for them to make the choice . glory be to allah . he is exalted far above their associating others in his divinity .
and at the mountains , how they are fixed firm ? -
on that day , the wrongdoer will bite his hands and say ,  would that i had walked in the messenger 's path !
‘ our lord ! do not make our hearts swerve after you have guided us , and bestow your mercy on us . indeed , you are the all-munificent .
and to you belongs half of whatever has been left behind by your wives if they die childless ; but if they have any children then to you belongs a fourth of what they have left behind , after payment of the bequest they might have made or any debts outstanding against them . and to them belongs a fourth of what you leave behind , if you die childless ; and if you have any child then to them belongs one-eighth of what you have left behind , after the payment of the bequest you might have made or any debts outstanding against you . and if the man or woman has no heir in the direct line , but has a brother or sister , then each of these shall inherit one-sixth ; but if they are more than two , then they shall inherit one-third of the inheritance , after the payment of the bequest that might have been made or any debts outstanding against the deceased , providing that the bequest causes no injury . this is a commandment from allah ; allah is all-knowing , all-forbearing .
verily those who believe and work righteous works - these ! they are the best of the creation .
hell ; which they shall enter ; what an evil resting-place !
they ask : “ when will the day of judgement be ? ”
anon shall i roast him into the scorching fire .
, you will perhaps grieve yourself to death because these people do not believe .
it is out of his mercy that he made for you the night and the day , that you may rest in it , and seek some of his bounty ; and that you may give thanks .
if any of your women commit indecency , call in four witnesses from among yourselves against them , if they testify , confine them to their houses till death overtakes them or till allah makes for them a way .
and they used to hew out dwellings from the mountainssecure .
said ,  you have already known that none has sent down theseexcept the lord of the heavens and the earth as evidence , and indeed i think , o pharaoh , that you are destroyed . 
verily , we have warned you of a penalty near , the day when man will seewhich his hands have sent forth , and the unbeliever will say ,  woe unto me ! would that i weredust ! 
they said : even so saith thine lords verily he ! he is the wise , the knower .
and surely , all , everyone of them will be brought before us .
they said , “ our lord , we have done wrong to ourselves . unless you forgive us , and have mercy on us , we will be among the losers . ”
the reality .
if you were to see it , you would find it to be a great kingdom with great bounty .
and they swear by god with thee their solemn oaths that if there came unto them a sign they would surely believe therein . say thou : signs are but with allah ; and what will make ye perceive that even if it came they will not believe ?
and drowned the other party .
dark green with foliage .
and the begetter and that which he begat ,
and other torments of similar kind , all together !
is it for you the males and for him the females ?
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , their lord will admit them into his mercy . that is the manifest success !
when god made a covenant with the prophets , saying ,  when i give you the book and wisdom and a messenger comes to you who will testify to the guidance which you have received from me , you must believe in him and help him , then he asked them ,  do you affirm and accept my covenant ?  they replied ,  yes , we affirm it .  the lord said ,  then bear witness to this and i shall bear witness with you  .
if they should reject you , say ,  my deeds are mine and your deeds are yours . you are not accountable for my actions , nor am i accountable for what you do . 
moses said to him , 'shall i follow thee so that thou teachest me , of what thou hast been taught , right judgment . '
you are the best of the nations raised up formen ; you enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and believe in allah ; and if the followers of the book had believed it would have been better for them ; of themare believers and most of them are transgressors .
allah outspreads and restricts his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . allah has knowledge of all things .
no sin for you to enter uninhabited houses wherein is comfort for you . allah knoweth what ye proclaim and what ye hide .
whereby that which is in their bellies , and their skins too , will be melted ;
the day on which we will gather those who guardto the beneficent allah to receive honors
a revelation from the beneficent , the merciful allah :
say our prayers regularly and to fear god .  he it is to whom you will be gathered . 
then he will neither die in it , nor live .
the mosques of allah are only to be maintained by those who believe in allah and the last day and establish prayer and give zakah and do not fear except allah , for it is expected that those will be of theguided .
although before it was sent down on them before that they had been in despair .
and the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice . none can alter his words , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
moses said to him :  may i attend upon you that you may instruct me in the knowledge you have been taught of the right way ? 
or say , when he sights the punishment , ‘ if only there were a second chance for me , i would be among the virtuous ! ’
when there were shown to him at eventide lightfooted coursers
 the people of the pharaoh : will they not fear allah ? 
then any one who turns away will be a transgressor . 
eat of that over which the name of allah hath been mentioned , if ye are believers in his revelations .
they will be condemned wherever they are and will be sized and done away with for good .
after that , at length ye will die
like ye are unto those before you : mightier were they than you in prowess and more abundant in riches and children . they enjoyed their portion awhile , so enjoy your portion awhile even as those before you enjoyed their portion awhile , and ye plunged about even as they plunged about . those ! their works have come to naught in the world and the hereafter , and those ! they are the losers .
chaste , loving companions of the same age
the event that terrifies the hearts !
o believers , take not as your friends those of them , who were given the book before you , and the unbelievers , who take your religion in mockery and as a sport -- and fear god , if you are believers --
rejoicing in whatever their lord has given them . their lord has saved them from the torment of the fire ,
he , who made for you fire out of the green tree , and , behold , you light fire from it !
nay , but yehonour not the orphan
and they say : this qur'an is naught but magic manifest .
then he followed the road ,
the day when men will hear the fateful cry , they will rise up .
o you who believe ! give of the good things you have earned , and from what we have produced for you from the earth . and do not pick the inferior things to give away , when you yourselves would not accept it except with eyes closed . and know that god is sufficient and praiseworthy .
and of those who led the way - the first of the emigrantsand the helpers , and those who followed them in the best possible manner - allah is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with allah . he has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow ; therein they will abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
fear god and do not shame me . 
this is a reminder , and verily , for the muttaqunis a good final return ,
and those who spend their propertyto be seen of the people and do not believe in allah nor in the last day ; and as for him whose associate is the shaitan , an evil associate is he !
and provide for him from whence he does not count upon . and whoever puts his trust in allah , he will suffice him . indeed allah carries through his commands . certainly , allah has ordained a measurefor everything .
is the reward of goodness aught but goodness ?
and assurelly we have propounded it variously in this qur'an that they might be admonished , but it increaseth them only in aversion .
then he whose deeds shall weigh heavier in the scale
and we place in it gardens of palm-trees and vines , and cause springs to gush out of it .
“ i am indeed a trustworthy noble messenger of allah to you . ”
they answered : jumbled dreams ! and we are not knowing in the interpretation of dreams .
let it not deceive you that those who disbelieve go to and fro in the cities fearlessly .
when death approaches one of the unbelievers , he says ,  lord , send me back again
and when moosa said to his people , “ o my people ! remember allah ’ s favour upon you , that he created prophets among you , and made you kings , and has now given you what he has not given to any one else in this world . ”
these are the verses of the illuminating book .
but when he rescues them , they commit excesses in the land unjustly again . your rebellion , o people , shall recoil back on your own selves . the joys of the world : you have to come back to us in the end . we shall then inform you what you were doing .
but they disbelieved in it ; soon they shall know !
and we are those who sing hallelujas to him . 
we made a covenant with the children of israel that they should not worship anyone except me , that they should serve their parents , relatives , orphans , and the destitute , that they should speak righteous words to people , and that they should be steadfast in their prayers and pay the religious tax . but soon after you made this covenant , all but a few of you broke it heedlessly .
and for those who have earned evil deeds the recompense of an evil deed shall be the like of it ; abasement shall overspread them , neither have they any defender from god , as if their faces were covered with strips of night shadowy . those are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
in it are fruits , and palms in clusters .
when we sent him to them for a genuine purpose , they said ,  kill the sons of those who have believed in him but keep their women alive .  the plots of the unbelievers can only result in failure .
o you who believe ! kill not game while you are in a state of ihram for hajj or 'umrah , and whosoever of you kills it intentionally , the penalty is an offering , brought to the ka'bah , of an eatable animalequivalent to the one he killed , as adjudged by two just men among you ; or , for expiation , he should feed masakin , or its equivalent in saum , that he may taste the heavinessof his deed . allah has forgiven what is past , but whosoever commits it again , allah will take retribution from him . and allah is all-mighty , all-able of retribution .
they will not experience any death other than that which they have already been through .
we have made the heavens with our own hands and we expanded it .
and when our decree came to pass , we delivered hud and those who believed with him with mercy from us , and we delivered them from a hard chastisement .
they say ,  why does this messenger eat food , and walk in the streets ? why has not an angel been sent to him so that they could preach the message together ?
excepting him who originated me ; indeed he will guide me . ’
whom allah has cursed and hesaid : 'indeed , i will take to myself an appointed portion of your worshipers ,
and gathered his people together
he said , “ pick it up and do not fear ; we shall restore it to its former state . ”
such will be the garden of which ye are made heirs for yourdeeds .
and hell-fire shall be made apparent in full view forone who sees ,
god cites the example of a man shared by partners at odds , and a man belonging exclusively to one man . are they equal in status ? praise be to god , but most of them do not know .
if only a koran whereby the mountains were set in motion , or the earth cleaved asunder , or the dead spoken to . no , but to allah is the affair altogether . do those who believe know that had allah willed he could have guided all people ? as for those who disbelieve , because of what they do , disaster will not cease to afflict them , or it alights near their home until the promise of allah comes . allah will not break his promise .
i believe in your lord ; so listen to me . ”
for all there will be ranks from what they did . thy lord is not unaware of what they do .
the fruit clusters of which are hanging down .
god has prepared for them gardens through which rivers flow , in which they shall abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
no intercession with him will be of any benefit except that of those whom he has granted permission . the angels can not intercede . they are always submissive to their lord . fear vanishes from their heart when . they ask each other ,  what did your lord say ?  others answer ,  he spoke the truth . he is the most high and the most great . 
“ and when i inspired the disciples : ` believe in me and in my messenger . ' they said , ` we have believed , so bear witness that we have submitted . ' “
andthose who believe and do good deeds , we will make them enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them for ever ; they shall have therein pure mates , and we shall make them enter a dense shade .
and guard yourselves against a day when no soul will in aught avail another , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will compensation be received from it , nor will they be helped .
then as he was about to lay hands on the one who was their common enemy , he cried out :  o moses , do you want to kill me as you killed that person yesterday ? you only want to be a tyrant in the land and no peacemaker . 
as for those who areguided , he enhances their guidance and invests them with their godwariness .
they ask you as to what they should spend . say : whatever wealth you spend , it is for the parents and the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer , and whatever good you do , allah surely knows it .
submitted nooh , “ my lord ! help me as they deny me . ”
if they had established the torah and the gospel and what was sent down to them from their lord they would be eating from above them and from beneath their feet . some of them are a righteous nation ; but many of them evil is what they do .
again , what shall make thee know whatsoever the day of requital is ?
the day when we shall raise a witness from each community and then the unbelievers will neither be allowed to plead nor will they be asked to repent and seek pardon .
forhe might make what they differed about plain to them , and that the infidels may realise that they were liars .
and believe in that i have sent down , confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve in it . and sell not my signs for a little price ; and fear you me .
and lo ! verily i am forgiving toward him who repenteth and believeth and doeth good , and afterward walketh aright .
by the night when it envelops ,
when they are cast therein , they will hear thedrawing in of its breath as it blazes forth .
which then smoothly speed along ,
so there will not benefit them the intercession ofintercessors .
and if they believe in the same way you have believed , they have attained guidance ; and if they turn away , they are clearly being stubborn ; so allah will soon suffice youagainst them ; and he only is the all hearing , the all knowing .
in their history verily there is a lesson for men of understanding . it is no invented story but a confirmation of the existingand a detailed explanation of everything , and a guidance and a mercy for folk who believe .
if those who did wrong owned everything on earth , and the like of it with it , they would redeem themselves with it from the terrible suffering on the day of resurrection . but there will appear to them from god what they never anticipated .
every soul must taste of death , and we try you with evil and with good , for ordeal . and unto us ye will be returned .
god has control of the heavens and the earth ; he creates whatever he will -- he grants female offspring to whoever he will , male to whoever he will ,
my lord , you have given meof sovereignty and taught me of the interpretation of dreams . creator of the heavens and earth , you are my protector in this world and in the hereafter . cause me to die a muslim and join me with the righteous . 
and on the day when the disbelievers are presented upon the fire ; it will be said , “ is this not a reality ? ” they will answer , “ by oath of our lord , surely yes , why not ? ” ; it will be said , “ therefore taste the punishment , the recompense of your disbelief . ”
and say , “ my lord , lead me in through an entry of truth , and lead me out through an exit of truth , and grant me from you a supporting power . ”
and others await allah 's decree , whether he will punish them or will forgive them . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
have they not considered how many generations we destroyed before them ? we had established them on earth more firmly than we established you , and we sent the clouds pouring down abundant rain on them , and we made rivers flow beneath them . but we destroyed them for their sins , and established other civilizations after them .
and those whose scales are light are the people who put themselves to ruin – the recompense of the injustice they used to do to our signs .
the day when they will come out of the graves quickly as racing to a goal ,
allah turned with favour to the prophet , the muhajirs , and the ansar , - who followed him in a time of distress , after that the hearts of a part of them had nearly swerved ; but he turned to them : for he is unto them most kind , most merciful .
o believers , when you negotiate a debt for a fixed term , draw up an agreement in writing , though better it would be to have a scribe write it faithfully down ; and no scribe should refuse to write as god has taught him , and write what the borrower dictates , and have fear of god , his lord , and not leave out a thing . if the borrower is deficient of mind or infirm , or unable to explain , let the guardian explain judiciously ; and have two of your men to act as witnesses ; but if two men are not available , then a man and two women you approve , so that in case one of them is confused the other may prompt her . when the witnesses are summoned they should not refuse . but do not neglect to draw up a contract , big or small , with the time fixed for paying back the debt . this is more equitable in the eyes of god , and better as evidence and best for avoiding doubt . but if it is a deal about some merchandise requiring transaction face to face , there is no harm if noin writing . have witnesses to the deal , that the scribe or the witness is not harmed . if he is , it would surely be sinful on your part . and have fear of god , for god gives you knowledge , and god is aware of everything .
god it is who has sent down the book with the truth , and also the balance . and what shall make thee know ? haply the hour is nigh .
except such as aregoing to the blazing fire !
then , when they perceivedour torment , behold , theyflee from it .
tell them , :  who protects you , during the night or the day from the most compassionate lord ?  and yet they turn away from the admonition of their lord .
and he had already led astray from among you much of creation , so did you not use reason ?
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is another punishmentbefore this , but most of them know not . .
and if , after adversity , we let him taste good fortune he says ,  all my ills are gone .  he becomes exultant and boastful .
but not a prophet came to them , without they mocked at him ;
those who love the life of the world more than the hereafter , and debarfrom the way of allah and would have it crooked : such are far astray .
no , by the moon !
“ and that you shall worship me ? this is the straight path . ”
he came to the city when the people were in a care-free mood , and saw two men quarrelling , one belonging to his community , the other to his enemies . the man who belonged to his community appealed for help against the one who belonged to the enemies . moses struck him a blow with his fist and finished him off .  this is of satan 's doing ,  he said .  he is certainly an enemy and a corrupter . 
then we totally destroyed the others .
and job , when he cried unto his lord , : lo ! adversity afflicteth me , and thou art most merciful of all who show mercy .
but they say ,  why are not signs sent down to him from his lord ?  say ,  the signs are only with allah , and i am only a clear warner . 
o you who believe ! if you support god , he will support you , and will strengthen your foothold .
and verily , we shall recount their whole story with knowledge , for we were never absent .
say , “ if your parents , and your children , and your siblings , and your spouses , and your relatives , and the wealth you have acquired , and a business you worry about , and homes you love , are more dear to you than god , and his messenger , and the struggle in his cause , then wait until god executes his judgment. ” god does not guide the sinful people .
it is not for god to have a child—glory be to him . to have anything done , he says to it , “ be , ” and it becomes .
woe , then , to the unbelievers , on account of that day of theirs which they have been promised !
till , when he comes to us , he says , 'would there had been between me and thee the distance of the two easts ! ' an evil comrade !
laughing , joyous .
nor of the unseen is he a tenacious concealer .
this is news of the unknown we reveal to you , for you were not present when joseph 's brothers agreed on their course of action , and devised their plot .
there is an excellent example in them for you—for anyone who seeks god and the last day . but whoever turns away—god is the self-sufficient , the most praised .
then , when one blast is sounded on the trumpet ,
had god not decreed exile for them , he would have certainly punished them . in this life and in the next life they would have suffered the torment of hell fire .
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zechariah
and when they turn their eyes towards the inmates of the fire , they will say ,  our lord , do not include us among the wrongdoers ! 
there is also evidencein the story of the thamud , who were told to enjoy themselves for an appointed time .
he makes satan 's suggestions a trial for those whose hearts are diseased or hardened , and , surely , the wrongdoers are far gone in error ,
and never will your lord destroy the townsuntil he sends to their mother town a messenger reciting to them our verses . and never would we destroy the towns unless the people thereof are zalimun .
which then of thy lord 's benefits wilt thou doubt ?
that is because they hate the revelation of allah ; so he has made their deeds fruitless .
god has created every living being from water : some of them creep on their bellies ; some walk on two feet and some of them walk on four legs . god creates whatever he wants . he has power over all things .
our lord ! make not our hearts to deviate after thou hast guided us aright , and grant us from thee mercy ; surely thou art the most liberal giver .
“ and indeed we had bestowed upon you a favour one more time . ”
then we would surely have cut his life-vein
that god may chastise the hypocrites , men and women alike , and the idolaters , men and women alike ; and that god may turn again unto the believers , men and women alike . god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and assuredly harun had said unto them afore : o my people ! ye are only being tempted thereby ; and verily your lord is the compassionate ; so follow me and obey my command .
the real sovereignty will belong to ar-rahman . how grievous will be the day for the infidels !
when we made a covenant with the children of israel , you shall worship none except allah . show kindness to your parents , to kinsmen , to the orphans , and to the needy , and speak of goodness to people . establish your prayers and pay the obligatory charity . but , except for a few , you all turned your backs and gave no heed .
and allah hath created the heavens and the earth with purpose and that every soul may be recompensed for that which it hath earned . and they will not be wronged .
children of israel ! we saved you from your enemies and made a covenant with you on the right side of the mountain . we sent down manna and quails .
peace be with moses and aaron .
and when we made the housea resort for mankind and sanctuary , : take as your place of worship the place where abraham stood . and we imposed a duty upon abraham and ishmael , : purify my house for those who go around and those who meditate therein and those who bow down and prostrate themselves .
and chide not him who asks ,
aaron had indeed told them earlier :  o my people , you are being only misled with this . surely your lord is ar-rahman . so follow me and obey my command . 
and if we willed , we could have deformed them , in their places so they would not be able to proceed , nor could they return .
he shall say : will you look on ?
and the mountains will become as carded wool .
what do you have to do with explaining it ?
who are more unjust than those who ascribe falsehood to god ? when such people are brought into the presence of their lord , the witness will say ,  these are the ones who told lies about their lord . certainly god will condemn the unjust
thus have we sent itdownas clear signs , evidences and proofs , and surely , allah guides whom he wills .
and know that whatsoever ye obtain of spoils then verily unto allah belongeth a fifth thereof and unto the apostle and unto his kindreds and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer if ye indeed have believed in allah and that which we sent down on our bondmans on the day of distinction , the day whereon the two hosts met . and allah is over everything potent .
from following my way ? have you disobeyed my command ? 
the followers will say , “ in fact , for you ! may you not get open space ! it is you who brought this calamity upon us ! ” so what a wretched destination .
as a fitting recompense for their deeds .
he said :  can i entrust him to you except as i entrusted his brother ] to you aforetime ? but allah is the best to guard , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy . 
should someone suspect bias or injustice on the part of a testator , and then reconciles between them , he commits no sin . god is forgiving and merciful .
and when youare among them and lead them in prayer , only a group of them should be with you , and they must keep their weapons with them ; so when they have performed their prostrations they should move away behind you ; and the other group that had not prayed , must come and offer prayers in your leadership , keeping their guard and weapons with them ; the disbelievers wish that you neglect your arms and your means so they may overpower you with a single attack ; it is no sin for you to lay aside your arms due to rain or if you are sick ; and keep your guard ; undoubtedly allah has kept prepared a disgraceful punishment for the disbelievers .
and we made the house a focal point for the people , and a sanctuary . use the shrine of abraham as a place of prayer . and we commissioned abraham and ishmael , “ sanctify my house for those who circle around it , and those who seclude themselves in it , and those who kneel and prostrate . ”
 praise be to allah , who hath granted unto me in old age isma'il and isaac : for truly my lord is he , the hearer of prayer !
but they play around in doubt .
we bestowedupon job . recall , when he cried to his lord :  behold , disease has struck me and you are the most merciful of those that are merciful . 
if yeeschew the most heinous of the things which ye are forbidden to do , we shall expel out of you all the evil in you , and admit you to a gate of great honour .
my wealth has not availed me ,
and who are more unjust than those who prevent the name of allah from being mentioned in his mosques and strive toward their destruction . it is not for them to enter them except in fear . for them in this world is disgrace , and they will have in the hereafter a great punishment .
there they will have all that they desire , and we have more .
god has sent down water from the sky and has brought the dead earth to life . in this there is evidencefor those who listen .
therefor judge thou between us , ajudgment , and save me and those believers who are with me .
so we desired that their lord might give them in his place one better than him in purity and nearer to having compassion .
therein will be a bubbling spring :
of what avail shall their enjoyment be to them ?
, they ask you what has been made lawful for them . tell them ,  all pure things are made lawful for you .  if you train dogs or other beasts for hunting , you should train them according to what god has taught you . it , then , is lawful for you to eat the animals that they hunt , provided you mention the name of god over the prey . have fear of god . certainly god 's reckoning is swift .
i do not demand for it any wealth from you , o my people . my reward is with god . and i will not drive those away who believe . they have also to meet their lord . but i see you are an ignorant people .
saying : put him into a chest , then cast it down into the river , then the river shall throw him on the shore ; there shall take him up one who is an enemy to me and enemy to him , and i cast down upon you love from me , and that you might be brought up before my eyes ;
said ,  you believed him before i gave you permission . indeed , he is your leader who has taught you magic . so i will surely cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , and i will crucify you on the trunks of palm trees , and you will surely know which of us is more severe inpunishment and more enduring . 
surely this islam is your religion , one religion , and i am your lord , therefore serve me .
o prophet , when believing women come to you and pledge to you that they will not associate aught with allah in his divinity , that they will not steal , that they will not commit illicit sexual intercourse , that they will not kill their children , that they will not bring forth a calumny between their hands and feet , and that they will not disobey you in anything known to be good , then accept their allegiance and ask allah to forgive them . surely allah is most forgiving , most compassionate .
do you call on baal , and forsake the best of creators ?
as for me , they hold the charge of a crime against me . i fear they will put me to death . 
burn in it . whether you are patient , or impatient , it is the same for you . you are only being repaid for what you used to do . ”
you will see , and they will see ,
is it a matter of wonderment to men that we have sent our inspiration to a man from among themselves ? - that he should warn mankind , and give the good news to the believers that they have before their lord the lofty rank of truth.say the unbelievers :  this is indeed an evident sorcerer ! 
lot said ,  these are my daughters if you want them . 
o thou enveloped in thy cloak ,
that day ye will possess no use nor hurt one for another . and we shall say unto those who did wrong : taste the doom of the fire which ye used to deny .
say :  who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ?  say :  allah .  say :  have you then takenauliya'other than him , such as have no power either for benefit or for harm to themselves ?  say :  is the blind equal to the one who sees ? or darkness equal to light ? or do they assign to allah partners who created the like of his creation , so that the creationseemed alike to them .  say :  allah is the creator of all things , he is the one , the irresistible . 
andthe sky and he who constructed it
and when they entered into the presence of joseph , he embraced his brother , and said , “ i am your brother ; do not be saddened by what they used to do . ”
o children of israel ; we delivered you from your enemy , and treated with you on the right side of the mount and sent down upon you the manna and the quails .
we only send the messengers to bring good news and to give warning . those who deny use fallacious arguments to nullify the truth , treating my revelations and my warnings as a jest .
they have fear of god for his power over them , and act as commanded .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! it does not behoove us to take any wali in your stead ! but you provided for them and their fathers until they forgot the reminder , and they were a ruined lot . ’
moses replied : 'my lord knows well who brings guidance from him and who shall possess the last residence . the harmdoers will not prosper '
it is not a jest .
she said : in what wise shall there be a boy unto me , whereas not a human being hath touched me , nor have i been a harlot ?
they ask thee for a pronouncement . say : allah hath pronounced for you concerning distant kindred . if a man die childless and he have a sister , hers is half the heritage , and he would have inherited from her had she died childless . and if there be two sisters , then theirs are two-thirds of the heritage , and if they be brethren , men and women , unto the male is the equivalent of the share of two females . allah expoundeth unto you , so that ye err not . allah is knower of all things .
and those who accepted faith and did good deeds – we will indeed relieve their sins and reward them for the best of their deeds .
they only shall tend allah 's mosques who believe in allah and the last day and establish prayer and give the poor rate and fear none save allah . belike those will be of the guided ones .
so turn away from them ; you are not to blame .
andwhen you slew a man and were therefore accusing each other concerning it ; and allah wanted to expose what you were hiding .
 those whose lives the angels take in a state of wrong-doing to their own souls .  then would they offer submission ,  we did no evil .  ,  nay , but verily allah knoweth all that ye did ;
yet when the eyes are dazzled ,
do you not think that the story of the companions of the cave and the inscription was one of our marvelous miracles ?
do they await anything except the like of the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ then wait ! i too am waiting along with you . ’
but the dignitaries of his people , those who disbelieved and denied the meeting of the hereafter , and we had indulged them in the present life , said , “ this is nothing but a human like you ; he eats what you eat , and he drinks what you drink .
and if we had willed , we could have sent into every city a warner .
say :  i am a man like you , it is revealed to me that your god is one god , so take the straight path to him , and ask him to forgive your sins . woe to the idolaters
then we shall advance upon the work which they have done and render it as scattered dust .
and bear thou the glad tidings unto those who believe and do righteous works that verily for them shall be gardens whereunder rivers flow . so oft as they shall be provided with a fruit therefrom they will say : this is that wherewith we were provided afore ; and they shall be vouchsafed that which is consimilar ; and for them shall be therein spouses purified , and therein they shall be abiders .
we made the sky a preserved roof and yet they are disregardful of its signs .
surely ye shall behold thescorch .
the closing night ,
o men , bow you down and prostrate yourselves , and serve your lord , and do good ; haply so you shall prosper ;
this book has been sent down to you , let there be no heaviness in your heart about it , so that you may warn by means of it and it is a reminder to the believers .
they invoke in his stead only females ; they pray to none else than satan , a rebel
then why do you not , if you are not to be recompensed ,
they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , but they did not notice .
keep yourself content with those who call upon their lord , morning and evening , seeking his pleasure , and do not let your eyes pass beyond them . do you seek the pomp and glitter of the world ? do not follow him whose heart we have caused to be heedless of our remembrance , and who follows his desires , and whose attitude is of excess .
say :  not equal are things that are bad and things that are good , even though the abundance of the bad may dazzle thee ; so fear allah , o ye that understand ; thatye may prosper . 
: o zachariah ! lo ! we bring thee tidings of a son whose name is john ; we have given the same name to none before .
then we withdraw it to us a gradual concealed withdrawal .
and the booty which they received from it . god is majestic and all-wise .
indeed the number of months before allah is twelve – in the book of allah – since the day he created the heavens and the earth , of which four are sacred ; this the straight religion ; so do not wrong yourselves in those months ; and constantly fight against the polytheists as they constantly fight against you ; and know well that allah is with the pious .
sad . by the renowned qur'an ,
and a full cup .
o people who believe ! endure and surpass your enemies in endurance , and guard the frontiers of the islamic nation ; and keep fearing allah , hoping that you may succeed .
and certainly we created you , then we fashioned you , then we said to the angels : prostrate to adam . so they did prostrate except iblis ; he was not of those who prostrated .
peace be with noah among all men in the worlds .
those—their penalty is that upon them falls the curse of god , and of the angels , and of all mankind .
if you encounter the disbelievers in a battle , strike-off their heads . take them as captives when they are defeated . then you may set them free as a favor to them , with or without a ransom , when the battle is over . this is the law . had god wanted , he could have granted themvictory , but he wants to test you through each other . the deeds of those who are killed for the cause of god will never be without virtuous results .
and remember , we said to you :  enter this city , eat wherever you like , as much as you please , but pass through the gates in humility and say : 'may our sins be forgiven . ' we shall forgive your trespasses and give those who do good abundance .
and recall what time a community of them said why exhort ye a people whom allah is going to destroy or chastise with a severe chastisenent they said : to justify us before your lord , and that haply they may fear .
what is the matter with you that you do not speak ?
their lord announces to them good news of mercy from him , and acceptance , and gardens wherein they will have lasting bliss .
he hath only forbidden you dead meat , and blood , and the flesh of swine , and that on which any other name hath been invoked besides that of allah . but if one is forced by necessity , without wilful disobedience , nor transgressing due limits , - then is he guiltless . for allah is oft-forgiving most merciful .
and when he reached maturity , we bestowed on him judgment and knowledge . as such we recompense those who do good .
remember when we gave moses the scripture , and the criterion , so that you might be guided .
so moses threw down his staff and suddenly it appeared as a serpent , plainly visible .
unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . and allah is sufficient as defender .
and of abraham who fulfilled his trust ? --
“ that destroys all things by the command of its lord ” – so at morning none could be seen except their empty houses ; this is the sort of punishment we mete out to the guilty .
saying ,  i am your supreme lord  .
they who disbelieve and deny our ayatare those who will be the dwellers of the hell-fire .
or do you , , ask of them a payment , so they are by debt burdened down ?
say :  o mankind ! verily , i am sent to you all as the messenger of allah - to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . la ilaha illa huwa ; it is he who gives life and causes death . so believe in allah and his messenger , the prophet who can neither read nor writewho believes in allah and his words , the tauratand the injeeland also allah 's word :  be !  - and he was , i.e . 'iesason of maryam ] , and follow him so that you may be guided . 
we have enjoined man to show kindness to his parents -- for his mother bears him , in hardship upon hardship , and his weaning takes two years.give thanks to me and to your parents ; all will return to me .
he said :  we will certainly strengthen you through your brother and will invest both of you with such power that they shall not be able to hurt you . with the help of our signs the two of you and your followers will prevail . 
then we would have cut from him the aorta .
a lying , sinful forelock !
what has come upon you that you fight not in the cause of god and for the oppressed , men , women and children , who pray :  get us out of this city , o lord , whose people are oppressors ; so send us a friend by your will , and send us a helper . 
therefore do no be doubtful as to what these worship . they worship only that which their fathers worshiped before them . we shall indeed pay them in full their undiminished measure .
—those with whom you made a treaty , and who violated their treaty every time , and who are not godwary .
and kill not your children for fear of poverty . we provide for them and for you . surely , the killing of them is a great sin .
it is we who will inherit the earth , and all beings thereon : to us will they all be returned .
say ,  are there of your 'partners ' any who begins creation and then repeats it ?  say ,  allah begins creation and then repeats it , so how are you deluded ? 
the heavens webbed-with-tracks is witness
o mankind , fear your lord , who created you from one soul and created from it its mate and dispersed from both of them many men and women . and fear allah , through whom you ask one another , and the wombs . indeed allah is ever , over you , an observer .
do you send it down from the clouds , or we send it down ?
my lord ! deliver me and my followers from what they do .
and grain covered with husk , and fragrant flowers .
if their honesty is challenged , two others from the relatives of the deceased should swear in the same way and testify to the bequest saying ,  we swear by god that our testimony is the true one . we do not transgress in the matter lest we become unjust ones . 
say : ' i do not tell you that i have the treasuries of allah or know the unseen , nor do i claim to be an angel . i follow only that which is revealed to me ' say : 'are the blind and the seeing alike ? will you not think '
consequently , by allah 's grace , they routed the unbelievers , and david killed goliath ; and allah gave him kingship and wisdom and taught him whatever other things he willed . and if allah had not been repelling one set of people by means of another , the earth would have been filled with chaos . but allah is bountiful to the world .
and suddenly they will beupon the earth 's surface .
and he made you heirs to their land and their dwellings and their property , anda land which you have not yet trodden , and allah has power over all things .
 o my people ! yours is the kingdom this day , you are uppermost in the land . but who will save us from the torment of allah , should it befall us ?  fir'aunsaid :  i show you only that which i see , and i guide you only to the path of right policy ! 
“ he is just a man who has fabricated a lie against allah , and we are not going to believe him . ”
o o ye who believe : fear allah and leave that which remainoth of usury if ye are believers .
it is he who has made you inherit the earth . he who denies him shall bear the burden of his denial . god 's displeasure with the deniers will only be increased by their denial of the truth , it will only increase their loss .
when abraham said to his father and his people , “ i am innocent of what you worship .
if only , when our disaster came on them , they had been humble ! but their hearts were hardened and the devil made all that they used to do seem fair unto them !
and accomplish the pilgrimage and the visit for allah , but if , you are prevented , whatever offering is easy to obtain , and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches its destination ; but whoever among you is sick or has an ailment of the head , hea compensation by fasting or alms or sacrificing , then when you are secure , whoever profits by combining the visit with the pilgrimagewhat offering is easy to obtain ; but he who can not findshould fast for three days during the pilgrimage and for seven days when you return ; thesetencomplete ; this is for him whose family is not present in the sacred mosque , and be carefulto allah , and know that allah is severe in requiting .
and the companions of the ramparts call to men whose marks they recognize : 'neither your amassing nor your pride have availed you .
never stand you therein . verily , the mosque whose foundation was laid from the first day on piety is more worthy that you stand therein . in it are men who love to clean and to purify themselves . and allah loves those who make themselves clean and pureand water from urine and stools , after answering the call of nature ] .
with them will be spouses , modest of gaze and beautiful of eye ,
he had no faction to help him besides god , and he was helpless .
there is no god but he : it is he who gives life and gives death , - the lord and cherisher to you and your earliest ancestors .
then see how was the end of those warned ,
nay , but they say the like of what their predecessors of yore had said .
sons to be at his side ,
and those who honor their trusts and their pledges .
and when we assigned to ibrahim the place of the house , saying : do not associate with me aught , and purify my house for those who make the circuit and stand to pray and bow and prostrate themselves .
or have theythe unseen , so they writedown ?
and we did not send down this book towards you except for you to clearly explain to them the matters in which they may differ , and a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
but when moses came to them with our signs as clear evidences , they said ,  this is not except invented magic , and we have not heard of thisamong our forefathers . 
so , we encompassed in knowledge what was with him .
he said ,  my lord , forgive me and grant me a kingdom such as will not belong to anyone after me . indeed , you are the bestower . 
they rejoice because of the favours from allah andmunificence , and because allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
proclaim , “ if all mankind and jinns agree to bring an equivalent to the qur ’ an , they will not be able to bring its equal – even if they were to help each other . ”
who believed in our ayatand were muslims .
, you are destined to die and they too are destined to die .
their eyes will be downcast and disgrace will overwhelm them . such is the day that they were promised .
tell them , : “ did you considerif this qur'an were indeed from allah and yet you rejected it ? and this even though a witness from the children of israel has testified to the like of it . but he believed , while you waxed arrogant . verily allah does not guide such wrong-doers to the right way .
you worship whatever you wish besides him. ’ say , ‘ the losers are those who ruin themselves and their families on the day of resurrection. ’ indeed , that is a manifest loss !
lo ! we , even we are they who hymn his praise
say , ‘ observe what is in the heavens and the earth. ’ but neither signs nor warnings avail a people who have no faith .
certainly we afflicted pharaoh ’ s clan with droughts and loss of produce , so that they may take admonition .
theysaid :  you are only human beings like ourselves , and the most beneficenthas revealed nothing , you are only telling lies . 
all-knower of the unseen and the seen ! exalted be he over all that they associate as partners to him !
the prophet told a secret to one of his wives telling her not to mention it to anyone else . when she divulged it , god informed his prophet about this . the prophet told his wife part of the information which he had received from god and ignored the rest . then she asked ,  who informed you about this ?  he replied ,  the all-aware and all-knowing one has told me  .
then they disdained the command of their lord ; wherefore the bolt laid hold of them even while they looked on .
they have denied the truth , but soon will come to them the news of what they ridiculed .
why do you laugh rather than weep ?
and as for 'aad , they were destroyed by a screaming , violent wind
then found they one of our slaves , unto whom we had given mercy from us , and had taught him knowledge from our presence .
and the disbelievers conspired , and allah covertly planned to destroy them ; and allah is the best of secret planners .
and created you in pairs ?
laughing and full of joy ,
indeed , i have relied upon allah , my lord and your lord . there is no creature but that he holds its forelock . indeed , my lord is on a pathstraight . 
nothing has been said to you which was not said to the messengers who lived before you . your lord is certainly all-forgiving , but stern in his retribution .
may the hands of abu lahab perish , may he be ruined .
for allah is he who givessustenance , - lord of power , - steadfast .
and the angels will be on its sides , and eight will , that day , bear the throne of thy lord above them .
surely we sent on them a tornado in a day of bitter ill-luck
allah has promised those of you who believe and do good works that he will indeed make them successors in the land as he made those who were before them successors , and that he will indeed establish their religion for them ; that which he has approved for them , and will exchange safety for them after their fear . they worship me and associate nothing with me . after that , those who disbelieve are the impious .
the jews and the christians will never be satisfied with you , o muhammad , until you follow their way . tell them plainly ,  the right way is shown by allah .  and if , after all the ' knowledge you have received , you were to yield to their desires , you shall find neither any friend nor helper to protect you from allah 's wrath .
no , the unbelievers exalt in their division .
lo ! heretofore they were effete with luxury
the people of the city came , rejoicing .
in them are women of good behaviour and gorgeous faces .
as for those who believe and do righteous works—we never burden any soul beyond its capacity—these are the inhabitants of the garden ; abiding therein eternally .
and say : ' i am the plain warner '
they say ,  lord , you have caused us to die twice and you have brought us back to life twice . we have confessed our sins , so is there any way out of this ? 
and we sent messengers before thee , and we assigned to them wives , and seed ; and it was not for any messengers to bring a sign , but by god 's leave . every term has a book .
who creates first then reverts it ? and who gives you provision from the heavens and the earth ? is there any other god along with god ? tell them :  bring your proof , if you are truthful . 
and declare thou unto them that water hath been divided between them ; every drinking shall be by turns .
wherein both will be thoserestraining their glances upon their husbands , whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
he is the only lord , so choose him as your guardian .
thus the word of your lord is fulfilled concerning the transgressors that they shall not believe .
and he accepts the prayers of those who accept faith and do good deeds , and gives them a greater reward by his munificence ; and for the disbelievers is a severe punishment .
except for those who repent before they fall into your power : in that case , know that allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal , and what they reveal .
then , for him who tagha .
say , “ if i disobey my lord , i then fear the punishment of the great day . ”
say :  o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! all-knower of the ghaiband the seen . you will judge between your slaves about that wherein they used to differ . 
and collectedand hoarded .
lord of the arsh , the glorious ,
those who are in a wholesome state when the angels take them—will say , “ peace be upon you ; enter paradise , for what you used to do . ”
we did not send any apostles before you but that they indeed ate food and walked in marketplaces . we have made you atest for one another , if you will be patient and steadfast , and your lord is all-seeing .
he made you inheritors of their land , their houses , and their possessions , and another land on which you had never set foot before . truly , allah is powerful over everything .
we send our messengers only to proclaim glad tidings and to give warning . but the unbelievers dispute with false arguments so that they may belie the truth . they have taken my verses and warnings in mockery .
o ye who believe ! take not for an intimate anyone besides yourselves ; they shall not be remiss in doing you mischief . fain would they that which distresseth you . surely their malice hath shewn itself by their mouths , and that which their breasts conceal is greater still . surely we have expounded unto you the signs , if ye will but reflect .
ta ' . sin . these are the verses of the qur'an and a clear book ;
consider , how they have lied against their own souls and have lost their gods .
verily ! the worst ofliving creatures with allah are the deaf and the dumb , those who understand not .
your lord will give you , and you will be satisfied .
hast thou not seen how thy lord did with the men of the elephant ?
“ enter the gates of hell , to remain in it forever ” ; so what a wretched destination for the haughty !
will you bid others to piety , and forget yourselves while you recite the book ? do you not understand ?
ye people of the book ! why do ye clothe truth with falsehood , and conceal the truth , while ye have knowledge ?
you will mount stage by stage .
it is a fire , intensely hot .
surely there are clear signs in that . in this way we put people to the test .
then we will save those who feared allah and leave the wrongdoers within it , on their knees .
and zachariah when he called to his lord saying : 'lord , do not let me remain by myself ; you are the best of inheritors '
ye people of the book ! why reject ye the signs of allah , of which ye arewitnesses ?
say : lo ! my worship and my sacrifice and my living and my dying are for allah , lord of the worlds .
and that our hosts , they verily would be the victors .
verily , your waliis allah , his messenger , and the believers , - those who perform as-salat , and give zakat , and they bow down .
the lord said ,  moses , throw it on the ground  .
this because they say :  the fire shall not touch us but for a few numbered days  : for their forgeries deceive them as to their own religion .
] said :  i am not the one to prostrate myself to a human being , whom you created from sounding clay of altered black smooth mud . 
have these people not travelled through the land to make their hearts understand and let their ears hear ; the truth is that it is not the eyes that are blind but the hearts that are in the bosoms that are blinded .
and allah created you from clay , then a drop of liquid , then made you as couples ; and no female conceives or gives birth except with his knowledge ; and every aged being that is given the age , and every one whose life is kept short – all this is in a book ; indeed this is easy for allah .
and purchase not a small gain at the price of allah 's covenant . lo ! that which allah hath is better for you , if ye did but know .
to those against whom war is made , permission is given , because they are wronged ; - and verily , allah is most powerful for their aid ; -
until you confronted the graves .
and you carve out of the mountains , homes , with skill .
and if a breath of the torment of thy lord were to touch them , they will say : woe unto us ! we have been wrong-doers .
leave alone those for whom religion is only a sport and pastime and are deceived by the life of this world , but continue to remind them with the quran , lest a soul be held in pledge because of what it has wrought , having no helper or intercessor besides god . whatever ransom they may offer , it will not be accepted . such are those that are damned by their own actions : they will have boiling water to drink and a painful punishment for their denial of truth .
it is allah who created you weak , then after weakness gave you strength , then after strength gave you weakness and old age ; he creates whatever he wills ; and only he is the all knowing , the able .
allah hath prepared for them stern punishment ; so keep your duty to allah , o men of understanding ! o ye who believe ! now allah hath sent down unto you a reminder ,
and his wife was standing , and she laughed : but we gave her glad tidings of isaac , and after him , of jacob .
do those who commit evil assume that we will make them equal to those who believe and do good deeds , therefore both becoming equal in life and death ? what an evil judgement they impose !
but as a reminder to he who fears .
those - their reward is forgiveness from their lord and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide eternally ; and excellent is the reward of theworkers .
we are closer to him than you , but you can not see .
if you invoke them they will not hear your invocation , and even if they heard they can not respond to you , and on the day of resurrection they will forswear your polytheism , and none can inform you like the one who is all-aware .
no ! indeed , he has been toward our verses obstinate .
and that he it is who enriches and gives to hold ;
thus did we return moses to his mother that we would delight her eyes , relieve her sorrows , and let her know that the promise of god was true , but many people do not know .
because of their breaking the covenant , and of their rejecting the ayatof allah , and of their killing the prophets unjustly , and of their saying :  our hearts are wrapped  - nay , allah has set a seal upon their hearts because of their disbelief , so they believe not but a little .
the jews say , 'the christians stand not on anything ' ; the christians say , 'the jews stand not on anything ' ; yet they recite the book . so too the ignorant say the like of them . god shall decide between them on the day of resurrection touching their differences .
you see many of them race with one another in sin and transgression and devour the unlawful . evil is what they do .
jesus never disdained the worship of god nor did the nearest angels to god . whoever , out of pride , disdains the worship of god should know that everyone will be brought before him .
and what do you know , howthe sijjeen is !
what , is this magic , or is it you that do not see ?
he was just a servant whom we had blessed and made an exemplar for the children of israel .
as for those who stay clear of the worship of fake deities and turn penitently to allah , there is good news for them . so give good news to my servants
whatever argument they come to you with , we provide you with the truth , and a better exposition .
but pharaoh denied and disobeyed .
no indeed ; not a refuge !
he is allah , there is no god but he ; knower of the unseen and the seen . he is the compassionate , the merciful .
it is he who has subjected the sea to you , so that you eat of its soft flesh and bring up from it ornaments which you wear . and you see the ships plowingtheir course through it in order that you seek his bounty and give thanks .
but when the bearer of the good news arrived and cast the shirt on jacob 's face , his eyesight returned and he said ,  did i not tell you that i know from god what you do not know ? 
o men . the promise of god is true . let not the life of this world deceive you , nor let the deceiver deceive you about god .
thamood and ad cried lies to the clatterer .
that was why we laid it down for the children of israel that whoever killed a human being , except as a punishment for murder or for spreading corruption in the land , shall be regarded as having killed all mankind , and that whoever saved a human life shall be regarded as having saved all mankind . our messengers came to them with clear signs , but many of them continued to commit excesses in the land .
and for allah only are the best names , so invoke him by them ; and abandon those who depart from the truth regarding his names ; they will soon receive the reward of their deeds .
indeed , they who conceal what allah has sent down of the book and exchange it for a small price - those consume not into their bellies except the fire . and allah will not speak to them on the day of resurrection , nor will he purify them . and they will have a painful punishment .
as they come hurrying on in fear , their heads upraised , their gaze returning not to them , and their hearts as air .
if you disbelieve - indeed , allah is free from need of you . and he does not approve for his servants disbelief . and if you are grateful , he approves it for you ; and no bearer of burdens will bear the burden of another . then to your lord is your return , and he will inform you about what you used to do . indeed , he is knowing of that within the breasts .
recite what has been revealed to you from the book of your lord . nothing can change his words , and you will never find any refuge besides him .
and call in remembrance the favour of allah unto you , and his covenant , which he ratified with you , when ye said :  we hear and we obey  : and fear allah , for allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts .
they said : pray for us unto thy lord that he make clear to us whatshe is.answered : lo ! he saith , verily she is a cow neither with calf nor immature ; between the two conditions ; so do that which ye are commanded .
then whosoever hath worked good of an atom 's weight shall behold it
has the story reached you , of the honoured guestsalong with another two ] of ibrahim ?
but theblast overtook them before morning ,
even if i wish to advise you aright , my counsel will not profit you if god intend that you go astray , for he is your lord and to him you will return . 
lo ! we have appointed it a torment for wrong-doers .
'therefore today none of you shall have power to profit or hurt another . ' and we shall say to the evildoers , 'taste the chastisement of the fire , which you cried lies to ! '
some of the people of the book wish to make you go astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , though they do not sense it .
and pray , “ my lord ! cause me to alight at a blessed place – and you are the best of all who bring to settle . ”
what is the matter with you , , and ] you hope not for reward .
then they were filled with remorse and saw that they had erred and said :  if our lord does not forgive us we will surely be lost . 
 and allah will teach him the book and wisdom , the law and the gospel ,
this is how those who deny the signs of allah go reverting .
and your lord knows best all who are in the heavens and the earth . and indeed , we have preferred some of the prophets above others , and to dawudwe gave the zabur .
when our messengers came to lut , he was grieved on their account and felt himself powerlessthem . he said :  this is a distressful day . 
i call to witness the star of the pleiades when it has dipped
and we raised above them the mount , while making a covenant with them , and we said to them .  enter the gate humbly ,  and we also commanded them ,  transgress not in the matter of the sabbath .  we took from them a firm covenant .
have you then considered if we let them enjoy themselves for years ,
proclaim , , “ o mankind ! if you love allah , follow me – allah will love you and forgive you your sins ” ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and she took a veil apart from them ; then we sent unto her our spirit that presented himself to her a man without fault .
for any one who turns his back on that day , except to manoeuvre or rally to his side , will bring the wrath of god on himself , and have hell as abode ; and what an evil destination !
only seeking the acceptance of his lord , the most high .
thus we distinguish our signs , that the sinners ' way may be manifest .
but he whose scales are light those have lost their souls because they were harmful towards our verses .
good land yields its vegetation by the permission of its lord . while the corrupted yields only the scanty . so we make plain the verses to those who are thankful .
he who does not believe in god and his apostlewe have prepared for unbelievers a blazing fire . 
moses said : o pharaoh ! lo ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
that exists in a well-guarded tablet .
abraham said to his father azar , “ do you take idols for gods ? i see that you and your people are in evident error . ”
it is those who have faith , and do not mix their faith with wrongdoing , who will be secure , and it is they who are rightly guided . 
and as for 'ad , they were destroyed by a furious violent wind ;
how about when a disaster strikes them because what their hands have put forward , and then they come to you swearing by god : “ we only intended goodwill and reconciliation ” ?
they have certainly disbelieved who say ,  allah is the messiah , the son of mary  while the messiah has said ,  o children of israel , worship allah , my lord and your lord .  indeed , he who associates others with allah - allah has forbidden him paradise , and his refuge is the fire . and there are not for the wrongdoers any helpers .
verily , is able to bring him back !
by the time ,
you have certainly known the first creation . why , then , do you not take heed ?
from this very earth we created you and to the same earth we shall cause you to return , and from it we shall bring you forth to life again .
peace be on him on the day of his birth , and on the day of his death , and peace will be on him on the day he is raised up to life again .
and when our clear communications are recited to them you will find denial on the faces of those who disbelieve ; they almost spring upon those who recite to them our communications . say : shall i inform you of what is worse than this ? the fire ; allah has promised it to those who disbelieve ; and how evil the resort !
rather keep your duty to allah , and obey me .
and it will be said , “ call on your partners. ” and they will call on them , but they will not respond to them . and they will see the suffering . if only they were guided .
and we shall succour them with fruits and flesh such as they desire
or were you witnesses when death approached ya'qub ? when he said unto his sons ,  what will you worship after me ?  they said ,  we shall worship your ilah , the ilahof your fathers , ibrahim , isma'il , ishaque , one ilah , and to him we submit . 
and if we had pleased , we would certainly have exalted him thereby ; but he clung to the earth and followed his low desire , so his parable is as the parable of the dog ; if you attack him he lolls out his tongue ; and if you leave him alone he lolls out his tongue ; this is the parable of the people who reject our communications ; therefore relate the narrative that they may reflect .
 orit should say when itsees the penalty : 'if only i had another chance , i should certainly be among those who do good ! '
nor come nigh to adultery : for it is a shamefuland an evil , opening the road .
in themwill be fruits , and date- palms and pomegranates .
, tell them ,  running away will never be of any benefit to you even if you run away from death or being killed . still you would not be able to enjoy yourselves except for a short while . 
knower of the unseen and the witnessed , the exalted in might , the wise .
they running forward with necks outstretched , their heads uplifted , their gaze returning not towards them , and their hearts avoid !
then he gathered and cried aloud ,
and not a sign cometh unto them of the signs of their lord but that therefore they have been backsliders .
each we succour , these and those , from thy lord 's gift ; and thy lord 's gift is not confined .
and a few of those of later time .
who preach the messages of allah , and fear him , and fear none but allah . and enough is allah to callto account .
they said , 'pray to thy lord for us , that he make clear to us what her colour may be . ' he said , 'he says she shall be a golden cow , bright her colour , gladdening the beholders . '
when our messengers brought abraham the good newstheysaid ,  we are indeed going to destroy the people of this city , for the people of this city are truly wrongdoers . 
say , “ produce your witnesses who would testify that god has prohibited this. ” if they testify , do not testify with them . and do not follow the whims of those who deny our revelation , and those who do not believe in the hereafter , and those who equate others with their lord .
verily , we have created all things with qadar .
and nuh ! recall what time he cried aforetime ; so we answered him and delivered him and his house hold from a calamity mighty .
so woe to those who disbelieve because of that day of theirs which they are promised .
or dost thou reflect that the companions of the cave and of the inscription were wonders among our sign ?
believers , fear god as is his due , and when death comes , be in a state of complete submission to him .
 or you have a house of adornable materials , or you ascend up into the sky , and even then we will put no faith in your ascension until you bring down for us a book that we would read .  say :  glorifiedbe my lordabove all that evil theyassociate with him ! am i anything but a man , sent as a messenger ? 
they say they believe in god and the prophet , and have come to believe , yet a section of them turns back even after this ; and these are not believers .
realizing that a back-breaker has befallen them .
in a good seat , near a sovereign omnipotent .
that i should do righteousness in that i forsook ' no ! it is only a word which he will speak . behind them there shall stand a barrier till the day that they shall be resurrected .
o you who have believed , do not putbefore allah and his messenger but fear allah . indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
so if we take you away , we shall then indeed take revenge from them .
well pleased with their striving ,
he was created from gushing liquid .
but as for those who defiantly disobeyed , their refuge is the fire . every time they wish to emerge from it , they will be returned to it while it is said to them ,  taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . 
it is allah who takes away the souls at the time of their death , and those that die not during their sleep . he keeps thosefor which he has ordained death and sends the rest for a term appointed . verily , in this are signs for a people who think deeply .
as for those who fear their lord in secret—for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
andthose who disbelieve , for them is destruction and he has made their deeds ineffective .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the most honourable , the all knowing .
here are two adversaries feuding regarding their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire will be tailored for them , and scalding water will be poured over their heads .
“ you will surely know upon whom will come a torment that will abase him , and upon whom will fall a lasting torment . ”
surely in that case i should be in manifest error .
they scornfully said ,  lord , show us the record of our deeds before the day when everyone must present the account of their deeds .  .
that is the requital of the enemies of allah—the fire ! in it , they will have an everlasting abode , as a requital for their impugning our signs .
what do you imagine the lord of the worlds to be ? 
on the day when the heaven will heave withheaving ,
we madeas evidence of the truth . however , is there anyone who would take heed ?
the thamud were destroyed by a terrible storm of thunder and lightning ;
is not hewho produceth creation , then reproduceth it , and who provideth for you from the heaven and the earth ? is there any allah beside allah ? say : bring your proof , if ye are truthful !
follow what is divinely revealed to you from your lord ; there is none worthy of worship except him ; and turn away from the polytheists .
what is the matter with them that they evade the reminder
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them out of his bounty , jubilant that neither fear nor grief shall come upon the believers left behind in the world who have not yet joined them .
ibrahim was not a jew , nor a nazarene , but he was an upright muslim , nor was he of the associators .
allah - there is no god but he . his are the most excellent names .
those who have been evicted from their homes without right - only because they say ,  our lord is allah .  and were it not that allah checks the people , some by means of others , there would have been demolished monasteries , churches , synagogues , and mosques in which the name of allah is much mentioned . and allah will surely support those who support him . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
so the truth was established , and abolished was what they were doing .
and in the night-time also hymn his praise , and at the setting of the stars .
the stars are made to fade away ,
they carry your heavy loads to lands which you would not have been able to reach without great difficulty . your lord is certainly compassionate and all-merciful .
zechariah exclaimed : 'my lord ! how shall i have a son when old age has overtaken me and my wife is barren ? ' he said : thus shall it be ; allah does what he wills . '
and allah sets forth an example to those who believe the wife of firon when she said : my lord ! build for me a house with thee in the garden and deliver me from firon and his doing , and deliver me from the unjust people :
and allah 's is the east and the west , therefore , whither you turn , thither is allah 's purpose ; surely allah is ample-giving , knowing .
and thus have we made in every town the great ones to be its guilty ones , that they may plan therein ; and they do not plan but against their own souls , and they do not perceive .
for none may ever feel secure from the punishment of their lord ;
o you who have believed , do not enter houses other than your own houses until you ascertain welcome and greet their inhabitants . that is best for you ; perhaps you will be reminded .
and if ye intend to replace a wife by anot her , and ye have given the one of them a talent , take not back aught therefrom . would ye take it back by slander and manifest sin .
so today no ransom shall be taken from you or the faithless . the fire will be your abode : it is yourrefuge and an evil destination . ’
and admit them to paradise which he has made known to them .
and to establish them in the land ; and to show pharaoh , hamaan , and their troops , the very thing they feared .
they said , 'what , when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be indeed raised up ?
and if allah had not decreed migration for them , he verily would have punished them in the world , and theirs in the hereafter is the punishment of the fire .
and the life of ease in which they took delight !
most of them follow not but conjecture . assuredly conjecture can by no means take the place of truth . lo ! allah is aware of what they do .
have you seen him who turns his back ,
then he pursued a course .
many apostles have been scoffed before you ; but they who scoffed were themselves caught by what they had ridiculed .
and thou art a lodger in this land ;
no one besides god can rescue a soul from hardship .
said he , ‘ what prevented you from prostrating , when i commanded you ? ’ ‘ i am better than him , ’ he said . ‘ you created me from fire and you created him from clay . ’
the imminent is imminent ;
no ! you are going to know .
and so amongst men and crawling creatures and cattle , are they of various colours . those truly fear allah , among his servants , who have knowledge : for allah is exalted in might , oft-forgiving .
so why do you still reject the religion ?
for what sin she was slain ,
nay ! verily , man does transgress all bounds .
allah did curse him , but he said :  i will take of thy servants a portion marked off ;
you will never be able to maintain justice among your wives and love them all equally , no matter how hard you try . do not give total preference to one of them , leaving the other as if in suspense . if you do bring about reconciliation and maintain piety , god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
whosoever emigrates in the way of allah shall find in the land numerous refuges and abundance . whosoever leaves his house an immigrant to allah and his messenger and then death overtakes him , his wage shall have fallen upon allah . allah is the forgiver , the most merciful .
by command , from our presence . for wesend ,
proclaim , “ o my * slaves , who have wronged themselves , do not lose hope in allah ’ s mercy ; indeed allah forgives all sins ; indeed he only is the oft forgiving , the most merciful . ”
he made me to be blessed wherever i am , and he has charged me with prayer and charity for as long as i shall live .
indeed it is god who splits up the seed and the kernel , and brings forth the living from the dead , the dead from the living . this is god : so whither do you stray ?
and when they are reminded , they mind not ,
in retribution there is life . o men of sense , you may haply take heed for yourselves .
that for known days . but should any of you be sick or on a journey , let it be anumber of other days . those who find it straining shall be liable to atonement by feeding a needy person . should anyone do good of his own accord , that is better for him , and to fast is better for you , should you know .
o believers , when you go out on a journey in the way of god , be discreet and do not say to anyone who greets you in peace :  you are not a believer .  you desire the gain of earthly life , but there are prizes in plenty with god . you were also like himin the past , but god has been gracious to you . so be careful and discreet , for god is aware of what you do .
allah has created the heavens and the earth with the truth . surely , in that there is a sign for believers .
but he replied : 'do you shrink away from my gods , abraham ? surely , if you do not cease i will stone you , so leave me for awhile '
he said , “ what do i know about what they do ?
except those on the right side .
he said : no reproof against you this day ; allah may forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
so do not invoke any god besides allah , lest you should be among the punished .
in the day when allah gathereth together the messengers , and saith : what was your response ? they say : we have no knowledge . lo ! thou , only thou art the knower of things hidden ,
he rejects the faith , turns away
that he created pairs , male and female ,
but the saying : peace , peace .
so allah made them taste disgrace in worldly life . but the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
then we will surely extract from every sect those of them who were worst against the most merciful in insolence .
so be patient , . indeed , the promise of allah is truth . and ask forgiveness for your sin and exaltwith praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
and recall what time musa said unto his people : verily allah commandeth you that ye slaughter a cow . they said : makest thou a jest of us ? he said take refuge with allah that i should be of the ignorant .
no indeed ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
and every soul will be fully compensatedwhat it did ; and he is most knowing of what they do .
seek they to lay a plot ? then those who disbelieve it is they who shall be plotted against .
by time .
surely for those who say ,  god is our lord ,  and then remain firm , there is no fear or regret .
both these gardens yielded their fruits , and failed not aught thereof , and we caused a river to gush forth in their midst ,
a book revealed unto thee , - so let thy heart be oppressed no more by any difficulty on that account , - that with it thou mightest warnand teach the believers ) .
allah knows well those of you who create obstructionsand say to their brethren : “ come and join us. ” they hardly take any part in battle .
it is he who gives life and death ; and when he decides upon an affair , he says to it ,  be  , and it is .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide eternally . that is the great attainment .
and we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance to the children of israel : 'take not unto yourselves any guardian apart from me . '
it will not benefit you on that day , since you did wrong . you are partners in the suffering .
and of his signs are the ships sailing the sea like flags .
they answered and turned towards them , “ what is it you can not find ? ”
when itsees them from a far place , they will hear its raging and its roaring .
that was because their apostles used to bring them manifest proofs , but they defied . so allah seized them . indeed he is all-strong , severe in retribution .
he who brings a good deed shall have tenfold of its like , but he who brings a sin shall be recompensed only for its like . none shall be wronged .
forgiver of sins , accepter of repentance , severe in punishment , bountiful in bounty . there is no god but he . to him is the ultimate return .
and be not slack so as to cry for peace and you have the upper hand , and allah is with you , and he will not bring your deeds to naught .
when you murdered someone , each one of you tried to accuse others of being guilty . however , god made public what you were hiding .
the infidels will remain in doubt about it till the hour overtakes them unawares , or the punishment of the barren day destructive should come upon them .
and he brought down from their strongholds those of the people of the book who backed them , and he threw terror into their hearts . some of them you killed , and others you took captive .
for the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth shall swoon , save whom god wills . then it shall be blown again , and lo , they shall stand , beholding .
and ye love riches with exceeding love .
o ye who believe ! protect yourselves and your households from a fire the fuel whereof is mankind and stones , over which are angels , stern , strong ; they disobey not allah in that which he commandeth them , and do that which they are commanded .
has not the story reached you , , of those whobefore you ? - of the people of noah , and 'ad , and thamud ? - and of those whoafter them ? none knows them but allah . to them came messengers with clear ; but they put their hands up to their mouths , and said :  we do denyon which ye have been sent , and we are really in suspiciousdoubt as to that to which ye invite us . 
so will you make the deaf listen or show the path to the blind , and to those who are in open error ? .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed for them a term , in which there is no doubt ; yet the wrongdoers are only intent on ingratitude .
they said : supplicate for us unto thy lord that he make manifest unto us whatever her colour should be . he said : verily he saith , she should be a yellow cow the colour whereof is deepest , delighting the beholders .
and do not be like those who came forth from their homes insolently and to be seen by people and avertfrom the way of allah . and allah is encompassing of what they do .
and if we will , we can drown them , so there would be no help in their distress , nor would they be saved .
said :  ye chiefs ! here is delivered to me - a letter worthy of respect .
they said ,  who has done this to our gods ? indeed , he is of the wrongdoers . 
these are some of the prophets god has blessed , from the descendants of adam , and from those we carried with noah , and from the descendants of abraham and israel , and from those we guided and selected . whenever the revelations of the most gracious are recited to them , they would fall down , prostrating and weeping .
and praise to allah , the lord and cherisher of the worlds .
and it is alike unto them , whather thou warnest them or warnest them not ; they shall not believe .
say :  do you refuse to believe in him who created the earth in two spans of time , and set up compeers to him , the lord of all the worlds ?
he is just a man who has fabricated a lie against allah , and we will not believe in him . ’
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , ‘ we are indeed going to destroy the people of this town . its people are indeed wrongdoers . ’
the cause is only against the ones who wrong the people and tyrannize upon the earth without right . those will have a painful punishment .
when you heard of it , why did not the believing men and believing women think well of their own people , and say ,  this is a manifest slander ? 
and will be scorched by the fire .
lord , you know all that we conceal or reveal . nothing in the heavens or the earth is hidden from god .
we had empowered them to an extent which we have not empowered you , ; and we had endowed them with hearing , and sight , and hearts : but neither their hearing , nor their sight , nor their hearts were of the least avail to them , since they went on rejecting god 's revelations ; and they were overwhelmed by the very thing which they had been wont to deride .
how many a generation have we destroyed before them , and theycalled out ; but it was not a time for escape .
they worship besides allah what has no power to provide them with anything from the heavens and the earth , nor are they capable .
said he : 'you are among the respited '
protects them ] , till he sees that theyhave conveyed the messages of their lord . and hesurrounds all that which is with them , and hekeeps count of all things .
do not obey the orders of the transgressors
verily we shall give life to the dead , and we record that which they send before and that which they leave behind , and of all things have we taken account in a clear book .
they said ,  indeed , we consider you a bad omen . if you do not desist , we will surely stone you , and there will surely touch you , from us , a painful punishment . 
adding ,  our lord , give double punishment to those who brought this upon us . 
and whomever allah sends astray , there is no friend for him against allah ; and you will see the unjust when they behold the punishment saying , “ is there a way to return ? ”
had they had faith in god , the prophet , and what was revealed to him , they would not have been the friends of the unbelievers . however , many of them are evil-doers .
as for the people of the right hand , how happy they will be !
they will have whatever they please with their lord . such is the reward for the virtuous .
if they disobey you , say ,  i bear no responsibility for what you do . 
and we helped them , so they overcame ;
the bedouins are stronger in disbelief and hypocrisy and more likely not to know the limits of whatallah has revealed to his messenger . and allah is knowing and wise .
men ! now there has come to you an exhortation from your lord , a healing for the ailments of the hearts , and a guidance and mercy for those who believe .
he said :  thus will it be . your lord said : 'it is easy for me , ' and that : 'we shall make him a sign for men and a blessing from us . ' this is a thing already decreed . 
and they were surprised that a herald of warning came to them from among themselves ; and the disbelievers said , “ he is a magician , a great liar ! ”
and a proclamation from god and his messenger to the people on the day of the greater pilgrimage , that god has disowned the polytheists , and so did his messenger . if you repent , it will be better for you . but if you turn away , know that you can not escape god . and announce to those who disbelieve a painful punishment .
even if they are patient , their abode is hell ; and if they beg for favour , none will favour them .
saying ,  we believe in the lord of the universe
recite to them the tale of the man to whom we gave our signs , but who then cast them to one side and satan overtook him . and he became one of those who went astray ,
and when they said , ' o god , if this be indeed the truth from thee , then rain down upon us stones out of heaven , or bring us a painful chastisement . '
he knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you publish . god knows the thoughts within the breasts .
 taste you ! verily , you werethe mighty , the generous !
surely with difficulty is ease .
andthose who reject our communications , we draw them nearby degrees from whence they know not .
and who is better in speech than he who summoneth unto allah , and worketh righteously , and saith : verily i am one of the muslims .
those who repent to allah , who worship him , who praise him , who fast , who bow down , who prostrate themselves , who enjoinfor al-ma'rufand forbidfrom al-munkar , and who observe the limits set by allah . and give glad tidings to the believers .
in order that allah may distinguish the vile from the good ; and the vile he shall place one upon anot her , and shall pile it all together , and shall place it into hell . those ! it is they who are the losers .
god granted a great favor to the believers by sending a messenger from their own people to recite to them god 's revelations , to purify them of moral defects , to teach them the book , and to give them wisdom . before this they had lived in manifest error .
except those who repent and amend and make manifest . these it is toward whom i relent . i am the relenting , the merciful .
what ! when a misfortune befalls you , after you had yourself inflicted twice as heavy losses , you say ,  how has this come about ?  say ,  it was your own fault .  truly , god has the power to will anything :
we shall now show them our signs in all the directions and within their own selves until it becomes clear to them that it is certainly the truth ; is not your lord sufficient as a witness over all things ?
we shall send the she-camel as a trial for them ; so watch their end with patience .
it shall be said to them , 'where is that you were serving
whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah . to him belongs all sovereignty and to him belongs all praise , and he has power over all things .
a powerful one from among the jinn said ,  i will bring it to you before you rise from your place , and indeed , i am for thisstrong and trustworthy . 
the life of this world is but play and amusement : and if ye believe and guard against evil , he will grant you your recompense , and will not ask youyour possessions .
you are only a human being like ourselves . indeed we think you are a liar .
for a single good deed , one will be rewarded tenfold . but the recompense for a bad deed will be equal to that of the deed and no injustice will be done to anyone .
have you considered al-lat and al-uzza ?
and yet there are men who contend about god without understanding , and follow every wayward devil
they said  so long as moses does not come back we are not going to give it up , and we will remain devoted to it . 
surely , in this is a proclamation to a worshiping nation .
and whosesoever balances will be light - those are they who have lost themselves in respect of our signs .
there is indeed a sign in that ; but most of them do not have faith .
surely , your lord is allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days and then istawathe throne , disposing the affair of all things . no intercessorexcept after his leave . that is allah , your lord ; so worship him . then , will you not remember ?
we have established you in the earth and there appointed for you livelihood ; little thanks you show .
o ye who believe ! allah will surely try you somewhatof the game which ye take with your hands and your spears , that allah may know him who feareth him in secret . whoso transgresseth after this , for him there is a painful doom .
andthe frequented house
o believers , if you yield to some of those who were given the scripture , they will cause you to renounce the truth after you have believed .
when that chastisement will descend upon their courtyard , evil shall that day be for those who had been warned .
they say :  when will the threat of punishment come to pass if you are truthful ? 
yet do they worship , besides allah , things that can neither profit them nor harm them : and the misbeliever is a helper , against his own lord !
serve god , and associate naught with him . be kind to parents , and the near kinsman , and to orphans , and to the needy , and to the neighbour who is of kin , and to the neighbour who is a stranger , and to the companion at your side , and to the traveller , and to that your right hands own . surely god loves not the proud and boastful
and when we have recited it to you ] , then follow you itsrecital .
thou seest the mountains and thinkest them firmly fixed : but they shall pass away as the clouds pass away : the artistry of allah , who disposes of all things in perfect order : for he is well acquainted with all that ye do .
we will certainly bring you magic to match it . so appoint a time between us and you , in an open space , which neither we nor you will fail to keep . 
whereas the wicked will be in hell ;
and why did you not , when you heard it , say ?  it is not right for us to speak of this . glory be to youthis is a great lie . 
say thou ! shall i declare unto you that which is better than these for those who fear allah are gardens with their lord , there under rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders , and spouses purified , and pleasure from allah . and allah is beholder of his bondsmen
remember god during the stated days ; but if a person comes away after two days , it will not be a sin ; and if one tarries , he will not transgress , if he keep away from evil . follow the law of god , and remember that you will have to gather before him in the end .
their obedience and speech are known . then when the affair is determined , if even then they gave credence unto allah , it would have been better for them .
lo ! herein verily are portents , for lo ! we are ever puttingto the test .
thou makest the night to pass into the day and thou makest the day to pass into the night , and thou bringest forth the living from the dead and thou bringest forth the dead from the living , and thou givest sustenance to whom thou pleasest without measure .
they said , “ we bring you what they have doubts about . ”
those who disbelieved among the people of the scripture and the polytheists were not to be parteduntil there came to them clear evidence -
lo ! those who malign allah and his messenger , allah hath cursed them in the world and the hereafter , and hath prepared for them the doom of the disdained .
him unto whom belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is of all things the witness .
it was said :  enter thou the garden .  he said :  ah me ! would that my people knew ! -
know they not that whoso opposeth allah and his messenger , his verily is fire of hell , to abide therein ? that is the extreme abasement .
except an old woman who lingered behind .
and fear a trial which shall surely not smite in particular the evildoers among you ; and know that god is terrible in retribution .
verily he ! he is the hearer , the knower .
thus indeed do we reward the muhsinun .
as to those who believe and work righteous deeds , they have , for their entertainment , the gardens of paradise ,
they said : o shu'eyb ! we understand not much of that thou tellest , and lo ! we do behold thee weak among us . but for thy family , we should have stoned thee , for thou art not strong against us .
then his lord chose him , so he turned to him and guided .
has the news of the dispute reached you ? when they scaled the sanctuary
the righteously striving believers will happily live in paradise .
and doors to their houses , and furnishings on which they recline .
and if thy lord willed , all who are in the earth would have believed together . wouldst thoucompel men until they are believers ?
return to your father and say ,  o our father , indeed your son has stolen , and we did not testify except to what we knew . and we were not witnesses of the unseen ,
the unbelievers of the people of the book and the idolaters shall be in the fire of gehenna , therein dwelling forever ; those are the worst of creatures .
those indeed are they who are denying the truth beyond doubt , and we have prepared a humiliating punishment for the deniers .
the endeavors of he who believes and does good works shall not go unthanked . we write it down for him .
o mankind ! if ye are in doubt concerning the resurrection , then lo ! we have created you from dust , then from a drop of seed , then from a clot , then from a little lump of flesh shapely and shapeless , that we may makeclear for you . and we cause what we will to remain in the wombs for an appointed time , and afterward we bring you forth as infants , thenthat ye attain your full strength . and among you there is he who dieth , and among you there is he who is brought back to the most abject time of life , so that , after knowledge , he knoweth naught . and thouseest the earth barren , but when we send down water thereon , it doth thrill and swell and put forth every lovely kind .
indeed you are calling them to a straight path ,
those who exchange the covenant of god , and their vows , for a small price , will have no share in the hereafter , and god will not speak to them , nor will he look at them on the day of resurrection , nor will he purify them . they will have a painful punishment .
then he mustered
we gave the persecuted nation dominion over the eastern and western lands which we had blessed . so the word of your lord , the finest , was fulfilled for the children of israel because of their patience ; and we destroyed the edifices , and towers of pharaoh and whatsoever they manufactured .
say : if the beneficent allah has a son , i am the foremost of those who serve .
but he who turneth away from remembrance of me , his will be a narrow life , and i shall bring him blind to the assembly on the day of resurrection .
but i , ‘ ‘ he is allah , my lord , ’ ’ and i do not ascribe any partner to my lord .
indeed we sent forth noah and abraham and established in their line prophecy and the book . then some of them embraced the guidance and many of them are wicked .
the righteously striving believers will have paradise for their dwelling as the reward of their good deeds .
but when the deafening cry shall be sounded
so we might test them therein . and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord he will put into arduous punishment .
those who were arrogant will say , “ we are all in it ; god has judged between the servants . ”
can one who prays in the watches of the night , bowing in homage or standing attentive , fearful of the life to come , and hoping for the mercy of his lord , ? say :  can those who know , and those who do not know , be equal ? only they think who are wise . 
and the day as it reveals .
they said : aziz ! verily he hath a father , an old man very aged ; so take one of us in his stead ; verily we behold thee to be of the well-doers .
he said , ‘ certainly you and your fathers have been in manifest error . ’
i seek your protection should they approach me . 
and how many of the generations have we destroyed before them who were better in respect of goods and outward appearance !
similar situationshave passed on before you , so proceed throughout the earth and observe how was the end of those who denied .
you have a good example in abraham and those with him . they said to their nation : 'we are quit of you , and that which you worship , other than allah . we disbelieve you , enmity and hatred has shown itself between us for ever until you believe in allah alone ' except that abraham said to his father : 'surely , i shall supplicate to ask for forgiveness for you although i have no power to do anything for you with allah ' ' our lord , in you we have put our trust ; to you we turn , and to you is the arrival ,
those whose eyes were screened to my message , and were unable to hear .
the life of the world is just play and diversion , but if you are faithful and godwary , he will give you your rewards , and will not ask your wealthfrom you .
and enjoin as-salaton your family , and be patient in offering them ] . we ask not of you a provision ; we provide for you . and the good endis for the muttaqun .
he said :  the knowledgeis with allah only , and i convey to you that wherewith i have been sent , but i see that you are a people given to ignorance ! 
and when they regretted and saw that they had gone astray , theysaid :  if our lord have not mercy upon us and forgive us , we shall certainly be of the losers . 
and cry not , beside allah , unto that which can not profit thee nor hurt thee , for if thou didst so then wert thou of the wrong-doers .
and allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour shall come to pass , on that day shall they perish who say false things .
whoso doeth that through aggression and injustice , we shall cast him into fire , and that is ever easy for allah .
and the stupor of death will come in truth ; that is what you were trying to escape .
but for god 's bounty to you and his mercy in the present world and the world to come there would have visited you for your mutterings a mighty chastisement .
people ask you concerning the hour , say :  the knowledge of it is with allah only . what do you know ? it may be that the hour is near ! 
going to your wives during the nights of the fast is made lawful for you ; they are coverings for you and you are coverings for them ; allah knows that you were deceiving yourselves , so he accepted your penance and forgave you ; so cohabit with them and seek what allah has destined for you – and eat and drink until the white thread becomes distinct to you from the black thread at dawn – then complete the fast till nightfall ; and do not touch women while staying in seclusion for worship in the mosques ; these are the limits imposed by allah , so do not go near them ; this is how allah explains his verses to mankind so that they may attain piety .
o you who have believed , whoever of you should revert from his religion - allah will bring fortha people he will love and who will love himhumble toward the believers , powerful against the disbelievers ; they strive in the cause of allah and do not fear the blame of a critic . that is the favor of allah ; he bestows it upon whom he wills . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
every foods was allowable unto the children of isra'il , save that which isra'il had forbidden unto himself , ere the taurat was revealed . say thou : bring ye then the taurat and recite it , if ye say sooth .
‘ undoubtedly allah is the lord of all – mine and yours – so worship him only ; this is the straight path . ’ ”
whoever has done an atom 's weight of good will see it .
you shall see them , as they are brought face to face with the chastisement , in a state of abject humiliation , looking with a furtive glance . but the believers will say : “ surely the true losers are they who lose themselves and their kindred on the day of resurrection. ” lo , the wrong-doers will be in an enduring torment .
o you who have faith ! do not violate allah ’ s sacraments , neither the sacred month , nor the offering , nor the necklaces , nor those bound for the sacred house , who seek their lord ’ s grace andpleasure . but when you emerge from pilgrim sanctity , you may hunt for game . ill feeling for a people should not lead you , because they barred you fromthe sacred mosque , to transgress . cooperate in piety and godwariness , but do not cooperate in sin and aggression , and be wary of allah . indeed allah is severe in retribution .
this is the recompense of allah ’ s enemies – the fire ; they have to stay in it forever ; the penalty for denying our signs .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make safe this territory , and preserve me and my sons from serving idols .
no nation can go before its term ends nor stay back .
and in the night , too , celebrate his glory , in the wake of prostration .
these two groups are like the blind and the deaf as compared with those who can see and hear . can the two be equal ? will you not then understand ?
and not to invoke any other than god , who can neither help nor hurt me ; for if i do , i would surely be unjust .
and the hosts of iblis all together .
if you display good or hide it , or pardon an evil , surely , allah is the pardoner , the powerful .
ah ! there you are , being invited to spend in the way of allah ; yet among you there are those who are stingy ; and whoever is stingy is stingy only to himself . allah is the all-sufficient , and you are all-needy , and if you turn away he will replace you with another people , and they will not be like you .
labouring , weary ,
and when moses had completed the term and was traveling with his family , he perceived from the direction of the mount a fire . he said to his family ,  stay here ; indeed , i have perceived a fire . perhaps i will bring you from thereinformation or burning wood from the fire that you may warm yourselves . 
and we shall create the means of ease for you .
how is it that you do not expend in the way of allah when to allah belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth ? those who spent their wealth and took part in fighting before the victory can not be equated . they are higher in rank than those who spent and fought afterwards . but to each allah has promised a good reward . allah is well aware of all that you do .
so , as for the orphan , do not oppress him ;
throw down your staff .  when moses saw his staff moving on the ground like a living being he fled with no desire to step forward . he was told ,  moses , step forward . do not be afraid ; you will be safe and secure .
eat from the pure and lawful things that god has given to you . have fear of god in whom you believe .
and by oath of the heaven and by oath of him who made it .
those who believe and do deeds of righteousness , and perform the prayer , and pay the alms -- their wage awaits them with their lord , and no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
when god made a covenant with the prophets , he said ,  here is the book and the wisdom which i have given you . when there comes to you a messenger fulfilling thatwhich is with you , you must believe in him and help him . do you then affirm this and accept the responsibility i have laid upon you in these terms ?  they said ,  we will affirm it .  god said ,  then bear witness , and i will bear witness with you . 
o believers , enter not the houses of the prophet , except leave is given you for a meal , without watching for its hour . but when you are invited , then enter ; and when you have had the meal , disperse , neither lingering for idle talk ; that is hurtful to the prophet , and he is ashamed before you ; but god is not ashamed before the truth . and when you ask his wives for any object , ask them from behind a curtain ; that is cleaner for your hearts and theirs . it is not for you to hurt god 's messenger , neither to marry his wives after him , ever ; surely that would be , in god 's sight , a monstrous thing .
it is not right that all the believers should go outall together . why , then , does not a party from every group come toin order to acquire a deeper knowledge of religion and to warn their people , so that they can guard themselves against evil ?
we have not revealed unto theethis qur'an that thou shouldst be distressed ,
and sent against them birds , in flocks ,
and all that ye see not
and when our messengers came to lot , he was perturbed by their coming and felt troubled on their account , and said : 'this is a distressing day .
and of his signs is that you sleep at night and day , and seek his bounty . surely , there are signs in this for those who hear .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , by stealth and openly , verily their reward is with their lord , and their shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
there was none of them but called the apostles liars , so just was my retribution .
so , which of your lord 's bounties will you doubt ? ”
and who bringeth out thepasture ,
they then slew the camel and rebelled against the orders of their lord saying ,  salih , if you are truly a messenger , let that torment with which you have threatened us come to pass . 
by allah , , we sent messengers to other communities before you but satan made their evil deeds attractive to them . the same satan is their patron today and they are heading towards a painful chastisement .
and you were not at the side of the mount when we calledbutas a mercy from your lord to warn a people to whom no warner had come before you that they might be reminded .
but as for him whose record shall be given to him from behind his back ,
so that we may bring forth thereby grain and a variety of plants ,
to whom the worldly life is dearer than the hereafter , and who prevent from the way of allah and wish deviations in it ; they are in extreme error .
do they assume that , in furnishing them with wealth and children .
said ,  we will see whether you were truthful or were of the liars .
my money can not avail me .
whoever commits evil or wrongs himself and then pleads to allah for forgiveness , will find allah all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and the comfort they enjoyed .
and ours their reckoning .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto da'ud grace from us , ' and said : mountains ! repeat our praise with him ; and also ye birds ! and we softened for him the iron .
fellow-prisoners ! is it better that there be diverse lords , or just allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and we surely expect that our lord will forgive us our sins for we are the first ones to believe . 
the day when a man will evade his brother ,
they said ,  o our people , indeed we have heard abook revealed after moses confirming what was before it which guides to the truth and to a straight path .
and we guarded them from every outcast devil .
and we rescued him and lut towards the land which we have blessed for the entire world .
have they not seen that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whom he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
the order will be god 's on that day ; he will judge between them . then those who had come to believe and done the right will be in gardens of delight .
 my lord !  ,  how shall i have a son when my wife is barren and i have reached such extreme old age ? 
indeed they have a greater awe of you in their hearts than of allah . that is because they are a lot who do not understand .
and when they went in to yusuf . he lodged his brother with himself , saying : i am your brother , therefore grieve not at what they do .
and say : the truth is from your lord , so let him who please believe , and let him who please disbelieve ; surely we have prepared for the iniquitous a fire , the curtains of which shall encompass them about ; and if they cry for water , they shall be given water like molten brass which will scald their faces ; evil the drink and ill the resting-place .
they strongly swear by god that god will not bring the dead to life . god 's promisewill certainly come true but many people do not know .
in which no one will suffer forever
and he is allah , there is no god but he ! all praise is due to him in thisand the hereafter , and his is the judgment , and to him you shall be brought back .
look not with your eyes ambitiously at what we have bestowed on certain classes of them , nor grieve over them . and lower your wings for the believers .
join my worshipers and
 so now has been proved true , against us , the word of our lord that we shall indeedtaste .
noah said : ' embark in it . in the name of allah is its sailing and its anchorage . my lord is ever forgiving , most merciful .
o people of the book , why dispute about abraham ? the torah and the gospel were sent down after him : do you not understand ?
it is you who are asked to spend for the cause of god , but some of you behave in a niggardly way . whoever behaves miserly does so against his own soul . god is self-sufficient and you are poor . if you were to turn away from him , he would just replace you with another people , who will not be like you .
who believe in what has been sent down to thee and what has been sent down before thee , and have faith in the hereafter ;
those who reject faith , - neither their possessions nor theirprogeny will avail them aught against allah : they are themselves but fuel for the fire .
some of the desert dwelling arabs around you are hypocrites as are some of the inhabitants of medina . they are persisting in their hypocrisies . you do not know them but we know them well and will punish them twice over . then they will be brought to the great torment .
and his people argued with him . he said ,  do you argue with me concerning allah while he has guided me ? and i fear not what you associate with himunless my lord should will something . my lord encompasses all things in knowledge ; then will you not remember ?
hell , where they will be roasted . an evil place to dwell !
say :  if i am in error it is to my own loss ; if i am on guidance that is so because of what my lord reveals to me . he is all-hearing and all-too-near . 
he shall surely receive an easy reckoning
those who disbelieve say , “ when we have become dust , and our ancestors , shall we be brought out ?
and your movements among those who bow in homage to god .
they said , “ our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
which of your lord 's wonders would you deny ?
and if they resolve on divorce , ( let them remember that allah hears everything and knows everything .
that thou mayst warn a folk whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
andwhen the angels said :  o maryam ! verily , allah has chosen you , purified you , and chosen you above the women of the 'alamin . 
no soul can believe , except by the will of allah , and he will place doubton those who will not understand .
we have established you firmly on earth , and made for you in it livelihood—but rarely do you give thanks .
“ and o my people ! keep on with your works in your positions , i am doing mine ; very soon you will come to know – upon whom comes the punishment that will disgrace him , and who is the liar ; and wait – i too am waiting with you . ”
there is no blamebefore their fathers or their sons , their brothers , or their brother 's sons , or their sisters ' sons , or their women , or thewhom their right hands possess . and , , fear allah ; for allah is witness to all things .
abraham was clement , compassionate , penitent .
or has he taken , out of what he has created , daughters and chosen you forsons ?
and we gave him out of our mercy his brother aaron , a prophet .
as if about to explode with rage ; whenever a group is thrown into it , the guardians of hell will ask them , “ did not a herald of warning come to you ? ”
were we then worn out by the first creation ? yet they are in doubt about a second creation .
such is the chastisement , and certainly the chastisement of the hereafter is greater , did they but know !
this is the book , whereof there is no doubt , a guidance to those who are al-muttaqunand love allah much ] .
he said : 'other than allah , you have taken to yourselves idols as an affection between yourselves in the present life . then , on the day of resurrection , you shall deny one another and curse one another , and your refuge will be the fire , and none shall help you '
he who purifies it will prosper ,
or is it they who created the heavens and the earth ? no ; the truth is that they lack sure faith .
said :  respite is granted thee
so do not lose heart or be grieved , for you will surely prevail if you are believers .
they swear by allah that they said it not , but assuredly they said the word of infidelity and disbelieved after their profession of islam and they resolved that to which they could not attain . and they avenged not except for this that allah and his apostle had enriched them out of his grace . if then they repent , it will be better for them , and if they turn away , allah will torment them with an afflictive torment in the world and the hereafter , and theirs shall be on the earth no friend nor helper .
fight them so that idolatry will not exist any more and god 's religion will stand supreme . if theygive up the idols ) , god will be well aware of what they do .
for all there will be degrees in accordance with that which they did , and thy lord is not unaware of that which they do .
and we have appointed thereon for you livelihoods and also for those of whom ye are not the providers .
then there came after them an evil posterity who inherited the book , taking only the frail good of this low life and saying : it will be forgiven us . and if the like good came to them , they would take it . was not a promise taken from them in the book that they would not speak anything about allah but the truth , and they have read what is in it ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who guard . do you not then understand ?
and they imagine kinship between him and the jinn , whereas the jinn know well that they will be brought before .
we sent noah to his people :  do thou warn thy people before there comes to them a grievous penalty . 
we gave guidance and drove each to destruction .
say ,  it is only god who deserves all praise . he has not begotten a son and has no partner in his kingdom . he does not need any guardian to help him in his need . proclaim his greatness .
those wronging their souls while the angels are taking them away—they will propose peace : “ we did no wrong. ” yes you did . god is aware of what you used to do . ”
but if he is of the rejecters , the erring ,
and make the ark before our eyes andour revelation , and do not speak to me in respect of those who are unjust ; surely they shall be drowned .
until you reach your graves .
who does greater evil than he who lies against allah and belies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a lodging in gehennafor the unbelievers ?
if you ask for a judgement , now has the judgement come unto you and if you cease , it will be better for you , and if you return , so shall we return , and your forces will be of no avail to you , however numerous it be , and verily , allah is with the believers .
is it not a sign unto them that the learned among the children of isra'il know it ?
you are only a warner .
no fault shall be attached to the prophet for doing what allah has obligated for him . such was the way of allah with those who passed away before the decree of allah is a decree determined
he said : assuredly ye , ye and your fathers , have been in error manifest .
and when our decree came to pass , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the shout overtook those who did wrong , so they lay in their dwellings crouching .
and in the night-time hallow him , and also after the prescribed prostration .
do you have any armies who will help you against the beneficent god ? the disbelievers are certainly deceived .
and most surely this is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
whatever charity you give , or a pledge you fulfill , god knows it . the wrongdoers have no helpers .
then when he gave them out of his grace , they became niggardly therewith and turned away as backsliders .
so that we may thereby bring forth grain and vegetation ,
but when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek allah 's bounty , and remember allah much so that you may prosper .
and their prophet said to them , “ the proof of his kingship is that the ark will be restored to you , bringing tranquility from your lord , and relics left by the family of moses and the family of aaron . it will be carried by the angels . in that is a sign for you , if you are believers . ”
they said ,  are we to believe in two human beings like ourselves , while their people are subject to us ? 
will ye cry unto baal and forsake the best of creators ,
and everything have we recorded in a book .
my lord ! they have sent astray many among mankind ; whosoever followeth me , verily he is of me ; and whosoever disobeyeth me , then verily thou art forgiving , merciful .
so when they had passed beyond it , said to his boy ,  bring us our morning meal . we have certainly suffered in this , our journey , fatigue . 
there is life and cheer for you as you drive them home in the evening , and lead them out in the morning to graze .
of what ask they ?
and that we would not be punished ? 
excepting the folk of lot ; them we shall deliver
has not the time yet come for those who believe that their hearts should be humble for the remembrance of allah and what has come down of the truth ? and that they should not be like those who were given the book before , but the time became prolonged to them , so their hearts hardened , and most of them are transgressors .
 so your lord has decreed : do not worship anyone but him , and be good to your parents . if one or both of them grow old in your presence , do not say fie to them , nor reprove them , but say gentle words to them
honoring his parents , being neither arrogant nor rebellious .
it is this notion you had of your lord that caused your ruin , and you are lost . 
this is naught else than speech of mortal man .
verily the pious shall drink of a cup whereof the admixture is like unto camphor .
and no burdened soul can bear another 's burden , and if one heavy laden crieth forhis load , naught of it will be lifted even though hebe of kin . thou warnest only those who fear their lord in secret , and have established worship . he who groweth , groweth only for himself , . unto allah is the journeying .
among the people of the book there are some who , if you entrust them with a heap of gold , will return it to you . but there are others of them who , if you entrust them with a single dinar , will not return it to you , unless you keep demanding it from them . that is because they say ,  we are under no obligation towards the gentiles .  they deliberately tell lies about god .
soon shall we send down to thee a weighty message .
o you who believe ! do not take your fathers and your brothers for guardians if they love unbelief more than belief ; and whoever of you takes them for a guardian , these it is that are the unjust .
believers , fear allah and give up what is still due to you from usury , if you are believers ;
'sorcerer ' they said , 'pray to your lord for us in accordance to the covenant he has made with you , and surely we shall be rightly guided '
do not consume one another 's property by unjust means , nor offer it as a bribe to the authorities , so that you may deliberately and wrongfully devour a part of other people 's wealth .
we did indeed send noah to his people and he lived among them a thousand years save fifty . eventually the flood overtook them while they were engaged in wrongdoing .
there has certainly come to you a messenger from among yourselves . grievous to him is what you suffer ; concerned over you and to the believers is kind and merciful .
alike to every one of you , who want to go forward or hang back .
he certainly saw of the greatest signs of his lord .
but because they broke their covenant , we cursed them and hardened their hearts . they changed the words from their places and have forgotten a portion of what they were reminded . except for a few , you will always find treachery from them , yet pardon them , and forgive ; indeed allah loves the gooddoers .
andin the presence of your lord and the rows and rows of angels , your greed for riches will certainly be of no avail to you .
and on the day when the last day is established , the guilty will swear that they did not stay except for an hour ; this is how they keep straying .
and we said ,  go both of you to the people who have denied our signs .  then we destroyed them withdestruction .
and , when we saved you from the people of pharaoh , afflicting you with the worst torment - killing your sons and keeping your women alive . and in that was a great trial from your lord .
such are the ones from whom we accept the best of what they do , and overlook their misdeeds , among the inhabitants of paradise—a true promise which they had been given .
the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell and seared therewith will be their foreheads , their flanks , and their backs , ,  this is what you hoarded for yourselves , so taste what you used to hoard . 
saying :  we believe in the lord of the 'alamin .
and we caused the earth to gush forth with springs , so the waters metto the extent decreed .
or did they not know their messenger , so they are toward him disacknowledging ?
and in paradise they will be given to drink cups , filled with a mixture of ginger .
some jews take words out of their context and say ,  we have heard , but we disobey ,  or  hear without listening .  and they say  look at us ,  twisting the phrase with their tongues so as to disparage religion . but if they had said ,  we hear and we obey ,  and  listen to us and look at us with favour ,  that would have been better and more proper for them . god has rejected them for their defiance so that they shall not believe , except a few of them .
with neither crookedness nor any curving to be seen therein '
it is they whom god has sealed their hearts , and their hearing , and their sight . it is they who are the heedless .
they said :  these are confused dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of such dreams . 
and the dwellers of madyan ; and belied was musa , but i granted respite to the disbelievers for a while , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment .
and they have taken besides allahdeities that they would be for themhonor .
and allah deferreth not a soul when its term- hath come ; and allah is aware of that which ye do .
they said , “ shall we believe in you , when it is the lowliest who follow you ? ”
he said , 'this is a mercy from my lord . but when the promise of my lord comes to pass , he will make it into powder ; and my lord 's promise is ever true . '
god has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great victory .
therefore proclaim openlythat which you are commanded , and turn away from al-mushrikun .
this is guidance . those who deny the revelations of their lord will suffer a dreadful doom .
wherein , reclining , they call for plenteous fruit and cool drinktherein .
if the two of you turn in repentance to allah , for the hearts of both of you have swerved from the straight path . but if you support one another against the prophet , then surely allah is his protector ; and after that gabriel and all righteous believers and the angels are all his supporters .
and when thou art on board the ship , thou and whoso is with thee , then say : praise be to allah who hath saved us from the wrongdoing folk !
will ye not fight a people who have violate their oaths and resolved the expulsion of the apostle and who began against you for the first time ? fear ye them ? allah is more worthy that ye should fear him , if ye are believers .
has the human not seen how we created him from a drop ? yet he is a clear opponent .
and when theylisten to what has been sent down to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognised . they say :  our lord ! we believe ; so write us down among the witnesses .
after we had destroyed the earlier generations we bestowed the book on moses - a source of enlightenment for people and a guidance and mercy -- that they may take heed .
therefore , treat not the orphan with oppression ,
the righteousamid gardens and fountains .
or the poor in distress ;
it is possible that , if he divorces you , his lord will give him in exchange wives better than you , women who have surrendered , believing , obedient , penitent , devout , given to fasting , who have been married and virgins too .
indeed , we thought that we should never be able to frustrate god in the earth , neither be able to frustrate him by flight .
they will say : allah 's . say : from whence are you then deceived ?
but those who had been givenknowledge said :  woe to you ! the reward of allahis better for those who believe and do righteous good deeds , and this none shall attain except those who are patient . 
on the right way . and when he came to the waters of midian he found a company of the people there drawing water , and he found , apart from them , two women holding back their flocks . he said , 'what is your business ? ' they said , 'we may not draw water until the shepherds drive off ; and our father is passing old . '
and when it is rehearsed unto them they say : we believe therein : verily it is truth from our lord : verily we have been even before it of those who submit themselves .
surely , shaitanis an enemy to you , so takehim as an enemy . he only invites his hizbthat they may become the dwellers of the blazing fire .
and when our verses are recited to them they say , “ yes , we have heard – if we wanted we could also say something like this – these are nothing but stories of former people ! ”
and keep to mind what is recited in your houses of the communications of allah and the wisdom ; surely allah is knower of subtleties , aware .
they will say :  we believe in it .  how could they reach it from a place of no return ?
we created them and made firm their make , and when we please we will bring in their place the likes of them by a change .
when the earth is shaken with a shock
said he , ‘ i will not prostrate before a human whom you have created out of a dry clayfrom an aging mud . ’
go , both of you to pharaoh , for he has transgressed all bounds .
and even so we raised them up again that they might question one another . one of them said , 'how long have you tarried ? ' they said , 'we have tarried a day , or part of a day . ' they said , 'your lord knows very well how long you have tarried . now send one of you forth with this silver to the city , and let him look for which of them has purest food , and bring you provision thereof ; let him be courteous , and apprise no man of you .
nevertheless , if their turning away grieves you , then seek - if you can - either a way down into the earth or a ladder to the heavens , and try to bring to them some sign . had allah so willed , he would have gathered them all to the true guidance . do not , then , be among the ignorant .
it is adistinctly written record
behold ! we told thee that thy lord doth encompass mankind round about : we granted the vision which we showed thee , but as a trial for men , - as also the cursed treein the qur'an : we put terrorinto them , but it only increases their inordinate transgression !
then look again and again . your gaze will come back to you confused and exhausted .
so she conceived him , and withdrew with him to a distant place .
so that there covered them that which did cover .
so they turned towards their own selves andsaid , “ indeed you yourselves are unjust . ”
and call to mind when moses said to his people : “ o my people , why do you torment me when you know well that i am allah 's messenger to you ? ” so when they deviated , allah made their hearts deviant . allah does not direct the evil-doers to the right way .
we had placed between them and the towns that we had blessed , other towns situated close to each other , and we fixed the stagesbetween them , saying ,  travel between them in safety by night and day , 
lest any soul should say : alas , my grief that i was unmindful of allah , and i was indeed among the scoffers !
certainly allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , so he sent down tranquillity on them and rewarded them with a near victory ,
and whom i am eager shall forgive me my sins on the day of recompense '
by the night when it covers the earth with darkness ,
had his lord 's grace not been bestowed upon him , he would have been cast away in disgrace upon that desolate shore .
man wearies not of praying for good , but when evil visits him , he despairs and gives up all hope .
o you who believe ! stand out firmly for justice , as witnesses to allah , even though it be against yourselves , or your parents , or your kin , be he rich or poor , allah is a better protector to both . so follow not the lusts , lest you may avoid justice , and if you distort your witness or refuse to give it , verily , allah is ever well-acquainted with what you do .
truly , it is in the books of the ancients .
and you did not expect that the book would be inspired to you , but it is a mercy from your lord , therefore be not a backer-up of the unbelievers .
as for the good land , its vegetation cometh forth by permission of its lord ; while as for that which is bad , only the useless cometh forth . thus do we recount the tokens for people who give thanks .
as for those who disbelieve—it is the same for them , whether you have warned them , or have not warned them—they do not believe .
and establish prayer and give the poor-rate . and whatsoever of good ye send forth for your souls ye shall find with allah ; verily allah is the beholder of that which ye work .
except those of your servants , the chosen ones from amongst them . ”
 enter the gates of hell ,  they will be told ,  and there abide for ever .  how grievous a destination for the haughty !
so it tasted the evil result of its disbelief , and the consequence of its disbelief was loss .
they will say , “ our lord , you made us die twice , and twice you gave us life . now we acknowledge our sins . is there any way out ? ”
they took revenge on them only because they believed in the all-mighty , the al-laudable ,
he created the heavens without pillars as you see them , and put mountains upon the earth lest it might convulse with you , and he spread in it animals of every kind ; and we sent down water from the cloud , then caused to grow thereinof every noble kind .
so what is your opinion regarding the semen you discharge ?
and lut believed in him , and he said : i am fleeing to my lord , surely he is the mighty , the wise .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens ;
by the ten nights ,
he created the heavens without pillars that you see and has cast into the earth firmly set mountains , lest it should shift with you , and dispersed therein from every creature . and we sent down rain from the sky and made grow thereinof every noble kind .
and glorify him through part of the night and after the prostrations .
it is he who gave you life , then he shall make you dead , then he shall give you life . surely man is ungrateful .
and may make mention of thee oft .
what ! is he whose heart allah has opened for islam so that he is in a light from his lord ? nay , woe to those whose hearts are hard against the remembrance of allah ; those are in clear error .
this quran tells the israelites most of the matters about which they had disputes among themselves .
and grape vines and vegetables ,
andthose who strive to oppose our communications , they shall be the inmates of the flaming fire .
he created mankind from a sperm drop , yet he is a clear adversary .
hewill say :  remain you in it with ignominy ! and speak you not to me ! 
some of them will listen to you , but are you supposed to make the deaf hear even if they have no understanding ?
those who put away their wives by pronouncing zihar and thereafter would retract that which they have said , then upon them is the freeing of a slave before the twain touch each other . that is that wherewith ye are exhorted ; and allah is of whatsoever ye work aware .
verily safa and marwa are of the landmarks of allah ; so whosoever maketh a pilgrimage to the house , or performeth the umra , in him there is no fault if he walketh in-between the twain . and whosoever voluntarily doth good , then verily allah is appreciative , knowing .
and do not stretch your eyes after that with which we have provided different classes of them , the splendor of this world 's life , that we may thereby try them ; and the sustenanceby your lord is better and more abiding .
so avoid them for a while .
their recompense is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens with rivers flowing through them , where they will abide forever . how excellent will be the reward of those who do good works .
so observe the effects of allah ’ s mercy : how he revives the earth after its death ! indeed he is the reviver of the dead , and he has power over all things .
that thereof you may thread ways , ravines . 
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
he ] said :  thatbetween me and you whichever of the two terms i fulfill , there will be no injustice to me , and allah is surety over what we say . 
it is for us to collect it and to give youthe ability to recite it ,
and were allah to punish men for what they earn , he would not leave on the back of it any creature , but he respites them till an appointed term ; so when their doom shall come , then surely allah is seeing with respect to his servants .
o my people , i do not ask of you wealth for this ; my wage falls only upon god . i will not drive away those who believe ; they shall surely meet their lord . but i see you are an ignorant people .
we will make smooth for him the path for evil ;
but god has been gracious to us , and has saved us from the torment of scorching wind .
and we made them leaders calling to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they shall not be succoured .
towards your lord only is its conclusion .
say : i find not in that which is revealed unto me aught prohibited to an eater that he eat thereof , except it be carrion , or blood poured forth , or swineflesh - for that verily is foul - or the abomination which was immolated to the name of other than allah . but whoso is compelled , neither craving nor transgressing , lo ! thy lord is forgiving , merciful .
behold ! they fold up their hearts , that they may lie hid from him ! ah even when they cover themselves with their garments , he knoweth what they conceal , and what they reveal : for he knoweth well theof the hearts .
return , all of you to your father and say to him : 'father , your son has committed a theft . we testify only to what we know . how could we guard against the unforeseen ?
it is the same for them whether you plead for forgiveness for them , or do not plead for forgiveness for them : allah will never forgive them . indeed allah does not guide the transgressing lot .
and other ornament of gold . all these are only the means of enjoyment in this world , but the pious will receive their reward from your lord in the life hereafter .
o you who have faith , if you obey a part of those who were given the book , they will turn you back , after your faith , into faithless ones .
but satan tempted them and had them banished from thestate they were in . and we said :  go , one the antagonist of the other , and live on the earth for a time ordained , and fend for yourselves . 
and you devour the inheritance with greed ,
these are they who disbelieve in the communications of their lord and his meeting , so their deeds become null , and therefore we will not set up a balance for them on the day of resurrection .
and we made them a precedent and an example for the later peoples .
laboring , toiling ,
this is of the tidings of things hidden . we reveal it unto thee . thou wast not present with them when they threw their penswhich of them should be the guardian of mary , nor wast thou present with them when they quarrelled .
turning towards him—and be conscious of him , and perform the prayer , and do not be of the idolaters .
again , by no means ! anon they shall know .
those who were allowed to stay behind rejoiced at remaining behind and not accompanying the messenger of allah . they were averse to striving in the way of allah with their belongings and their lives and told others :  do not go forth in this fierce heat .  tell them :  the hell is far fiercer in heat .  would that they understand !
so how awesome were my chastisement and my warnings !
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them in six days , then he settled on the throne . you do not have besides him any guardian or intercessor . will you not then take admonition ?
assuredly , we are able to show thee that we promise them .
you are only a warner for those who fear such a day .
the day on which men shall stand before the lord of the worlds ?
and a small band from the latecomers .
then , we gave the turn back to you to prevail over them , and we helped you with wealth and children , and made you the greater host .
and they who do not associate anything with their lord
tell the believers to ignore those who do not believe in the coming of the days of god . he will requite people for what they have done .
they said , “ you are surely one of the bewitched .
they wish to put his light out with their mouths . but he will perfect his light , much as those who deny the truth may dislike it ;
our lord , and send among them a messenger from themselves who will recite to them your verses and teach them the book and wisdom and purify them . indeed , you are the exalted in might , the wise . 
to every community we sent a messenger : “ worship god , and avoid idolatry. ” some of them god guided , while others deserved misguidance . so travel through the earth , and see what the fate of the deniers was .
and those who have responded to their lord and established prayer and whose affair isconsultation among themselves , and from what we have provided them , they spend .
say , “ o my servants who have transgressed against themselves : do not despair of god ’ s mercy , for god forgives all sins . he is indeed the forgiver , the clement . ”
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people : ' o my people , do i not possess the kingdom of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? what , do you not see ?
the one who had knowledge from the book said ,  i can bring it to you before you even blink your eye .  when solomon saw the throne placed before him , he said ,  this is a favor from my lord by which he wants to test whether i am grateful or ungrateful . whoever thanks god does so for his own good . whoever is ungrateful to god should know that my lord is self-sufficient and benevolent . 
nor be of those who have called god 's revelations lies lest you become lost .
or thou have a house of gold ; or thou ascend up into heaven , and even then we will put no faith in thine ascension till thou bring down for us a book that we can read . say : my lord be glorified ! am i aught save a mortal messenger ?
moses said :  i have indeed called upon my lord and your lordfrom every arrogant one who believes not in the day of account ! 
‘ there is none among us but has a known place .
have they feet on which they can walk ? have they hands with which they can grasp ? have they eyes with which they can see ? have they ears with which they can hear ? say : 'invoke all those to whom you ascribe a share in allah 's divinity , then scheme against me and grant me no respite .
relate to them , the true story of the two sons of adam . when they both presented an offering , it was accepted from one of them and not from the other . the latter said ,  i shall kill you !  the former said ,  god acceptsonly from the righteous .
let the people of the injeeljudge by what allah has revealed therein . and whosoever does not judge by what allah has revealedsuchare the fasiqunto allah .
prophet , exert yourself to the utmost against those who deny the truth and the hypocrites . deal severely with them . hell will be their abode -- a vile destination .
thus have theirpartnersmade the killing of their children to seem fair unto many of the idolaters , that they may ruin them and make their faith obscure for them . had allah willed , they had not done so . so leave them alone with their devices .
yet pardon them , and say , 'peace ! ' soon they will know .
we created them in nothing else except the truth . but most do not know .
and be patient for the sake of your lord !
do not walk proudly on the earth . you can not cleave the earth , nor can you rival the mountains in height .
do they wish to hasten our punishment ?
say : 'truth has come . falsehood has vanished and shall return no more . '
by those unleashed in succession .
in a guarded book
he is not avid of the unseen .
said :  set me over the store-houses of the land : i will indeed guard them , as one that knows . 
say :  o god , the originator of the heavens and the earth , the knower of the unknown and the known , you alone will judge between your creatures for things they differed about . 
and by the mercy of allah , you dealt with them gently . and had you been severe and harsh-hearted , they would have broken away from about you ; so pass over , and askforgiveness for them ; and consult them in the affairs . then when you have taken a decision , put your trust in allah , certainly , allah loves those who put their trust .
so knowthat la ilaha ill-allah , and ask forgiveness for your sin , and also forbelieving men and believing women . and allah knows well your moving about , and your place of rest .
except the servants of allah , the purified ones .
he said ,  you will not receive food that is provided to you except that i will inform you of its interpretation before it comes to you . that is from what my lord has taught me . indeed , i have left the religion of a people who do not believe in allah , and they , in the hereafter , are disbelievers .
“ and to keep theprayer established and to fear him ; and it is to him that you are to be raised . ”
so , by the lord of the heaven and the earth , this is certainly true , as true as the fact of your speaking .
we have revealed to you clear signs , and none rejects them except the sinners .
give full measure , and be not of those who give less .
we would have been god 's faithful servants . ”
—those who are patient and who put their trust in their lord .
those whom you serve beside him are merely idle names that you and your fathers have fabricated , without allah sending down any sanction for them . all authority to govern rests only with allah . he has commanded that you serve none but him . this is the right way of life , though most people are altogether unaware .
do they not observe that they are tested once or twice every year ? yet they do not repent , nor do they heed advice !
when the wife of 'imran said :  o my lord ! i have vowed to you whatis in my womb to be dedicated for your services , so accept this , from me . verily , you are the all-hearer , the all-knowing . 
the bearers of the throne glorify their lord with his praise . they believe in him and ask him to forgive the believers . they say ,  our lord , your mercy and knowledge encompass all things . forgive those who turn to you in repentance and follow your path . lord , save them from the torment of hell .
to god shall you return ; he is powerful over everything . '
in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was disease said ,  their religion has deluded those .  but whoever relies upon allah - then indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
thinketh he , that none hath power over him ?
therefore glory be to allah when you enter upon the time of the evening and when you enter upon the time of the morning .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief andthey bore witness that the messenger is true and after clear proofshad come unto them . and allah guideth not wrongdoing folk .
when he attained maturity , god gave him strength , wisdom and knowledge . thus , do we reward those who do good .
 and our fathers of old ? 
thus has the word of your lord come true against the deniers ; they shall be the inmates of the fire .
surely , in our hands is guidance ,
do the unbelievers think that they can take my worshipers as guides other than me ? we have prepared gehenna to be the hospitality of the unbelievers .
they call a lie something that is beyond the limit of their knowledge and whose interpretation has not yet been revealed . some people who lived before them also called our revelations lies . consider how terrible was the end of the unjust people !
he has sent down this book which contains some verses that are categorical and basic to the book , and others allegorical . but those who are twisted of mind look for verses metaphorical , seeking deviation and giving to them interpretations of their own ; but none knows their meaning except god ; and those who are steeped in knowledge affirm :  we believe in them as all of them are from the lord .  but only those who have wisdom understand .
therefore wait patiently for the command of your lord , and obey not from among them a sinner or an ungrateful one .
behold ! we said to the angels :  bow down unto adam  : they bowed down except iblis : he said ,  shall i bow down to one whom thou didst create from clay ? 
if you have been struck by some misfortune , so theytoo have been struck earlier with the same misfortune ; these are the days in which we have allotted turns to people ; and so that allah may make known the believers and may bestow martyrdom to some of you ; and allah does not befriend the unjust .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor can it put it back .
and be modest in thy gait and lower thy voice ; verily the most abominable of voices is the voice of the ass .
and others that were bound with chains .
oft we have seen the turning of thy face to the heaven , wherefore we shall assuredly cause thee to turn towards the qiblah which shall please thee . turn then thy face toward the sacred mosque ; and turn ye , wheresoever ye be , your faces toward it . and verily those who are vouchsafed the book know this to be the truth and from their lord . allah is not neglectful of that which they work .
when they had passed on , moses said to his attendant :  bring us our early meal ; truly we have suffered much fatigue at thisour journey . 
they say , ‘ are our gods better or he ? ’ they cite him to you only for the sake of contention . indeed , they are a contentious lot .
on the day when the trumpet is blown , whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will be struck with terror , except for those whom god wishes to spare . all shall come to him in utter humility .
how many are the signs in the heavens and the earth which people pass by without giving any heed !
“ and that you never feel thirsty nor hot sunshine hurt you . ”
ha-mim.knows their meanings . ]
, they then sought a stratagem against him , but we made them the ones most humiliated !
 but allah has been gracious to us , and has saved us from the torment of the fire .
eat and pasture your cattle , ; verily , in this are proofs and signs for men of understanding .
your deity is allah alone : there is no deity save the all-beneficent and all-merciful allah .
he said : 'my lord as you have favored me , i will never be a helper to the wrongdoer '
he said :  i am one of those who abhor your practice .
for the beggar who asks , and for the unlucky who has lost his property and wealth , ;
and flesh of fowls that they desire .
those whom you invoke besides him can neither help you , nor help themselves .
except those upon whom allah has mercy ; indeed he only is the most honourable , the most merciful .
as a warner to mortals .
knower he of the unseen and the visible , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
we have made the quran easy to understand , but is there anyone who would pay attention ?
and on that day they will offer total submission to god : and all that they used to devise will fail them .
so we ransomed him for a great sacrifice ,
o david ! we did indeed make thee a vicegerent on earth : so judge thou between men in truth : nor follow thou the lusts , for they will mislead thee from the path of allah : for those who wander astray from the path of allah , is a penalty grievous , for that they forget the day of account .
what , do you wonder that a reminder from your lord should come to you by the lips of a man from among you ? that he may warn you , and you be godfearing , haply to find mercy . '
and ten nights .
commemorate our servant job . behold he cried to his lord :  the evil one has afflicted me with distress and suffering ! 
say :  verily ! my lord sends down inspiration and makes apparent the truth , the allknower of the ghaib .
allah forbids you not , with regard to those who fight you not forfaith nor drive you out of your homes , from dealing kindly and justly with them : for allah loveth those who are just .
so do not waver and call for peace while you have the upper hand . god is with you , and he will not waste your efforts .
and under the shadow of black smoke ,
there is no blame on elderly women who are past the age of marriage , if they take off their outer clothing , without revealing their adornments . but it would be better for them to guard themselves . god is all hearing , all knowing .
when a sign comes to them , they say ,  we will not believe in it until we are given what god 's messengers have been given . but god knows best whom to appoint as his messenger . humiliation before god and severe torment will befall the evil-doers for their scheming .
most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men who understand .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided for you , and give thanks to god , if it is him that you serve .
will it bring low ; will it exalt ;
allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods ; for theirsis the garden : they fight in his cause , and slay and are slain : a promise binding on him in truth , through the law , the gospel , and the qur'an : and who is more faithful to his covenant than allah ? then rejoice in the bargain which ye have concluded : that is the achievement supreme .
those who keep the prayer established and pay the charity and are certain of the hereafter .
the elite of his people said , ‘ indeed we see you in manifest error . ’
that is because ye had been exulting in the earth without right , and because ye had been strutting .
he it is who sent his apostle with guidance and the religion of truth , that he might cause it to prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may be averse .
and it was revealed to noah that ,  no one will believe from your people except those who have already believed , so do not be distressed by what they have been doing .
we shall give them fruits and meats , and what they desire .
tell them ,  if the ocean became ink for writing the words of my lord , surely the ocean would be exhausted before the words of my lord came to an end -- even if we were to add another ocean to it . 
go back unto them . then surely we shall come unto them with hosts which they can not withstand , and we shall drive them forth therefrom abased and they shall be humbled .
the unbelievers are each other 's friends . if youdo not keep the same among yourselves in the land , there will come into being widespread idolatry and great evil .
to each one we set forth parables and examples ; and each one we broke to utter annihilation .
these are the statutes of allah , and whosoever obeyeth allah and his apostle , him he shall cause to enter the gardens whereunder rivers flow , as abiders therein ; and that is an achievement mighty .
the chieftains of his people said : lo ! we see thee surely in plain error .
and we appointed for moses thirty nights , to which we added ten , whereby the term of forty nights set by his lord was fulfilled . and moses said to aaron , his brother : 'take my place among my people , act righteously , and do not follow the path of those who create mischief . '
and whenever a surah is revealed , they look at each other , ,  does anyone see you ?  and then they dismiss themselves . allah has dismissed their hearts because they are a people who do not understand .
those who forswear their wives must wait four months ; then , if they change their mind , lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and from the fruits of date and grapes , for you make juices and good nourishment from them ; indeed in this is a sign for people of intellect .
they will not taste death therein except the first death , and he will have protected them from the punishment of hellfire
nor urged others to feed the poor .
and we delivered those who had faith and were godwary .
and a sign for them is the night : we withdraw therefrom the day , and behold they are plunged in darkness ;
and be not like unto those who came forth from their homes vaunting and to be seen of men and hindering others from the way of allah ; and allah is the ecompasser of that which they work .
he will guide them and improve their condition ;
moses said : 'is this what you say of the truth when it has come to you ? is this sorcery ? sorcerers do not prosper '
do they not then earnestly seek to understand the qur'an , or are their hearts locked up by them ?
the ignorant ones who had stayed behind will now say to you , “ our wealth and our families prevented us from going by keeping us pre-occupied , therefore seek forgiveness for us ” ; they utter with their tongues what is not in their hearts ; say , “ so does anyone have any control over you against allah , if he wills to harm you or provide you benefit ? in fact allah is aware of what you do . ”
neither cold nor graceful in shape .
so rely on god . you are upon the clear truth .
a token unto them is the dead earth . we revive it , and we bring forth from it grain so that they eat thereof ;
where they will take their ease , calling for fruits in plenty , and for wine ,
allah effaceth what he will , and establisheth , and with him is the source of ordinance .
the lord heard their prayer and answered :  i suffer not the good deeds of any to go waste , be he a man or a woman : the one of you is of the other . and those who were deprived of their homes or banished in my cause , and who fought and were killed , i shall blot out their sins and admit them indeed into gardens with rippling streams .  -- a recompense from god , and the best of rewards is with god .
anda book inscribed
and assuredly we gave david grace from us , : o ye hills and birds , echo his psalms of praise ! and we made the iron supple unto him ,
certainly you have made an abominable assertion
most gracious is firmly established on the throne .
he is nothing but a man who has forged against allah a lie , we will never believe him '
we sent messengers before you to their respective nations , and they brought clear signs to them . then we took vengeance upon those who acted wickedly . it was incumbent on us to come to the aid of the believers .
i fear evil from my kinsmen after i am gone ; and my wife is barren , so grant me an heir out of your special grace ,
those who , when they are admonished with the signs of their lord , droop not down at them as if they were deaf or blind ;
no indeed ! by the moon !
therefore turn away from them , and wait , they are waiting .
and rememberyour lord in your mind , with humility and fear , and without raising your voice ; remember him in the morning and evening , and do not become of those who are negligent .
they will not hear any lewd talk in it , but only peace ; and in it for them is sustenance , every morning and evening .
they will answer : 'exaltations to you . we should not have taken others for a guardian , but you gave them and their fathers enjoyment until they forgot your remembrance and they were a destroyed nation '
and gave signs to them in which there was a clear trial .
tell those who disbelieved : 'you shall soon be overpowered and mustered to hell - and that is an evil resting place ! '
 or you have a garden of date-palms and grapes , and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst abundantly ;
and whoever invokes with allah another god -- he has no proof of this -- his reckoning is only with his lord ; surely the unbelievers shall not be successful .
flames of fire and molten copper shall be loosed against you , and you shall not be helped .
the evil of their deeds will become apparent to them , and they will be overwhelmed by that which they used to mock .
he says ,  these are ancient legends  .
exalter in ranks , owner of the throne . he lets the spiritdescend at his order on those of his worshipers whom he chooses , in order that he warns of the day of the meeting ;
but allah bears witness to what he has sent down to you—he sent it down with his knowledge—and the angels bear witness , and allah quite suffices as witness .
allah amplifies and straitens the means of subsistence for whom he pleases ; and they rejoice in this world 's life , and this world 's life is nothing compared with the hereafter but a temporary enjoyment .
how many a guilty town have we crushed , and established thereafter another people ?
indeed those of you who turned back on the day when the two armies met – for it was the devil who caused them to waver , because of some of their deeds ; and undoubtedly allah has forgiven them ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most forbearing .
and firaun said , “ bring every expert magician to me . ”
and during the night wake up and pray , as an additional prayer : it may well be that your lord will raise you to a station of praise and glory . 
perhaps you are leaving part of what has been sent down to you , and your chest is straitened by it , because they say : 'why has no treasure been sent down to him , or an angel come with him ' you are only a warner , and allah is a guardian over everything .
in themare benefits for you for an appointed term , and afterwards they are brought for sacrifice unto the ancient house .
and of everything we have created pairs ; perhaps you will take heed .
allah 's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth , and allah is ever mighty , wise .
and when moses said to his people , 'my people , you have done wrong against yourselves by your taking the calf ; now turn to your creator and slay one another . that will be better for you in your creator 's sight , and he will turn to you ; truly he turns , and is all-compassionate . '
so your lord poured on them different kinds of severe torment .
he asked :  who then is that lord of yours , o moses ? 
does everyone of them wish to enter the garden of bliss ?
that the quran is the word of the honorable angelic , mighty messenger
thereafter , it will be said unto those who wronged themselves : taste the torment everlasting : ye are requited not save for that which ye have been earning .
and when heaven is laid bare ;
 verily ! i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
the pains of labour drove her to the trunk of a date-palm . she said ,  oh , if only i had died before this and passed into oblivion ! 
these are the revelations of god . we recite them to you in truth . god desires no injustice for mankind .
“ that you must worship none except allah ; indeed i fear the punishment of the calamitous day upon you . ”
on the day when the heaven sways in agitation .
but they called their companion who took a sword and hamstrung her .
those who disbelieve and repel from the path of god—he nullifies their works .
with companions of modest look , the same in age , by their side .
his nation argued with him . he said : 'will you argue with me about allah , indeed he guided me ! except by his will , i do not fear those you associate with him . my lord embraces all things in knowledge , will you not remember ?
and i am cunningly devising .
the present life is nothing but sport and amusement . the true life is in the abode of the hereafter ; if only they knew .
among the believers there are men who have been true to the pledge they made with god . among them are such as have fulfilled their vow , and some whowait , without having changedin the least .
and then they cast lots and he was the one who lost ,
it has been made lawful for you to go to your wives on the night of the fast : they are like a garment for you , and you are like a garment for them . god is aware that you were deceiving yourselves and he has turned in mercy towards you and pardoned you . so you may now consort with them and seek what god has ordained for you . eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct from the black . then resume the fast until nightfall , and do not approach them during the nights of your devotional retreat in the mosques . these are the limits set by god , so do not approach them . thus he makes clear his commandments to mankind , so that they may guard themselves .
but we found only one muslim house .
when our clear verses are recited to them the unbelievers say to the believers : 'which of the two parties has a better position or company '
o believers , fear god as he should be feared , and see you do not die , save in surrender .
for god 's favors to them during their summer and winter journeys ,
and imagine when thereafter allah will say : 'jesus , son of mary , did you say to people :  take me and my mother for gods beside allah ?  and he will answer :  glory to you ! it was not for me to say what i had no right to . had i said so , you would surely have known it . you know all what is within my mind whereas i do not know what is within yours . you , indeed you , know fully all that is beyond the reach of human perception .
marked with fire in the providence of thy lord . and they are never far from the wrong-doers .
on the day when we resurrect from every nation a group from among those who had rejected our revelations , they will be kept confined in ranks .
and passed around them shall be silver vessels , and crystal goblets ,
say : 'my prayer , my ritual sacrifice , my living , my dying -- all belongs to god , the lord of all being .
o you who have faith ! do not render your charities void by reproaches and affronts , like those who spend their wealth to be seen by people and have no faith in allah and the last day . their parable is that of a rock covered with soil : a downpour strikes it , leaving it bare . they have no power over anything of what they have earned , and allah does not guide the faithless lot .
then after that you turned away . had it not been for the grace and mercy of allah upon you , indeed you would have been among the losers .
and when those who believe in our revelations come unto thee , say : peace be unto you ! your lord hath prescribed for himself mercy , that whoso of you doeth evil through ignorance and repenteth afterward thereof and doeth right , lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
and we said to the children of israel after him , 'dwell in the land ; and when the promise of the world to come comes to pass , we shall bring you a rabble . '
they descend upon every sinful liar .
:  your gods have refuted your assertion . you can neither avertnor receive any help . we shall make the wicked among you taste of severe punishment . 
and among mankind is he who disputes concerning allah , without knowledge , and follows every rebelliousshaitan .
how is it that you do not believe in allah when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord and although he has taken a covenant from you , if indeed you are believers ?
alas , would that i had not taken so-and-so for a friend !
and those who believe will say ,  are these the ones who swore by allah their strongest oaths that indeed they were with you ?  their deeds have become worthless , and they have become losers .
on the day when the earth and the hills rock , and the hills become a heap of running sand .
god has prepared a severe punishment for them . so , fear god , o men of understanding , who have believed . god has sent down to you a reminder
and what will explain to you what the ascent is ?
“ in it for them is all that they may desire , abiding in it for ever ; a promise incumbent upon your lord , that is prayed for . ”
let the faithless not suppose that the respite that we grant them is good for their souls : we give them respite only that they may increase in sin , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
you can ask the people of the town where we were and the caravan we met there . we are certainly telling the truth . 
he sends down water from the skies , and the channels flow , each according to its measure : but the torrent bears away to foam that mounts up to the surface . even so , from thatwhich they heat in the fire , to make ornaments or utensils therewith , there is a scum likewise . thus doth allahshow forth truth and vanity . for the scum disappears like forth cast out ; while that which is for the good of mankind remains on the earth . thus doth allah set forth parables .
they have made their oaths a screen : thus they obstructfrom the path of allah : therefore shall they have a humiliating penalty .
it is he who has the knowledge of the hour of doom and the fruits that will come out of their covering . he knows what the females conceive and deliver . on the day when the unbelievers will be asked ,  where are the idols which you considered equal to god ? ,  they will reply ,  we declare that none of us have seen them  .
and from the fruits of date-palms and grapes , you derive strong drinkand a goodly provision . verily , therein is indeed a sign for people who have wisdom .
and as for him who is niggardly and considers himself free from need ,
the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , and the lord of the easts .
this ; and most surely there is an evil resort for the inordinate ones ;
yet surely your lord is mighty and powerful .
and say , “ the truth is from your lord . whoever wills—let him believe . and whoever wills—let him disbelieve ” . we have prepared for the unjust a fire , whose curtains will hem them in . and when they cry for relief , they will be relieved with water like molten brass , which scalds the faces . what a miserable drink , and what a terrible place .
that was because there came to them their messengers with clear evidences , proofs and signs but they disbelieved . so allah seized them with punishment . verily , he is all-strong , severe in punishment .
they will say :  if we had listened and been wise , we would not have been among the inmates of hell . 
and when we substitute a verse in place of a verse - and allah is most knowing of what he sends down - they say ,  you , , are but an inventor .  but most of them do not know .
such as we send down for those who are divisive ,
and be not ye as those who forgot allah , therefor he caused them to forget their souls . such are the evil-doers .
o ye who believe ! befriend not a people against whom allah is wroth . surely they have despaired of the hereafter even as have despaired the entombed of the infidels . s
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and seek the means of recourse to him , and wage jihad in his way , so that you may be felicitous .
the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women are all of a piece ; they command that which is disreputable and restrain from that which is reputable , and they tighten their hands . they neglected allah , so he had neglected them . verily the hypocrites ! they are the ungodly ones .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right hand and on the left ,
when the birth of a girl is announced to any of them , his face darkens and he is filled with gloom .
bytime ,
: 'if you do good , it shall be for your own souls ; but if you do evil it is likewise ' and when the second promise came , to sadden your faces and to enter the mosque as they entered it the first time , they utterly destroyed whatever they came across .
indeed , in the creation of the heavens and earth , and the alternation of the night and the day , and theships which sail through the sea with that which benefits people , and what allah has sent down from the heavens of rain , giving life thereby to the earth after its lifelessness and dispersing therein everymoving creature , anddirecting of the winds and the clouds controlled between the heaven and the earth are signs for a people who use reason .
surely we ourselves have revealed the quran to you revealingin portions .
then , on that day will the event befall .
it will never be eased for them . in it , they will be devastated .
as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say , ‘ here , take and read my book !
woe to you , and woe !
the day whereon they will issue from their sepulchres in sudden haste as if they were rushing to a goal-post , -
we thus elaborate the revelations , so that they may return .
one of the two women said :  father , employ this man in your service . the best whom you might employ is he who is strong and trustworthy . 
through our mercy , we saved him and his companions and destroyed the unbelievers who called our revelations mere lies .
surely allah knows whatever you may have spent and whatever vow you may have made , and the wrong-doersshall have no helpers .
by the sun and its rising brightness
those to whom the knowledge has been given can see that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth , guiding to the path of the almighty , the praised .
are you under the illusion that you would be left just like this , whereas allah has not yet made known those of you who will fight and not confide their secrets with anyone except allah and his noble messenger and the muslims ? and allah is well aware of your deeds .
do they not see us advancing from all sides into their land and reducing its frontiers ? it is for god to judge ; and there is none to reverse his judgement . he is swift at reckoning .
, remember that group of the israelites after moses who demanded a prophet of their own to appoint a king for them who would lead them in the fight for the cause of god . their prophet then said ,  what if you are ordered to fight and you disobey ?  they said ,  why should we not fight for the cause of god when we and our sons have been expelled from our homes ?  however , when they were ordered to fight , all refused except a few among them . god knows well the unjust .
and do not kill the soul which god has made sacred , except in the course of justice . if someone is killed unjustly , we have given his next of kin certain authority . but he should not be excessive in killing , for he will be supported .
tell them :  whether you spend your money willingly or unwillingly , it shall not find acceptancefor you are an evil-doing folk . 
no vision can grasp him , but his grasp is over all vision . he is the most subtle and courteous , well-acquainted with all things .
say : who gives you sustenance from the heaven and the earth ? or who controls the hearing and the sight ? and who brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living ? and who regulates the affairs ? then they will say : allah . say then : will you not then guard ?
let there be a group among you who will invite others to do good deeds , command them to obey the law , and prohibit them from committing sins . these people will have eternal happiness .
and when their waiting term is ended , either keep them honourably or part with them in honour . call to witness two reliable men from among you and bear true witness for god . this is an admonishment for those who believe in god and the last day . to one who fears god , he will grant a way out ,
and indeed our hosts will be the victors .
who know that they will have to meet their lord , and that unto him they are returning .
a group of the pagans walked out of a meeting with the prophet and told the others ,  let us walk away . be steadfast in the worship of your gods . this man wants to dominate you .
when the most wicked among them stood up in defiance .
by the heaven full of tracks ,
remember the name of thy lord at morn and evening .
and when the command of your lord comes – and the angels row by row ,
when a chapteris revealed , . they look at one another and their eyes silently ask this question ,  has any one noticed the disappointment on our faces ?  then they walk away . in fact , god has turned their hearts away ; they are a people who have no understanding .
but parties from among them disagreed with each other , so woe to those who disbelieve , because of presence on a great day .
tell them the story of abraham ,
and who criedto his lord , while imprisoned and helpless inside the fish . had it not been for a favor from his lord , he would have been left out in the open , deserving blame for his shortcomings .
when the record of every one 's deeds is placed before him , you will see the criminals terrified from what the record contains . they will say ,  woe to us ! what kind of record is this that has missed nothing small or great ?  they will find whatever they have done right before their very eyes . your lord is not unjust to any one .
and men say : where is the wizard ?
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
by the bright forenoon ,
therefore leave them in their overwhelming ignorance till
to revive dead lands thereby , and to provide drink for the multitude of animals and humans we created .
this is a day they will not speak ,
god is your master , and he is the best of helpers .
but on this day the believers will laugh at the unbelievers
it is god who creates you , then makes you die ; and some reach the age of dotage when they forget what they had known before . god is indeed all-knowing and all-powerful .
keep your duty toward him who hath aided you withthat ye know ,
he who created the seven heavens one above another : no want of proportion wilt thou see in the creation ofmost gracious . so turn thy vision again : seest thou any flaw ?
what , do they look for the angels to come to them , nothing less , or that thy lord should come , or that one of thy lord 's signs should come ? on the day that one of thy lord 's signs comes it shall not profit a soul to believe that never believed before , or earned some good in his belief . say : 'watch and wait ; we too are waiting . '
and thy lord hath decreed that ye shall worship none but him , and unto parents shew kindness ; and if either of them or both of them attain old age with thee , say not unto them : pooh : and browbeat them not , and speak unto them a respectful speech .
and the example of those who spend their wealth in order to seek allah ’ s pleasure and to make their hearts steadfast , is similar to that of a garden on a height – hard rain fell on it , so bringing forth its fruit twofold ; so if hard rain does not reach it , the dew is enough ; and allah is seeing your deeds .
but those who reject- for them will be the fire of hell : no term shall be determined for them , so they should die , nor shall its penalty be lightened for them . thus do we reward every ungrateful one !
we shall send down upon the people of this city wrath out of heaven for their ungodliness . '
and none will bindas his binding .
they know but the outerin the life of this world : but of the end of things they are heedless .
surely we give life to the dead , and we write down what they have sent before and their footprints , and we have recorded everything in a clear writing .
had we willed , we would have appointed angels among you to be successors in the earth .
o messenger ! make known that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy lord , for if thou do it not , thou wilt not have conveyed his message . allah will protect thee from mankind . lo ! allah guideth not the disbelieving folk .
they have not valued allah with his true value . but on the day of resurrection , the entire earth will be in his grip , and the heavens shall be rolled up upon in his right . exaltations to him ! exalted high is he above all that they associate !
we only rescued the believers who had fear of god .
“ indeed this is what you used to doubt about . ”
gardens of perpetual residence , whose doors will be opened to them .
then evil was the end of those who did evil , because they belied the ayatof allah and made mock of them .
it is allah who has raised the heavens without any supports that you could see , and then he established himself on the throne . and he it is who has made the sun and the moon subservient , each running its course till an appointed term . he governs the entire order of the universe and clearly explains the signs that you may be firmly convinced about meeting your lord .
and we had certainly sent noah to his people , and he said ,  o my people , worship allah ; you have no deity other than him ; then will you not fear him ? 
do not be like those who , after they had been given clear evidence , split into factions and differed among themselves : a terrible punishment awaits such people .
and when we gave moses the book and the criterion so that you might be guided .
and enter my paradise . 
for the worst of beasts in the sight of allah are those who reject him : they will not believe .
god is absolute .
indeed , hellfire will be closed down upon them
they said :  by god , you are still persisting in your old delusion . 
and those with bright faces shall be under god 's grace and enjoy it for ever .
'lord , ' said zachariah , 'how shall i have a son , seeing i am an old man and my wife is barren ? ' 'even so , ' god said , 'god does what he will . '
man is a creature of haste : soonwill i show you my signs ; then ye will not ask me to hasten them !
that nation has passed away . theirs is what they earned and yours what you have earned . you shall not be questioned about what they did .
and then created for them other vessels like those on which they ride .
and if they wax proud , yet those who are with thy lord do glorify him by night and day , and grow not weary .
o prophet , god suffices thee , and the believers who follow thee .
and those who associate say : had god willed we would not have worshipped aught beside him , neither we nor our fathers , nor we would have forbidden aught without him . like-wise did those before them . naught is then on the apostles except a preaching plain .
from the evil of those who practice witchcraft
in order that allah may reward them for their best deeds and by his munificence , bestow upon them an increased reward ; and allah gives sustenance to whomever he wills , without account .
and the dwellers of the garden will call out to the inmates of the fire : surely we have found what our lord promised us to be true ; have you too found what your lord promised to be true ? they will say : yes . then a crier will cry out among them that the curse of allah is on the unjust .
“ i only desire that you alone should bear my sin and your own sin – hence you become of the people of hell ; and that is the proper punishment of the unjust . ”
so we revealed to him , saying : make the ark before our eyes andour revelation ; and when our command is given and the valley overflows , take into it of every kind a pair , two , and your followers , except those among them against whom the word has gone forth , and do not speak to me in respect of those who are unjust ; surely they shall be drowned .
then as to him who shall be vouchsafed his book in his left hand , he shall say : oh ! would that i had not been vouchsafed my book .
o prophet ! strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be hard against them ; and their abode is hell ; and evil is the resort .
lo ! this verily is the true narrative . there is no allah save allah , and lo ! allah , he verily is , is the mighty , the wise .
never thinking he will return .
on the day whereon we shall gather the god-feaing unto the com- passionate as an embassy . * chapter : 19
and it is he who spread out the earth , and placed therein firm mountains and rivers and of every kind of fruits he made zawjain ithnainhe brings the night as a cover over the day . verily , in these things , there are ayatfor people who reflect .
indeed your lord judges between them with his command ; and he is the almighty , the all knowing .
who has gathered wealth and counted it ,
they declare ,  none shall ever enter heaven unless he be a jew or a christian .  this is their own wishful thinking . , say ,  produce your evidence if you are telling the truth . 
that are a community who have passed away ; unto them shall be that which they earned , and unto you that which ye earn ; and ye shall be questioned not of that which they were wont to work .
do they not know that allah knows all whatever they hide and whatever they disclose ?
but for he who has feared the position of his lord are two gardens -
allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its ability ; for it iswhat it has earned and upon itwhat it has wrought : our lord ! do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake ; our lord ! do not lay on us a burden as thou didst lay on those before us , our lord do not impose upon us that which we have not the strength to bear ; and pardon us and grant us protection and have mercy on us , thou art our patron , so help us against the unbelieving people .
by men not distracted from the remembrance of god either by trade and commerce or buying and selling , who stand by their devotional obligations and pay the zakat , who fear the day when hearts and eyes would flutter with trepidation
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our verses and said ,  when we are bones and crumbled particles , will webe resurrecteda new creation ? 
o ye who believe ! lo ! among your wives and your children there are enemies for you , therefor beware of them . and if ye efface and overlook and forgive , then lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
ye serve instead of allah only idols , and ye only invent a lie . lo ! those whom ye serve instead of allah own no provision for you . so seek your provision from allah , and serve him , and give thanks unto him , unto him ye will be brought back .
nay , but when the earth is ground to atoms , grinding , grinding ,
say ,  if god 's abode of the hereafter is for you alone , to the exclusion of all others , then wish for death , if you are truthful . 
thisis the true guidance . those who deny the signs of their lord shall suffer the torment of a woeful scourge .
say ,  call upon allah or call upon the most merciful . whicheveryou call - to him belong the best names .  and do not reciteloudly in your prayer orquietly but seek between that anway .
for such the reward is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens beneath which rivers flow – abiding in it forever ; what an excellent reward for the performers !
but different parties began to dispute with one another . a dreadful woe awaits on that great day for those that reject the truth .
god will reform your deeds and forgive your sins . one who obeys god and his messenger will certainly achieve a great success .
,  o abraham , give up this . indeed , the command of your lord has come , and indeed , there will reach them a punishment that can not be repelled . 
why is it not then that when itcomes up to the throat ,
alif lam ra.a book , with verses which are fundamental , and then expounded in detail by one who is all wise and all aware .
o prophet ! truly we have sent thee as a witness , a bearer of glad tidings , and warner , -
they said , 'we have been hurt before thou camest to us , and after thou camest to us . ' he said , 'perchance your lord will destroy your enemy , and will make you successors in the land , so that he may behold how you shall do . '
they said ,  we see you and your followers as an evil omen .  he replied ,  no , your evil omen is with god ; the truth is that you are a people being put to the test . 
they asked him ,  shu'ayb , do your prayers tell you that we must give up the worship of what our fathers had worshipped and that we must not deal with our properties as we like ? we still believe that you are a person of forbearance and understanding . 
jesus , son of mary , then prayed : ' o allah , our lord , send down to us a repast from the heavens that shall be a festival for the first of us and for the last of us , and a sign from you . and provide us with sustenance , for you are the best provider of sustenance . '
and the guilty behold the fire and know that they are about to fall therein , and they find no way of escape thence .
while you are thoughtless ?
they shall be calling unto them , 'were we not with you ? ' they shall say , 'yes indeed ; but you tempted yourselves , and you awaited , and you were in doubt , and fancies deluded you , until god 's commandment came , and the deluder deluded you concerning god .
o you who believe ! when you intend to offer as-salat , wash your faces and your handsup to the elbows , rubyour heads , andyour feet up to ankles . if you are in a state of janaba , purify yourself . but if you are ill or on a journey or any of you comes from answering the call of nature , or you have been in contact with womenand you find no water , then perform tayammum with clean earth and rub therewith your faces and hands . allah does not want to place you in difficulty , but he wants to purify you , and to complete his favour on you that you may be thankful .
—so let anyone who wishes remember—
and we adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and made them things to stone satans ; and we have prepared for them the chastisement of the blaze .
how many generations have we destroyed before them who were mightier in power than they . then they searched throughout the land to see if there was a way of escape .
how was then my punishment of which they had been warned ?
say , :  shall we tell you who will be the greatest losers in respect of their works ?
after them we produced other generations
lord of the two easts , and lord of the two wests !
and we made them imams who guidedby our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of prayer and the giving of the alms , and usdid they serve ;
aye ! it would come upon them on a sudden and shall dumbfound them ; they shall not be able to avert it , nor shall they be respited .
when it followed its most wicked .
so let those who want , choose the right guidance
not those who spend of their substance , to be seen of men , but have no faith in allah and the last day : if any take the evil one for their intimate , what a dreadful intimate he is !
for it was he , who had deluded me to reject the admonition which had come to me . satan has proved very treacherous to man. 
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . and on the day when the hour is come , upon that day the vain-doers shall lose .
say ,  my lord knows every word spoken in the heavens and on the earth . he is all hearing , all knowing . 
some people pay for meaningless tales to draw others attention away from the quran without knowledge and treat as a matter of fun . they will suffer a humiliating torment .
 all that we say is that some of our godshave seized you with evil .  he said :  i call allah to witness and bear you witness that i am free from that which you ascribe as partners in worship ,
the squanderers are brothers of satan , and satan is unthankful to his lord .
and we took the children of israel across the sea , and pharaoh and his soldiers pursued them in tyranny and enmity until , when drowning overtook him , he said ,  i believe that there is no deity except that in whom the children of israel believe , and i am of the muslims . 
nor did he feel any urge to feed the needy ,
then he decreed them as seven heavens in two days , and revealed unto each heaven the command thereof ; and we bedecked the nether heaven with lamps and placed therein a guard . that is the ordinance of the mighty , the knower .
he knows all that is ahead of them and all that is behind them , while the others do not know .
when the sky will split asunder , and turn rosy like the dregs of annointing oil ,
thereafter let them end their unkemptnesss and fulfil their vows and circumambulate the ancient house .
he knows what is before them and behind them , and they do not comprehend him in knowledge .
did they not see that it did not return a word to them , and had no power either to hurt them or to cause them any benefit ?
do they possess the treasures of the mercy of your , , lord , the majestic and munificent god ?
and that cry of theirs ceased not , till we made them as a field that is reaped , extinct .
have they not seen how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? allah judges , and there is none who may repeal his judgement , and he is swift at reckoning .
will they not , then , turn to allah in repentance , and ask for his forgiveness ? allah is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and when any of them is given the good tidings of that he has likened to the all-merciful , his face is darkened , and he chokes inwardly .
andthat exalted is the nobleness of our lord ; he has not taken a wife or a son
know that there is no god except allah , and pleadfor forgiveness of your sin and for the faithful , men and women . allah knows your itinerary and yourabode .
have fear of god and obey me .
tell them :  my lord has enjoined piety , devotion in all acts of worship , and calling upon him with exclusive obedience . for you will be reverted back to what you werecreated first . 
saying :  ah woe , who has roused us from our sleep ?  this is what ar-rahman had promised , and whose truth the apostles had affirmed .
having in them various kinds .
so remind , if reminding helps .
say : 'nothing will befall us except what allah has ordained . he is our guardian . in allah , let the believers put their trust '
they said :  if you cease not . o lout ! verily , you will be one of those who are driven out ! 
have you heard the story of the disputants who entered his chamber by climbing over the wall ?
say , “ i do not find in what is sent down to me any eatable prohibited to a consumer , except if it is carrion , or blood flowing from blood vessels , or the flesh of swine – for that is indeed foul , or the sin causing animal over which the name of any other than allah is taken at the time of slaughtering ; so for one compelled by circumstances , neither himself desiring nor eating more than necessary , indeed your lord is oft forgiving , most merciful . ”
had god pleased to take a son , he could have chosen whom he liked from among those he has created . glory be to him . he is god , the one , the omnipotent .
say :  then bring a book from allah , which is a better guide than these twoand the quran ] , that i may follow it , if you are truthful . 
unto every community we have appointed a rite which they perform . let them not therefore contend with thee in the affair ; and call them thou unto thy lord , verily thou art on true guidance .
anon will the foolish among mankind say : what hath turned them away from their qiblah whereon they had been ? say thou : unto allah belongeth the east and the west he guideth whomsoever he listeth unto a straight path .
it is he who gives life , and causes death , and to him youshall return .
said firaun to the court members around him , “ he is indeed an expert magician . ”
and for others among them who have not joined them yet . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
and by the night when it passeth away ; -
o believers , take not my enemy and your enemy for friends , offering them love , though they have disbelieved in the truth that has come to you , expelling the messenger and you because you believe in god your lord . if you go forth to struggle in my way and seek my good pleasure , secretly loving them , yet i know very well what you conceal and what you publish ; and whosoever of you does that , has gone astray from the right way .
it is likely that , if he divorces you , his lord will give him wives better than you in your place -widows and maidens who are obedient , believing , respectful , penitent , serving and fasting .
we said :  o fire , become coolness and safety for abraham . 
like as we sent down on the dividers
ta . sin mim .
“ that you must worship allah and fear him , and obey me . ”
gardens of eden , underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; that is the recompense of the self-purified .
but if ye will do it not , then be apprised of war from allah and his apostle . and if ye repent , then yours shall be your capital sums ; ye shall neither wrong nor be wronged .
those whom we have given the book recognize him as they recognize their sons ; those who have lost their souls , they will not believe .
in pillars stretched forth .
said :  then , by thy power , i will put them all in the wrong , -
and they rejected them , although their souls were certain of them , out of wickedness and pride . so see how the outcome was for the mischief-makers .
see they not how many of those before them we did destroy ? - generations we had established on the earth , in strength such as we have not given to you - for whom we poured out rain from the skies in abundance , and gavestreams flowing beneath their : yet for their sins we destroyed them , and raised in their wake fresh generations .
then allah sent a crow who scratched the ground to show him to hide the dead body of his brother . hesaid :  woe to me ! am i not even able to be as this crow and to hide the dead body of my brother ?  then he became one of those who regretted .
and by the calm of night ,
theirs shall be the gardens of eden , which the all merciful has promised to his servants without their having seen them , and most surely his promise shall be fulfilled .
he said ,  my lord , how will i have a boy when my wife has been barren and i have reached extreme old age ? 
that is because allah is the guardian of the believers , and the unbelievers have no guardian .
:  seize ye him , and bind ye him ,
and allah coineth a similitude : two men , one of them dumb , having control of nothing , and he is a burden on his owner ; whithersoever he directeth him to go , he bringeth no good . is he equal with one who enjoineth justice and followeth a straight path ?
then after them we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs , but they wrongfully rejected them : so see what was the end of those who made mischief .
he said , ' o would that i had power against you , or might take refuge in a strong pillar ! '
those who remain constant in their salat ;
and your god is one god ! there is no god but he ; he is the beneficent , the merciful .
said : did we not bring you up as a child among us , and you tarried among us foryears of your life ?
this is how we have madedenying embedded in the hearts of the guilty .
to redeem oneself of one 's injustice , one would gladly spend the wealth of the whole earth if it were possible . on seeing the torment one will try to hide his regret . they will all be judged fairly and no wrong will be done to them .
‘ today that will be of no avail to you . as you did wrong , so will you share in the punishment . ’
o ye who believe ! persevere in patience and constancy ; vie in such perseverance ; strengthen each other ; and fear allah ; that ye may prosper .
whoever desires this world 's life and its finery , we will pay them in full their deeds therein , and they shall not be made to . suffer loss in respect of them .
believers ! fear god , and let every soul look to what it lays up for the future . fear god : god is aware of what you do .
what is the inevitable reality ?
when they were seated over it
therefore declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside from the polytheists .
and delicious drinks .
he spread out the earth for the people .
but god will deliver them who feared him to their place of salvation . no evil shall touch them , nor shall they grieve .
whosoever is in the heaven and earth ask him . every day he is upon an affair .
there is no soul without a protector over it .
they said , ‘ indeed , we found our fathers doing likewise . ’
and in two days he formed seven heavens , and revealed to each heaven its functions ; and we adorned the lower heaven with brilliant lampsand guarded it . that is the decree of the almighty , the all knowing .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will be quarrelling before your lord .
and when we said to the angels , 'bow yourselves to adam ' ; so they bowed themselves , save iblis ; he was one of the jinn , and committed ungodliness against his lord 's command . what , and do you take him and his seed to be your friends , apart from me , and they an enemy to you ? how evil is that exchange for the evildoers !
o you who believe ! when you rise to pray , wash your faces and your hands and arms to the elbows , and wipe your heads , and your feet to the ankles . if you had intercourse , then purify yourselves . if you are ill , or travelling , or one of you returns from the toilet , or you had contact with women , and could not find water , then use some clean sand and wipe your faces and hands with it . god does not intend to burden you , but he intends to purify you , and to complete his blessing upon you , that you may be thankful .
we would certainly have seized him by the right hand ,
and let thosehave the same fear in their minds as they would have for their own , if they had left weak offspring behind . so let them fear allah and speak right words .
and when satan made their foul deeds seem fair to them . he said : 'no one shall conquer you this day . i shall be your savior ' but when the two armies came within sight of each other , he took to his heels , saying : ' i reject you , for i can see what you can not . i fear allah , allah is stern in retribution '
allah does not like that the evil should be uttered in public except by him who has been wronged . and allah is ever all-hearer , all-knower .
in the meantime a man came running from the far end of the town , saying : “ my people , follow the messengers ;
say , “ o people of the scripture ! you have no basis until you uphold the torah , and the gospel , and what is revealed to you from your lord. ” but what is revealed to you from your lord will increase many of them in rebellion and disbelief , so do not be sorry for the disbelieving people .
and the mountains are blown away .
what thinkest thou ? if we give them enjoyment of days for many years ,
were it not for allah 's grace and mercy towards you in this world and in the hereafter , a painful scourge would have visited you because of the things in which you were involved .
and remember , when ye were few and reckoned feeble in the land , and were in fear lest men should extirpate you , how he gave you refuge , and strengthened you with his help , and made provision of good things for you , that haply ye might be thankful .
verily those who plight their fealty to thee do no less than plight their fealty to allah : the hand of allah is over their hands : then any one who violates his oath , does so to the harm of his own soul , and any one who fulfils what he has covenanted with allah , - allah will soon grant him a great reward .
if you desire a verdict , the verdict has come to you . and if you desist , it would be best for you . and if you return , we will return ; and your troops , however numerous , will not benefit you . god is with the believers .
andthose who disbelieve , some of them are the guardians of others ; if you will not do it , there will be in the land persecution and great mischief .
such will be their welcome on the day of judgement .
and if any of your wives slips away from you to the unbelievers , and then you retaliate , give those whose wives have gone away the like of what they have expended . and fear god , in whom you believe .
that is so al-'azeez will know that i did not betray him inabsence and that allah does not guide the plan of betrayers .
the building which they erected will constantly keep disturbing their hearts unless their hearts are torn to pieces ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
and what will make you know what the night of al-qadris ?
the people of noah who lived before and the confederate tribes who lived after them rejected our revelations . every nation schemed against its messengers to seize them and disputed against them to defeat the truth . but torment struck them and how terrible was their retribution !
on that day when their faces shall be turned around in the fire , they will say : “ would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger . ”
the guilty will be recognized by their mark ; so they will be seized by their forelocks and feet .
ask them about the town that was situated on the seaside , when they violated the sabbath , when their fish would come to them on the sabbath day , visibly on the shore , but on days when they were not keeping sabbath they would not come to them . thus did we test them because of the transgressions they used to commit .
listen to falsehood , to devour anything forbidden . so if they come to you , either judge between them , or turn away from them . if you turn away from them , they can not hurt you in the least . and if you judge , judge with justice between them . verily , allah loves those who act justly .
say : allah delivereth you from this and from all affliction . yet ye attribute partners unto him .
this nation of yours is one nation , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and when the stars fall ,
lo ! i have believed in your lord , so hear me !
o my slaves who believe ! certainly , spacious is my earth . therefore worship me . 
passed round amongst them will be dishes of gold and goblets , and therein will be whatsoever souls desire and eyes delight in ; and ye will be therein abiders .
that he might justify truth and prove falsehood false , distasteful though it be to those in guilt .
the sightturned not aside , nor it transgressed beyondlimit .
when the time of the first of these warnings came , we sent against you servants of ours , of great might , who ravaged your homes . so the warning was fulfilled ,
say : 'if the all-merciful has a son , then i am the first to serve him .
indeed the pious are among gardens and water springs .
: follow that which is sent down unto you from your lord , and follow no protecting friends beside him . little do ye recollect !
that you may worship none but allah . verily , i have come to you as a warner and a bearer of good news from him
proclaim , “ indeed death which you run away from will surely confront you , then you will be returned to him who knows all the hidden and the visible – he will then inform you of what you did . ”
he has set flowing two seas that appear to meet .
unless by our benevolence , to reap advantage for a time .
and we refrain from sending the signs , only because the men of former generations treated them as false : we sent the she-camel to the thamud to open their eyes , but they treated her wrongfully : we only send the signs by way of terror .
and when our apostles came to lut , he was grieved for them , and he lacked strength to protect them , and said : this is a hard day .
and when your lord said to the angels , i am going to place in the earth a khalif , they said : what ! wilt thou place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed blood , and we celebrate thy praise and extol thy holiness ? he said : surely i know what you do not know .
until he reached the limit where the sun rises and he found it rising on a people whom we had provided no shelter from it .
aliflaammeemsaad .
:  now have they proved you liars in what ye say : so ye can not avertnorhelp .  and whoever among you does wrong , him shall we cause to taste of a grievous penalty .
and certainly we have made the quran easy for remembrance , but is there anyone who will mind ?
but to worship me ? surely , that is a straight path .
and they assign a portion of that which we have given them unto what they know not . by allah ! but ye will indeed be asked concerningthat ye used to invent .
yea , to him be praise , in the heavens and on earth ; and in the late afternoon and when the day begins to decline .
and thus your lord will choose you , and will teach you the interpretation of events , and will complete his blessing upon you and upon the family of jacob , as he has completed it before upon your forefathers abraham and isaac . your lord is knowing and wise .
and when thy lord said to the angels , 'see , i am creating a mortal of a clay of mud moulded .
and had we destroyed them with a torment before it , surely they would have said : o our lord why sent not thou unto us an apostle that we might have followed thy signs before we were disgraced and humiliated .
o people of the scripture ! why disbelieve ye in the revelations of allah , when yebear witness ?
and if anyone disputes with you about him , after the knowledge that has come to you , say , “ come , let us call our children and your children , and our women and your women , and ourselves and yourselves , and let us invoke god ’ s curse on the liars . ”
and we rescued him and those with him in the ship , and made of it a portent for the peoples .
so when the deafening cry comes—
and we guided them both on the right way .
he said : fear not . lo ! i am with you twain , hearing and seeing .
verily , that indeed was a manifest trial
they said : have we not forbidden you frompeople ?
wasting yourlifetime in pastime and amusements .
we used to wadewithwaders ,
say to the bondmen of mine who believe , that they must keep the prayer established and spend in our way from what we have given them , secretly and publicly , before the advent of a day in which there will be no trade nor friendship .
and beside them will be chaste femalesrestraining their glances only for their husbands , of equal ages .
we unleashed upon them a shower of stones , except for the family of lot ; we rescued them at dawn .
except those who have faith and do righteous deeds . theirs is a never ending reward .
say thou : who guardeth you by night and by day from the compassionate ! o yet from the remembrance of their lord they avert themselves !
and surely they disbelieved when they said : 'christ , the son of mary , is indeed god ' ; whereas christ had said : 'children of israel ! serve allah , who is your lord and my lord . ' allah has forbidden paradise to those who associate anything with him in his divinity and their refuge shall be the fire . no one will be able to help such wrong-doers .
whatever differences you may have about the quran , the final decision rests with god . in him do i trust and to him do i turn in repentance .
he said , ‘ he has certainly wronged you by asking your ewe in addition to his own ewes , and indeed many partners bully one another , except such as have faith and do righteous deeds , and few are they. ’ then david knew that we had tested him , whereat he pleaded with his lord for forgiveness , and fell down in prostration and repented .
hesearched their bags before his brother 's and then took out the cup from his brother 's bag . in this way , we devised a plan on behalf of joseph . he could not have detained his brother under the king 's law , unless god so willed . we exalt whoever we please : but above those who have knowledge there is one all knowing .
god is cognisant of what every female carries in her womb , or what the wombs want or exceed . with him all things are in determined measure .
and remember ishmael , elisha and dhu ’ l-kifl—eachamong the elect .
as if they had never dwelt and flourished there . ah ! behold ! for the thamud rejected their lord and cherisher ! ah ! behold ! removedwere the thamud !
then , when it is his will , he will raise him up .
and for him who dreadeth the standing before his lord will be two gardens .
have they not travelled around the earth and seen the fate of those who preceded them ? and they were far superior to them in strength . nothing in the heavens or the earth can ever frustrate god 's . he is all-knowing and all powerful .
and the earth ; he set up for the creatures .
say thou : and verily ye ; shall then be despicable .
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , and provesbefore it to be true . verily god is informed of his creatures and sees everything .
what ! are they better than the people of tubba and those who were before them ? we destroyed them because they were guilty of sin .
so his lord answered his invocation and turned away from him their plot . verily , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
at the same time , my chastisement is highly painful .
that most surely is the truth : the contending one with another of the inmates of the fire .
when your lord inspired the angels ,  verily , i am with you , so keep firm those who have believed . i will cast terror into the hearts of those who have disbelieved , so strike them over the necks , and smite over all their fingers and toes . 
return to your lord wellpleased , wellpleasing .
on the day when the trumpet is blown , everyone in the heavens and the earth will be horrified , except whomever god wills ; and everyone will come before him in humility .
o mankind ! this noble messengerhas come to you with the truth from your lord , so accept faith for your own good ; and if you disbelieve , then undoubtedly to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and in the earth ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
and two of camels and two of oxen . say , ‘ is it the two males that he has forbidden or the two females , or what is contained in the wombs of the two females ? were you witnesses when allah enjoined this upon you ? ’ so who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah to mislead the people without any knowledge ? indeed allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
like the precedent of pharaoh ’ s clan and those who were before them , who defied allah ’ s signs , so allah seized them for their sins . indeed allah is all-strong , severe in retribution .
then fight in the cause of allah , and know that allah heareth and knoweth all things .
it is he who subjected the earth for you , therefore tread its paths and eat from allah ’ s sustenance ; and towards him is the resurrection .
why do not their priests and monks forbid them from speaking evil and devouring the forbidden ? undoubtedly what they do is extremely evil .
every soul will be recompensed fully for what it has done , and he is best aware of what they do .
o prophet ! say to those of the captives who are in your hands : if allah knows anything good in your hearts , he will give to you better than that which has been taken away from you and will forgive you , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they ask thee to hasten on the evil in preference to the good : yet have come to pass , before them , exemplary punishments ! but verily thy lord is full of forgiveness for mankind for their wrong-doing , and verily thy lord isstrict in punishment .
o you who have believed , when you meet those who disbelieve advancing , do not turn to them your backs .
they feed the destitute , orphans , and captives for the love of god , saying ,
, have you seen those who try to purify themselves ? they should know that god only purifies whomever he wants and that the slightest wrong will not be done to such people .
nay , but whosoever hath done evil and his sin surroundeth him ; such are rightful owners of the fire ; they will abide therein .
say thou : is there any of your associate-gods who originateth the creation and then repeateth it ? say thou : allah originateth the creation and then shall repeat it . whither away then are ye deviating ?
yea those who disbelieve belie .
as for the moon , we have ordained its phases , until it becomes like an old palm leaf .
indeed , qarun was from the people of moses , but he tyrannized them . and we gave him of treasures whose keys would burden a band of strong men ; thereupon his people said to him ,  do not exult . indeed , allah does not like the exultant .
he said ,  my lord , make for me a sign .  he said ,  your sign is that you will notspeak to the people for three days except by gesture . and remember your lord much and exaltin the evening and the morning . 
they believe in god and the last day , and advocate righteousness and forbid evil , and are quick to do good deeds . these are among the righteous .
who is more unjust than he who imputes lies to god or denies his revelations ? the sinners will surely not be reprieved .
the knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-great , the all-sublime .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels names of females .
“ we therefore led you astray , for we ourselves were astray ! ”
and this book that we have sent down is a blessed one ; so follow it , and be godwary so that you may receivemercy .
those who disbelieve will say :  o lord , show us those among the jinns and men who had led us astray that we may trample them underfoot and make them wholly abject . 
cruel , moreover , and an illegitimate pretender .
 o our people :  they said :  we have listened to a book which has come down after moses , confirming what wasbefore it , showing the way to the truth and a path that is straight .
and those unto whom they cry instead of him possess no power of intercession , saving him who beareth witness unto the truth knowingly .
your lord has said , 'call upon me and i will answer you . surely those who wax too proud to do me service shall enter gehenna utterly abject . '
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection and lead them into the fire ; and wretched is the place to which they are led .
the spoils that allah gave to his apostle from them , you did not spur any horse for its sake , nor any riding camel , but allah makes his apostles prevail over whomever he wishes , and allah has power over all things .
those are they brought near
when we have died and have become dust , ? that is a distant return . 
nor do you worship what i worship
or add to it ; and chant the quran rhythmically .
and the fruits of the palm and of the vine , from which you derive intoxicants and wholesome provisions . surely , in this there is a sign for nation who understand .
on that day , when the spiritand the angels stand in ranks they shall not speak , except he to whom the merciful has given permission , and sayswhat is right .
and we took a covenant from the children of israel and sent to them many messengers . but whenever any messenger brought to them something that did not suit their desires , they gave the lie to some of them and killed the others ,
in a parchment unrolled ,
tell them : “ if the unbelievers were to believe on the day of judgement that will not avail them . for then they will be granted no respite . ”
this is a blessed book which we have revealed , confirming what came before it , so that you may warn the mother of citiesand the people around it . those who believe in the hereafter do believe in it , and they are ever-mindful of their prayers .
hethen came nearer and nearer .
o you who have believed , do not take the jews and the christians as allies . they areallies of one another . and whoever is an ally to them among you - then indeed , he isof them . indeed , allah guides not the wrongdoing people .
they say , 'had the all-merciful so willed , we would not have served them . ' they have no knowledge of that ; they are only conjecturing .
and what will make you know what the day of recompense is ?
but lo ! i am going to send a present unto them , and to see with whatthe messengers return .
then we raised you up after your death : ye had the chance to be grateful .
, leave them alone and you will not be blamed .
and had not a command of your lord been passed , then the punishment would have gripped them – and had a term not been appointed .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth andthe balance . what do you know—maybe the hour is near !
verily allah will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds , to gardens , beneath which rivers flow : for allah carries out all that he plans .
all that is hidden in the heavens and the earth lies within the power of allah . to him are all matters referred for judgement . so do serve him , and place in him all your trust . your lord is not heedless of what you do .
and the ignorant people said , “ why does not allah speak to us , or some sign come to us ? ” those before them had also spoken in the same way as they speak ; their heartsare all alike ; undoubtedly , we have made the signs clear for the people who have faith .
a fire blazing fiercely !
when wesent to them two messengers , they rejected them : but we strengthened them with a third : they said ,  truly , we have been sent on a mission to you . 
and allah knows best what they gather ,
so naught was the answer of his people except that they said : slay him or burn him ; then allah delivered him from the fire ; most surely there are signs in this for a people who believe .
abraham said ,  you believe in idols besides god only out of worldly love , but on the day of judgment you will reject and condemn each other . your dwelling will be fire and no one will help you . 
he said , ' o council , which one of you will bring me her throne , before they come to me in surrender ? '
so we saved him and his family , except for his wife ; she was of those who remained .
this it is that ye are promised for the day of reckoning .
verily those love the herein , and leave in front of them a heavy day .
say : 'if i go astray , i go astray only to my own loss ; if i am guided , it is by what my lord reveals to me . he is all-hearing , ever-nigh . '
every soul will know the taste of death . we tempt you with evil and with good as a trial ; and to us you will return .
is it not of their own calumny that they say ,
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you , but if ye repeatwe shall repeat , and we have appointed hell a dungeon for the disbelievers .
the sending down of the book is from god , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and certainly we have brought them a book which we have made clear with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe .
judge between them by what allah has sent down , and do not follow their desires . beware of them lest they should beguile you from part of what allah has sent down to you . but if they turn their backs , then know that allah desires to punish them for some of their sins , and indeed many of the people are transgressors .
there the believers were tested and tremendously shaken .
and lut believed in him . and he said : verily i am going to migrate to my lord ; verily he is the mighty , the wise .
the officials said :  if you are lying , what will be the penalty for him who has stolen ? 
and when there cometh unto them a scripture from allah , confirming that in their possession - though before that they were asking for a signal triumph over those who disbelieved - and when there cometh unto them that which they knowthey disbelieve therein . the curse of allah is on disbelievers .
recall when your sister walked along and said ,  shall i guide you to one who will take care of him ?  thus we returned you to your mother , so that her eyes might be cooled and that she might not grieve . and you killed a man and we delivered you from sorrow . we tested you with various trials . you stayed for a number of years among the people of midian , then you came upto the standard , moses .
remember in thy dream allah showed them to thee as few : if he had shown them to thee as many , ye would surely have been discouraged , and ye would surely have disputed indecision ; but allah saved : for he knoweth well theofhearts .
verily , we have created man in toil .
whatever allah grants to people of mercy - none can withhold it ; and whatever he withholds - none can release it thereafter . and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
o my servants , you have nothing to fear on that day , nor will you grieve .
they surely disbelieve who say : lo ! allah is the messiah , son of mary . the messiahsaid : o children of israel , worship allah , my lord and your lord . lo ! whoso ascribeth partners unto allah , for him allah hath forbidden paradise . his abode is the fire . for evil-doers there will be no helpers .
had we sent it down upon some non-arab
when any of them is told about the birth of a female his face turns dark , and he is filled with suppressed anger ,
they long that ye should disbelieve even as they disbelieve , that ye may be upon a level . so choose not friends from them till they forsake their homes in the way of allah ; if they turn backthen take them and kill them wherever ye find them , and choose no friend nor helper from among them ,
but howwhen we bring of every people a witness , and we bring theea witness against these ?
and remember when you were only a few and meek in the land , and feared that men may snatch you away – he therefore gave you refuge and strengthened you with his help , and gave you good things as sustenance , so that you may be thankful .
but he has made no effort to pass on the path that is steep .
and some men there are who say , 'we believe in god and the last day ' ; but they are not believers .
if they should get knowledge of you they will stone you , or restore you to their creed , then you will not prosper ever .
o you who believe ! let not your wealth , or your children , divert you from the remembrance of allah ; and whoever does that , these are the losers .
so god gave them the reward of this world , and the excellent reward of the hereafter . god loves the doers of good .
and when it is said to them ,  follow what allah has revealed ,  they say ,  rather , we will follow that which we found our fathers doing .  even though their fathers understood nothing , nor were they guided ?
so they have indeed rejected the truth when it came to them ; therefore the truth of what they mocked at will shine upon them .
do you think that you shall be left alone while allah has not yet tested those among you who have striven hard and fought and have not taken walijahgiving openly to them their secrets ] besides allah and his messenger , and the believers . allah is well-acquainted with what you do .
that is their recompense , because they rejected our signs , and said ,  when we are reduced to bones and broken dust , should we really be raised upa new creation ? 
lo ! the number of the months with allah is twelve months by allah 's ordinance in the day that he created the heavens and the earth . four of them are sacred : that is the right religion . so wrong not yourselves in them . and wage war on all of the idolaters as they are waging war on all of you . and know that allah is with those who keep their duty .
and moses said ,  o my people , if you have believed in allah , then rely upon him , if you should be muslims . 
then do not , o lord , put me among the sinners . 
whoever intercedes for a good cause shall receive a share of it , and whoever intercedes for an evil cause shall share its burden , and allah is prepotent over all things .
in the high empyrean ,
they are indeed those who bartered away good guidance for error and gained nothing from the deal , nor found the right way .
so you ignore them for a time
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you ; surely he is aware of and sees his servants . '
and lo ! thy lord ! he is indeed the mighty , the merciful .
if you lapse back after receiving the clear teachings that have come to you , know it well that allah is all-powerful , all-wise .
so woe to the worshippers
he causes the night to enter in upon the day , and he causes the day to enter in upon the night , and he has made subservientthe sun and the moon ; each one follows its course to an appointed time ; this is allah , your lord , his is the kingdom ; and those whom you call upon besides him do not control a straw .
say ,  invoke those you have claimedbesides him , for they do not possess theremoval of adversity from you ortransfer . 
on that day he will call to them , saying : 'where are those whom you alleged to be my associates '
when the seas are poured forth ,
but no , he did not fulfill what he has commanded him .
the example of what they spend in this worldly life is like that of a wind containing frost which strikes the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves and destroys it . and allah has not wronged them , but they wrong themselves .
glorified be thy lord , the lord of majesty , from that which they attribute
say , “ o people ! if you are in doubt concerning my religion , theni will never worship those whom you worship instead of allah – but i worship allah who will give you death ; and i am commanded to be of the believers . ”
a fountain from which drink they who are drawn near .
and be patient and your patience is not but byallah , and grieve not for them , and do not distress yourself at what they plan .
and indeed we have sent down for you ayatthat make things plain , and the example of those who passed away before you , and an admonition for those who are al-muttaqun .
'messengers ' said he , 'what is your errand '
was it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among them : 'warn the people , and give thou good tidings to the believers that they have a sure footing with their lord ' ? the unbelievers say , 'this is a manifest sorcerer . '
and obey allah and the apostle , that you may be shown mercy .
he said ,  o my people , tell me : if i have clear evidence from my lord , and he has granted his mercy , who then will support me against god , if i disobey him ? you would only make my loss greater .
then we caused the earth to swallow up him and his house ; and he had notparty to help him against allah , nor could he defend himself .
, your lord has neither forsaken you , nor is he displeased .
“ o yahya – hold the book firmly ” ; and we gave him prophethood in his infancy .
one with whom was knowledge of the scripture said : i will bring it thee before thy gaze returneth unto thee . and when he saw it set in his presence , said : this is of the bounty of my lord , that he may try me whether i give thanks or am ungrateful . whosoever giveth thanks he only giveth thanks forhis own soul ; and whosoever is ungrateful . for lo ! my lord is absolute in independence , bountiful .
he calls unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; certainly , and evil maulaand certainly an evil friend !
“ and whoever does not listen to allah ’ s caller can not escape in the earth , and he has no supporters against allah ; they are in open error . ”
hallow thou the name of thine lord , the most high ,
and he reviewed the birds ; then he said , 'how is it with me , that i do not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absent ?
he will say to his friend in hell ,  by god , you almost destroyed me .
shall he not know , who created ? and he is the all-subtle , the all-aware .
and perform their witnessings ,
even so the word of thy lord was realised against the unbelievers , that they are the inhabitants of the fire .
and by those who regulate events .
he has made for you the night and the day out of his mercy , so that you may rest therein and that you may seek his bounty and so that you may give thanks .
we have appointed all that is on the earth an adornment for it , in order that we try which of them is finest in works .
it is for the poor ; those who are restrained in the way of god , and unable to travel in the land . the unaware would think them rich , due to their dignity . you will recognize them by their features . they do not ask from people insistently . whatever charity you give , god is aware of it .
we bestowed solomon on david who was an excellent devotee , for he turned to god in penitence .
say thou : what thing is the greatest in testimony ? say thou : allah is witness between me and you , and this qur'an hath been revealed unto me that i may thereby warn you and whomsoever it may reach . would ye indeed testify that there is anot her god together with allah ? say thou : i testify not . say thou : verily he is the one god , and i am quit of that which ye associate .
who know that verily they are going to meet their lord , and that verily unto him they are going to return ,
they are in varying gardens in the sight of allah , and allah sees well all that they do .
and on the day whereon the hour arriveth , the culprits will swear that they tarried not but an hour : thus were they ever deluded .
have we vouchsafed unto them any book before this , so that they are to it holding fast ?
god has made the sea subservient to you so that ships sail on by his command and you seek his favors . perhaps you will be grateful .
never will their wealth or their children avail them against allah at all . those are the companions of the fire ; they will abide therein eternally
and when there came to them , a bookfrom allah confirming what is with themand the injeel ] , although aforetime they had invoked allahin order to gain victory over those who disbelieved , then when there came to them that which they had recognised , they disbelieved in it . so let the curse of allah be on the disbelievers .
when there were displayed before him , in the afternoon , well trained horses of the highest breed ] .
your lord is only one . the hearts of those who do not believe in the life hereafter dislike . they are puffed up with pride .
close to which is the everlasting paradise .
and that it is he who causes to die , and causes to live
then say to them : 'shall i tell you about those whose retribution with allah is even worse ? they are the ones whom allah has cursed , and who incurred his wrath and some of whom were changed into apes and swine , and who served the false deities . such have an even worse rank and have strayed farther away from the right path .
he said ,  lord , grant me respite until the day of resurrection  .
asked the magicians ,  cast down what you want to  .
and indeed they had already made a covenant with allah not to turn their backs , and a covenant with allah must be answered for .
he replied : 'what do you think , i forgot the fish when we were resting on the rock . none but satan made me forget to mention this it made its way into the sea in a marvelous fashion '
is it not a guidance to them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwelling places they walk ? surely , in this there are signs for thoseof reason .
permission is granted thosewho fight because they were oppressed . god is certainly able to give help to those
do their minds command them to do this , or are they an outrageous folk ?
from him thou art distracted .
then he shall be in a life well-pleasing -
those who do not testify falsely and when they come across something impious , pass it by nobly ,
in the boiling fetid fluid : then in the fire shall they be burned ;
but those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt of it until the hour comes upon them unexpectedly or there comes to them the punishment of a barren day .
there have been many dispensations before you ; so travel in the land and see what befell those who denied the truth .
i must only speak what is true about god . i have brought you miracles from your lord ; therefore , let the children of israel go free  .
and what prevents their expenditures from being accepted from them but that they have disbelieved in allah and in his messenger and that they come not to prayer except while they are lazy and that they do not spend except while they are unwilling .
 and my brother harunhe is more eloquent in speech than me so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . verily ! i fear that they will belie me . 
but , whosoever feared the standing before his lord and prevented the self from desires ,
they said : hast thou come unto us to pervert us from thatin which we found our fathers , and that you two may own the place of greatness in the land ? we will not believe you two .
it is he who carries you across land and sea . when you are in the ships , and they sail along with them with a favourable wind , exulting in it , there comes upon them a tempestuous wind and waves assail them from every side , and they think that they are besieged , they invoke allah putting exclusive faith in him , ‘ if you deliver us from this , we will surely be among the grateful . ’
shall we treat those who believeand do righteous good deeds , as mufsidunon earth ? or shall we treat the muttaqun , as the fujjar ?
do not consider anything equal to god lest you will become despised and neglected .
and certainly we gave the book to musa , but it was gone against ; and had not a word gone forth from your lord , the matter would surely have been decided between them ; and surely they are in a disquieting doubt about it .
say thou : then bring a book from before allah , that is better in guidance than these two shall follow it -- if ye are truth- tellers .
for which one must strive hard .
when they disobeyed the apostle of their lord he seized them with an overwhelming punishment .
so give his due to the near of kin , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is better for those who desire to please allah . it is they who will prosper .
by no means ! if he desist not we shall seize and deal him by the forelock -
but if they see a sign , they turn away , and say ,  this istransient magic . 
god has made some of you richer than others . the rich ones do not have to give away their property to their slaves to make them equally rich . do they reject the bounties of god ?
some of the desert dwelling arabs believe in god and the day of judgment . whatever they spend for the cause of god they consider it as a means of getting nearer to god and have the prayers of the messenger in their favor . this , certainly is a means to get nearer to god . god will admit them into his mercy . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
when they came in unto him , and said : 'peace ! ' he said : 'peace ' ! - people unknown .
remember satan made theiracts seem alluring to them , and said :  no one among men can overcome you this day , while i am near to you  : but when the two forces came in sight of each other , he turned on his heels , and said :  lo ! i am clear of you ; lo ! i see what ye see not ; lo ! i fear allah : for allah is strict in punishment . 
those who left their homes for the cause of god after they had been persecuted , strove hard for his cause and exercised patience should knowthat your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
i do call to witness this city ; -
a speaker from among them said : do not slay yusuf , and cast him down into the bottom of the pit if you must do , some of the travellers may pick him up .
why , if you are not at our disposal ,
when both surrenderedand abraham flung the son down on his forehead ,
he said , “ this is my staff ; i support myself on it , and i knock down leaves for my sheep with it , and there are other uses for me in it . ”
and a book inscribed .
therefore judge you between me and them , and save me and those of the believers who are with me . 
and when it is said to them , “ believe as the people have believed , ” they say , “ shall we believe as the fools have believed ? ” in fact , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
and we did not find in most of them anycovenant , and we found most of them to be certainly transgressors .
we indeed tested those before them – so allah will surely test the truthful , and will surely test the liars .
high ranks conferred by him as well as forgiveness and mercy . god is forgiving and merciful .
believers ! when you encounter a host in battle , stand firm and remember allah much that you may triumph .
but what is the matter with those who deny the truth , that they come hastening towards you
verily allah heard the saying of those who said , :  allah , forsooth , is poor , and we are rich !  we shall record their saying with their slaying of the prophets wrongfully and we shall say : taste ye the punishment of burning !
it is he who turns down the orphans
indeed the place of success is for the pious .
o people of the scripture ! do not exaggerate in your religion nor utter aught concerning allah save the truth . the messiah , jesus son of mary , was only a messenger of allah , and his word which he conveyed unto mary , and a spirit from him . so believe in allah and his messengers , and say not  three  - cease ! better for you ! - allah is only one allah . far is it removed from his transcendent majesty that he should have a son . his is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and allah is sufficient as defender .
is the man who follows the good pleasure of allah like the man who draws on himself the wrath of allah , and whose abode is in hell ? - a woeful refuge !
each will have a position in accordance with his deeds ; and no wrong will be done to them .
or have they plotted some plan ? then we too are planning .
say , “ if i err , i err only to my own loss ; but if i am guided , it is by what my lord inspires me . he is hearing and near . ”
god will givewisdom and teach him the book , the torah , and the gospel .
praise be to allah , unto whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . his is the praise in the hereafter , and he is the wise , the aware .
evil is the example of those who belied our verses ; they wronged themselves .
they swear to you by allah that they might please you and , allah , as well as his apostle , has a greater right that they should please him , if they are believers .
they lied , and followed their opinions , but everything has its time .
his people had no answer to his remarks but to tell one another ,  expel him from our town ; he and his people want to purify themselves . 
thus does allah , the mighty , the wise , reveal to you , andto those before you .
who have believed and whose hearts have rest in the remembrance of allah . verily in the remembrance of allah do hearts find rest !
when she heard of their sly whispers , she sent for them and prepared a banquet . to each she gave a knife , 'come and attend to them ' when they saw him , they were so taken with him that they cut their hands , and said : 'allah save us ! this is no mortal , he is no other but a noble angel '
those who do not have the means to marry should keep themselves chaste until god grants them enough out of his bounty . if any of your slaves desire a deed of freedom , write it out for them , if you find any promise in them , and give them some of the wealth god has given you . do not force yourmaids into prostitution , in order to enrich yourself , when they wish to preserve their chastity . yet if anyone forces them , once they have been forced , god will be forgiving and merciful to them .
what is the matter with you that you deny the greatness of god ,
who expend in prosperity and adversity in almsgiving , and restrain their rage , and pardon the offences of their fellowmen ; and god loves the good-doers ;
surely , if you leave them they will mislead your worshipers and father none but the immoral , and unbelievers .
and none of you could have restrained us from him .
and upon allah is the direction of the way , and thereof is some crooked ; and had he willed he would have guided you all .
when thou art amongst them , and performest for them the prayer , let a party of them stand with thee , and let them take their weapons . when they bow themselves , let them be behind you ; and let another party who have not prayed come and pray with thee , taking their precautions and their weapons . the unbelievers wish that you should be heedless of your weapons and your baggage , then they would wheel on you all at once . there is no fault in you , if rain molests you , or you are sick , to lay aside your weapons ; but take your precautions . god has prepared for the unbelievers a humbling chastisement .
or he could wreck them for what they have done ; yet there is much that he pardons .
and why should we not put our trust in allah , when he has already guided us to our paths ? we will endure your hurt patiently . in allah , let all who trust place their trust '
and will provide him sustenance from whence he never even imagined . whoever puts his trust in allah , he shall suffice him . surely allah brings about what he decrees ; allah has set a measure for everything .
they say , 'yes indeed , a warner came to us ; but we cried lies , saying ,  god has not sent down anything ; you are only in great error .
then she pointed to him . they said : how can we talk to one who is in the cradle , a young boy ?
a messenger from allah , reciting from purified scrolls ;
you have indeed in the prophet of god a good example for those of you who look to god and the last day , and remember god always .
they replied : 'have we not forbidden youthe worlds '
but those who divorce their wives by zihar , then wish to go back on the words they uttered , -should free a slave before they touch each other : thus are ye admonished to perform : and allah is well-acquainted withthat ye do .
he submitted , “ my lord ! help me against these mischievous people . ”
and it is not possible for the muslims that all of them go out ; so it should be that a party from each group goes forth in order to gain knowledge in religion , and upon returning they warn their people in the hope that they may avoid .
the unbelievers say : 'when we and our fathers are turned to dust , shall we be brought forth ?
about the great event ,
indeed the faithful , the jews , the christians and the sabaeans—those of them who have faith in allah and the last day and act righteously—they shall have their reward from their lord , and they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
but those who spend their wealth in order to gain god 's approval , and to strengthen their souls are like a garden on elevated ground . when heavy rain falls on it , it doubles its produce ; and if heavy rain does not fall , then light rain suffices . god sees what you do .
say : 'who saves you from the darkness of the land and sea , when you call out to him humbly and in secret ,  if you save us from this , we will be among the thankful . 
say :  on the day of decision , no profit will it be to unbelievers if theybelieve ! nor will they be granted a respite . 
then shaitanwhispered suggestions to them both in order to uncover that which was hidden from them of their private parts ; he said :  your lord did not forbid you this tree save you should become angels or become of the immortals . 
and among the followers of the book there are some such that if you entrust onewith a heap of wealth , he shall pay it back to you ; and among them there are some such that if you entrust onewith a dinar he shall not pay it back to you except so long as you remain firm in demanding it ; this is because they say : there is not upon us in the matter of the unlearned people any way ; and they tell a lie against allah while they know .
equal it is unto them : whether thou askest forgiveness for them or askest not forgiveness for them , allah shall forgive them not . verily allah guideth not a transgressing people .
indeed we and our fathers had been promised this before . it is nothing but the earlier people 's lore . 
say : shall i give you glad tidings of things far better than those ? for the righteous are gardens in nearness to their lord , with rivers flowing beneath ; therein is their eternal home ; with companions pure ; and the good pleasure of allah . for in allah 's sight arehis servants , -
and they say : the firewill not touch us save for a certain number of days . say : have ye received a covenant from allah - truly allah will not break his covenant - or tell ye concerning allah that which ye know not ?
when their messengers brought them clear verses they rejoiced in such knowledge as they had ; but they were encompassed by that which they mocked .
has created man from a clot .
thus it isis an obligation that mankind owes to allah ] . and whosoever honours the symbols of allah , then it is truly from the piety of the heart .
and verily most of the men of old went astray before them ,
him , whose is the dominion of heavens and the earth . and allah is over everything a witness .
our lord ! oh , give them double torment and curse them with a mighty curse .
and you will see the mountains and think them solid , but they shall pass away as the passing away of the clouds . the work of allah , who perfected all things , verily ! he is well-acquainted with what you do .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and earth . we have charged those who were given the book before you and you to fear allah . if you disbelieve , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . allah is rich , the praised .
should god bring you harm there is none but he who could deliver you from it , and if he wish you good there is none who could take away his blessings : he showers them on those of his creatures as he please , and he is forgiving and kind . 
it is because he is possessed of wealth and children
they will offer submission to god that day , and the lies they fabricated will not be of the least avail .
if you tried to count god 's blessings , you would never be able to number them . god is ever forgiving and most merciful .
then we shall rescue those who kept from evil , and leave the evil-doers crouching there .
ask the israelites how many a clear sign have we given them ; and whoever changes the favor of allah after it has come to him , then surely allah is severe in requiting .
again , you shall most certainly end up seeing it with absolute certainty .
indeed , allah will admit those who have believed and done righteous deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow , but those who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as grazing livestock eat , and the fire will be a residence for them .
certainly the word has proved true of most of them , so they do not believe .
if thou couldst but see when they will quake with terror ; but then there will be no escape , and they will be seized from a positionnear .
then , when the bearer of good news arrived , he laid it over his face , and he regained his sight . he said , “ did i not say to you that i know from god what you do not know ? ”
they are those who bear with patience , and in their lord they trust .
labouring , striving hard .
by the mount ,
he asks , “ when will be the day of resurrection ? ”
had it been a near gainand an easy journey , they would have followed you , but the distancewas long for them , and they would swear by allah ,  if we only could , we would certainly have come forth with you .  they destroy their ownselves , and allah knows that they are liars .
you do not get into any situation , nor do you recite any quran , nor do you do anything , but we are watching over you as you undertake it . not even the weight of an atom , on earth or in the sky , escapes your lord , nor is there anything smaller or larger , but is in a clear record .
and when you recite the qur'an , we put between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter a concealed partition .
we did not send a messenger except that he should be obeyed , by the permission of allah . if , when they wronged themselves , they had come to you and asked allah for forgiveness , and the messenger had asked for forgiveness for them , they would have found allah the turner , the most merciful .
and whatever expenditure you expend , and whatever vow you vow , surely god knows it . no helpers have the evildoers .
and we inspired moses : “ travel with my servants by night . you will be followed . ”
we had revealed the torah , containing guidance and light . the prophets who had submitted themselves to the will of god , judged the jews by the laws of the torah . so did the godly people and the jewish scholars who remembered some parts of the book of god and bore witness to it . mankind , do not be afraid of people but have fear of me . do not sell my revelations for a paltry price . those who do not judge by the laws of god are disbelievers .
if we so willed , we would have transformed them where they were so that they would not go forward or backward .
who remember allah while standing or sitting oron their sides and give thought to the creation of the heavens and the earth , ,  our lord , you did not create this aimlessly ; exalted are you ; then protect us from the punishment of the fire .
and its fruits are like devils ' heads .
so , when they went forth against goliath and his hosts , they said , 'our lord , pour out upon us patience , and make firm our feet , and give us aid against the people of the unbelievers ! '
their postponing of the months is nothing but furtherance in disbelief – the disbelievers are misled by it – they decree it lawful in one year and regard it forbidden in another year , in order to equate to the number of the months which allah has made sacred , and to make lawful what allah has forbidden ; their evil deeds seem good in their sight ; and allah does not guide the disbelievers .
so turn thou from them ; thou wilt not be reproached .
has not he been informed of the contents of the book of moses
then pass on at a quick pace from the place whence it is usual for the multitude so to do , and ask for allah 's forgiveness . for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
i am for you a faithful messenger ,
and recall when abraham said to his father , azar : 'do you take idols for gods ? i see you and your people in obvious error . '
there was not one but belied the apostles , wherefore justified was my wrath .
and be not like a woman who breaks into untwisted strands the yarn which she has spun , after it has become strong . nor take your oaths to practise deception between yourselves , lest one party should be more numerous than another : for allah will test you by this ; and on the day of judgment he will certainly make clear to youthat wherein ye disagree .
so musa conceived in his mind a fear .
the seven heavens , the earth , and all that is within them give glory to him . there is nothing but gives glory to him with his praise , though you do not understand their hymns of praise . he is most forbearing , exceedingly forgiving . 
i say the truth , and call the moon to witness ,
had we willed , we would have raised up a separate warner in each habitation .
the wayis only against those who oppress men and revolt in the earth unjustly ; these shall have a painful punishment .
he said , “ he has done you wrong by asking your ewe in addition to his ewes . many partners take advantage of one another , except those who believe and do good deeds , but these are so few. ” david realized that we were testing him , so he sought forgiveness from his lord , and fell down to his knees , and repented .
thereforbear with what they say , and hymn the praise of thy lord before the rising and before the setting of the sun ;
we said to him , “ strike the earth with your foot ; this cool spring is for bathing and drinking . ”
verily we created man from a sperm yokedto bring out his real substance , then gave him hearing and sight .
in two days he determined them seven heavens , and he revealed to each heaven its commands . we decorated the lowest heaven with lamps and preserve them . such is the decree of the almighty , the knower .
possibly you may risk your lifeby grieving , because they did not believe .
your striving is most surelyvarious .
the folk of noah denied before them , yea , they denied our slave and said : a madman ; and he was repulsed .
woe unto every slanderer , traducer ,
indeed , hardship is followed by ease ,
surely the people standing closest to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe ; and god is the protector of the believers .
for those who believe and are mindful of god ,
they regarded it a favor to you that they have submitted . say , “ do not consider your submission a favor to me ; it is god who has done you a favor by guiding you to the faith , if you are sincere . ”
so let them thou alone wading and sporting until hey meet the day which they are promised .
there are some human beings who purchase an enchanting diversion in order to lead people away from the way of allah without having any knowledge , who hold the call to the way of allah to ridicule . a humiliating chastisement awaits them .
when he said to his father and his people :  what do you worship ? 
he directeth the ordinance from the heaven unto the earth ; then it ascendeth unto him in a day , whereof the measure is a thousand years of that ye reckon .
if they turn away ; we have not appointed you a warden over them . your duty is to deliver the message . when we let man taste of our favours he begins to exult ; but if misfortune befalls him , as a consequence of his own deeds , man is surely then ungrateful .
then we sent moses and aaron , his brother , with our signs and a manifest authority
‘ and that they assumed , like you humans assume , that allah would not send any noble messenger . ’
and are ungrateful for what we have given them . so enjoy yourselves for a while , but soon you will come to know .
they hold that the clans have not retired ; and if the clans should advance , they would fain be in the desert with the wandering arabs , asking for the news of you ; and if they were among you , they would not give battle , save a little .
then pour above his head of the torment of the boiling water :
then said the council of the people of pharaoh , 'wilt thou leave moses and his people to work corruption in the land , and leave thee and thy gods ? ' said he , 'we shall slaughter their sons and spare their women ; surely we are triumphant over them ! '
on earth , we have made each of your generations the successors of their predecessors ; we have made some of you do good deeds of a higher degree than others . he will test you in this way through what he has revealed to you . your lord 's retribution is swift and he is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
these will receive double reward for their forbearance , replacing evil by virtue , and for their spending for the cause of god .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves .
that is of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . do not set up with allah another god , or you will be cast into gehenna , condemned and rejected .
and some of them there are that listen to thee , and we lay veils upon their hearts lest they understand it , and in their ears heaviness ; and if they see any sign whatever , they do not believe in it , so that when they come to thee they dispute with thee , the unbelievers saying , 'this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancient ones . '
and to allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth . and allah is ever all-knower , all-wise .
do you not see that god made everything on earth subservient to you ? how the ships sail at sea by his command ? that he holds up the sky lest it falls on earth—except by his permission ? god is gracious towards the people , most merciful .
we have sent it down as an arabic qur'an , in order that ye may learn wisdom .
so we requited them . then see the nature of the consequence for the rejecters !
those who believe , then reject faith , then believeandreject faith , and go on increasing in unbelief , - allah will not forgive them nor guide them nor guide them on the way .
remember abraham said :  o my lord ! make this city one of peace and security : and preserve me and my sons from worshipping idols .
the guerdon of an ill-deed is an ill the like thereof . but whosoever pardoneth and amendeth , his wage is the affair of allah . lo ! he loveth not wrong-doers .
he has forbidden you only carrion , blood and the flesh of swine ; also anyconsecrated in the name of any but god . but if anyone is forced by dire necessity , not desiring it or exceeding his immediate need , god is forgiving and merciful towards him .
but if you desire allah and his apostle and the abode of the hereafter , then allah has indeed prepared a great reward for the virtuous among you . ’
asking , 'when shall be the day of doom ? '
and the mountains are crushed and crumbled .
and not one of you would have been able to stop .
then , when they disregarded what they were reminded of , we opened for them the gates of all things . until , when they delighted in what they were given , we seized them suddenly ; and at once , they were in despair .
they said : be not afraid ! lo ! we bring thee good tidings of a boy possessing wisdom .
but the bounty of the lord - rehearse and proclaim !
say ,  to whom do the earth and all therein belong ? tell me , if you have any knowledge ? 
he has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose and has formed you in the best shape . to him all things return .
on that day they will run after a caller , there will be no deviation in it ; and voices shall become hushed before the most gracious , so you will not hear except a faint sound .
those will have gardens of perpetual residence ; beneath them rivers will flow . they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and will wear green garments of fine silk and brocade , reclining therein on adorned couches . excellent is the reward , and good is the resting place .
indeed , we have given youthe abundance .
he is the cleaver of the daybreak , and he hath appointed the night for stillness , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . that is the measuring of the mighty , the wise .
so today we shall deliver your body so that you may be a sign for those who come after you. ’ indeed many of the people are oblivious to our signs .
our word had already been given before to our votaries , the apostles , --
your god is one god . but those who do not believe in the hereafter - their hearts are disapproving , and they are arrogant .
they will never fight against you all together except from fortified villages or from behind walls . their courage is great among themselves ; you think them to be united , yet their hearts are not united . that is because they are a people who have no sense .
had they remained patient until you came out to them , it would have been better for them . but god is forgiving and merciful .
nay , but man doth transgress all bounds ,
allah 's acceptance of repentance is only for those who commit evil out of ignorance and then soon repent . it is towards such persons that allah turns graciously . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
then those who followed them will say ,  would that we were given another chance to return to the world : then we will disown them just as they have disowned us today .  thus will allah bring before them the deeds they did in the world in such a manner as to make them wring their hands in regret but they shall be unable to come out of the fire .
or that there be a garden of palms and vines for you and then you cause rivers to abundantly flow forth through them ;
they said : surely we augur evil from you ; if you do not desist , we will certainly stone you , and there shall certainly afflict you a painful chastisement from us .
god is the creator of every thing ; he is guardian over every thing ;
except the feeble among men , and the women , and the children , who are unable to devise a plan and are not shown a way .
he is the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . he is the beneficent god and no one will be able to address him .
we have put themto test even as we put to test the owners of the orchard when they vowed that they would gather the fruit of their orchard in the morning ,
and with the flesh of any fowl that they may desire to eat ;
they claim that he has kinship with the jinn , yet the jinn themselves know that they will be produced before him .
left and right , in numerous groups ?
and whomever allah wills to guide , he opens his bosom for islam ; and whomever he wills to send astray , he makes his bosom narrow and firmly bound as if he were being forced by someone to climb the skies ; this is how allah places the punishment on those who do not believe .
allah hath made lawful for youabsolution from your oaths , and allah is your protector . he is the knower , the wise .
no people can outstrip the term for its destruction nor can it delay it .
but when the truth reached them from us , they said :  why was he not given that which was given to moses ?  but did they not reject before what had been given to moses ? they said :  both are magic , each supporting the other !  and they said :  we deny each of these . 
say your prayers from the decline of the sun , until nightfall ; and at dawn -- the recitation at dawn is indeed witnessed .
disbelievers ,  do not make any excuses on this day ; you are only receiving recompense for what you have done  .
and what is the matter with you , that you should not fight in allah ’ s cause and for the feeble men , and women , and children , who invoke , “ our lord ! liberate us from this town , the people of which are unjust ; and give us a protector from yourself ; and give us a supporter from yourself . ”
woe to those that deal in fraud , -
except in the case of their wives or those whom their right hands possess -- for these surely are not to be blamed ,
and as bright as a herd of yellow camels .
he will forgive you your sins and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing by , and excellent mansions in the garden of eden . this will be a great fulfilment .
and whenwas old enough to walk with him , said : o my dear son , i have seen in a dream that i must sacrifice thee . so look , what thinkest thou ? he said : o my father ! do that which thou art commanded . allah willing , thou shalt find me of the steadfast .
and if they deny thee , those before them also denied . their messengers came unto them with clear proofs , and with the psalms and the scripture giving light .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ; the almighty , the forgiving '
allahdirects you as regards your children 's : to the male , a portion equal to that of two females : if only daughters , two or more , their share is two-thirds of the inheritance ; if only one , her share is a half . for parents , a sixth share of the inheritance to each , if the deceased left children ; if no children , and the parents are theheirs , the mother has a third ; if the deceased left brothersthe mother has a sixth.after the payment of legacies and debts . ye know not whether your parents or your children are nearest to you in benefit . these are settled portions ordained by allah ; and allah is all-knowing , al-wise .
they said : your evil fortune is with you ; what ! if you are reminded ! nay , you are an extravagant people .
verily , those who disbelieve , if they had all that is in the earth , and as much again therewith to ransom themselves thereby from the torment on the day of resurrection , it would never be accepted of them , and theirs would be a painful torment .
and i will grant them respite , for my devising is indeed sure .
and say , 'my lord , let me land with your blessing in a blessed landing place . you alone can provide the best landings . ' 
those who try to challenge our revelations will be driven into torment .
and the angels say ,  who will take away his soul ,
now , surely , whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is allah 's ; and they do notfollow any associates , who call on others besides allah ; they do not followbut conjectures , and they only lie .
and by the day when it displays him
and continuous shade ,
or do they desire a war ? but those who disbelieve shall be the vanquished ones in war .
obeyed and honest .
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days - andhis throne was upon the water that he may test you , who of you is better in conduct if you were to say : 'all of you will surely be raised after death ' , then those who disbelieve will certainly say : 'this is nothing but plain sorcery .
and indeed , the recompense is to occur .
and they ask you about the spirit . say , “ the spirit belongs to the domain of my lord ; and you were given only little knowledge . ”
then moses cast his staff and lo , it forthwith swallowed up their lying invention ;
in records heldin honour .
enter the garden , ye and your wives , to be made glad .
the pharaoh returned to organize his plans and then attended the appointment .
do not think that unbelievers will subverton earth . their abode is hell ; and what an evil destination !
and he united their hearts . hadst thou expended all that is on the earth thou couldst not have united their hearts , but allah united them ; verily he is mighty , wise .
by the sun and its heat and brightness ,
a favor from your lord . that is the supreme salvation .
all praise be to god who created the heavens and the earth , and ordained darkness and light . yet the unbelievers make the others equal of their lord .
he planned and plotted .
pay their religious tax
for on that day everyone will be completely engrossed in his own concerns .
when the magicians arrived , they said to pharaoh , “ is there a reward for us , if we are the winners ? ”
go to pharaoh , for he has waxed insolent ;
if it is of those who have rejected the truth and have gone astray ,
then bringour forefathers , if you should be truthful . 
o mankind ! be careful of your duty to your lord who created you from a single soul and from it created its mate and from them twain hath spread abroad a multitude of men and women . be careful of your duty toward allah in whom ye claimof one another , and toward the wombs . lo ! allah hath been a watcher over you .
so the evilof what they did shall afflict them and that which they mocked shall encompass them .
he made the sun and moon , each following its course , and the day and the night all subservient to you .
and we had aforetime forbidden foster-mothers for him ; so she said : shall direct you unto a household who will rear him for you and who will be unto him good counsellors .
verily , we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
and when the angels said : o mary ! lo ! allah hath chosen thee and made thee pure , and hath preferred thee abovethe women of creation .
and thy movements among those who fall prostrate .
but as for him who feared the standing of his lord , and restrained the self from desires .
surely those who slander our signs are not hidden from us . then , is he better who will be cast into hell , or he who will come out safe on the day of resurrection ? do whatever you will , he sees whatsoever you do .
flaying off the scalp-skin .
it is no joke .
have you not regarded that allah sends down water from the sky , with which we produce fruits of diverse hues . and in the mountains are stripes , white and red , of diverse hues , andpitch black ?
indeed , your lord - he is the knowing creator .
even if they had a share in the kingdom , they would not have given the smallest thing to anyone .
so when the truth * from us came to them , they said , “ why has he not been given what was given to moosa ? ” had they not disbelieved in what was earlier given to moosa ? they said , “ they are two magicians , who support each other ” ; and said , “ we disbelieve in both of them. ” .
so let them laugh a little ; much will they weep as a requital for what they used to earn .
and fear the fire prepared for the unbelievers ,
unto thy lord belongeththe term thereof .
now , if you were to turn away , what else can be expected but that you will work corruption in the land and fly at each other 's throats ?
indeed , allah , to return him , is able .
say thou : call upon those whom ye assert beside allah . they own not an atom 's weight either in the heavens or in the earth , nor have they any partnership in either , nor is there for him from among them any supporter .
only they can reach it who are clean .
and we had certainly given luqman wisdom ,  be grateful to allah .  and whoever is grateful is grateful forhimself . and whoever denies- then indeed , allah is free of need and praiseworthy .
he uttereth no word but there is with him an observer ready .
he has no authority over those who believe and trust in their lord .
and he shall make them enter the garden ; he shall have made it known , unto them .
did we not assign unto him two eyes
verily we ! we sent against them a raging wind on a day of calamity continuous .
on the day when we shall seize you with the greatest grasp . verily , we will exact retribution .
those who say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , we have faith . so forgive us our sins , and save us from the punishment of the fire . ’
that is why we have sent down these clear revelations , for god gives guidance whomsoever he please .
shall we then make the muslims like the culprits ?
and it is allah who has given you houses in which to rest , and from the hides of cattle homes so they are light for you on the day you travel and on the day of settling ; while from their wool , fur , and hairfurnishing and enjoyment for a while .
theyask youabout the booty capturedduring a war . tell them ,  it belongs to god and the messengers . if you have faith , have fear of god . settle the disputes among yourselves and obey god and his messengers . 
so if they do not obey you , then say , “ indeed i am unconcerned with what you do . ”
a promise of allah , and allah fails not in his promise , but most of men know not .
know they not that god knows what they keep secret and what they publish ?
then when the trumpet is blown , there will be no more relationships between them that day , nor will one ask after another !
and when the son of maryamis quoted as an exampleis worshipped like their idols ) , behold ! your people cry aloud .
their noble messengers said , “ what ! you doubt concerning allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth ? he calls you that he may forgive some of your sins and until the time of death give you a life free from punishment ” ; they said , “ you are just human beings like us ; you wish to prevent us from what our forefathers used to worship – therefore now bring some clear proof to us . ”
when al-hawariunsaid :  o 'iesa , son of maryam ! can your lord send down to us a table spreadfrom heaven ?  'iesasaid :  fear allah , if you are indeed believers . 
on the day of resurrection you shall see that the faces of those who had lied against allah have turned dark . is hell not vast enough to provide a room to the vainglorious ?
surely , those who are with your lordare never too proud to perform acts of worship to him , but they glorify his praise and prostrate before him .
do not make excuses . you have disbelieved after you believed . if we forgive some of you , we will punish others , for they were sinners '
dispensations have gone forth before you go about then on the earth , and behold what wise hath been the end of the beliers !
when our command came , we delivered hud and those who believed with him by our special mercy . we saved them from a severe punishment .
a speaker among them will say ,  indeed , i had a companion
say , “ we believe in allah and what is sent down to us and what was sent down to ibrahim , and ismael , and ishaq , and yaqub , and to their offspring , and what was bestowed upon moosa and eisa , and what was bestowed upon other prophets – from their lord ; we do not make any distinction , in belief , between any of them ; and to allah we have submitted ourselves . ”
they will say , “ woe to us . this is the day of judgment . ”
and they said : what ! shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves while their people serve us ?
and when ibrahim ’ s fear abated and the glad tidings reached him , he argued with us regarding the people of lut .
and lo ! thy lord , he is indeed the mighty , the merciful .
indeed , allah is the cleaver of grain and date seeds . he brings the living out of the dead and brings the dead out of the living . that is allah ; so how are you deluded ?
and those who have earned misdeeds -the requital of a misdeed is the like thereof and abjection will cover them ; no protector they shall have from allah , though their faces were over cast with pieces of night pitch-dark . these are the fellows of the fire : therein they will be abiders .
unshading against the blazing flame
they will call out to them , ‘ did we not use to be with you ? ’ they will say , ‘ yes ! but you cast yourselves into perdition . you awaited and were skeptical , andhopes deceived you until the edict of allah came , and the deceiver deceived you concerning allah .
and thy lord revealed unto the bees , saying : 'take unto yourselves , of the mountains , houses , and of the trees , and of what they are building .
it is he who recalls you by night , and he knows what you work by day ; then he raises you up therein , that a stated term may be determined ; then unto him shall you return , then he will tell you of what you have been doing .
and there are , certainly , among the people of the book , those who believe in allah , in the revelation to you , and in the revelation to them , bowing in humility to allah : they will not sell the signs of allah for a miserable gain ! for them is a reward with their lord , and allah is swift in account .
] said :  he has wronged you in demanding your ewe in addition to his ewes . and , verily , many partners oppress one another , except those who believe and do righteous good deeds , and they are few .  and dawudguessed that we have tried him and he sought forgiveness of his lord , and he fell down prostrate and turnedin repentance .
some faces on that day shall shine
abraham told his people ,  worship god and have fear of him . it is better for you if only you knew it .
but we bore you away in the ark , when the waters rose high ,
of such the reward is that on themthe curse of allah , of his angels , and of all mankind ; -
reclining there upon couches , they shall see neither the sun nor the moon .
and when your lord proclaimed , “ if you are grateful , i will surely enhance you , but if you are ungrateful , my punishment is indeed severe . ” ’
we have revealed it as a recitation in arabic that you may fully understand .
a caller supplicated about a punishment to fall on
on that day , they will follow the caller , without any deviation . voices will be hushed before the merciful , and you will hear nothing but murmur .
bethink you : if it is from allah and ye reject it - who is further astray than one who is at open feud ?
so patiently persevere : for verily the promise of allah is true : nor let those shake thy firmness , who haveno certainty of faith .
and of his signs is that the heaven and the earth stand fast by his command , and thereafter , when he calleth you , a call from the earth , lo ! ye shall come forth .
and we subdued many devils who divedfor him and carried out other jobs besides that . we kept watch over all of them .
indeed in the messenger of allahyou have a good example to follow for him who hopes inallah and the last day and remembers allah much .
thus have we caused it to enter into the hearts of the guilty .
and those who disbelieve our signs - they are the fellows of the lefthand .
allah ! there is no god but he ! to him belong the most beautiful names .
'take him , and thrust him into the midst of hell ,
the way these people follow is bound to lead to destruction ; and all their works are vain .
around her neck is a rope of thorns .
said ,  my lord , i seek refuge in you from asking that of which i have no knowledge . and unless you forgive me and have mercy upon me , i will be among the losers . 
though they were not sent to watch over them .
no fresh reminder comes to them from the most merciful , but they turn their backs at it .
say , “ shall we invoke besides god something that can neither benefit us nor harm us , and turn back on our heels after god has guided us ; like someone seduced by the devils and confused on earth , who has friends calling him to guidance : 'come to us ' ? ” say , “ the guidance of god is the guidance , and we are commanded to surrender to the lord of the universe . ”
have you seen the one who prohibits
they swear by allah that they said nothing , but really they said the word of disbelief , and they disbelieved after accepting islam , and they resolved thatwhich they were unable to carry out , and they could not find any cause to do so except that allah and his messenger had enriched them of his bounty . if then they repent , it will be better for them , but if they turn away , allah will punish them with a painful torment in this worldly life and in the hereafter . and there is none for them on earth as a walior a helper .
people are a single nation ; so allah raised prophets as bearers of good news and as warners , and he revealed with them the book with truth , that it might judge between people in that in which they differed ; and none but the very people who were given it differed about it after clear arguments had come to them , revolting among themselves ; so allah has guided by his will those who believe to the truth about which they differed and allah guides whom he pleases to the right path .
their looks will be downcast .
a day when the secrets will be examined .
because of that we ordained for the children of israel : that whoever kills a person—unless it is for murder or corruption on earth—it is as if he killed the whole of mankind ; and whoever saves it , it is as if he saved the whole of mankind . our messengers came to them with clarifications , but even after that , many of them continue to commit excesses in the land .
then we put thee on theway of religion : so follow thou that , and follow not the desires of those who know not .
those who practice miserliness , and exhort others to miserliness ; and whoever turns away , thenallah is the independent , the most praiseworthy .
he causes the night to pass into the day , and causes the day to pass into the night , and he fully knows all that is hidden in the breasts of people .
then eat of all fruits , and follow the ways of thy lord , made smooth . there cometh forth from their bellies a drink divers of hues , wherein is healing for mankind . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who reflect .
i have chosen you ; so listen to what is revealed .
noron those who came to thee to be provided with mounts , and when thou saidst ,  i can find no mounts for you ,  they turned back , their eyes streaming with tears of grief that they had no resources wherewith to provide the expenses .
and which rightly directs , to give warning of stern punishment from him , and to proclaim to the believers who do righteous deeds that they shall have an excellent recompense ,
o you wrapped up in your mantle !
beyond that , women are not lawful for you , nor that you should change them for other wives even though their beauty should impress you , except those whom your right hand owns . allah is watchful over all things .
he said , “ will you take a glimpsebelow ? ”
and preaching what they themselves never practice .
when he reached the place where the sun sets , he found it setting over a warm sea , and by it he found a people . we said , ‘ o dhul qarnayn ! you will either punish them , or treat them with kindness . ’
those who , if we established them in the land , would say their prayers regularly and pay the zakat and enjoin good and forbid evil . the final outcome of all affairs rests with god .
when they presented themselves before joseph , he took his brother in his arms , and said : ' i am your brother . do not grieve at what they did '
seated on couches , facing one another .
alif lam ra . a book whose verses are set clear , and then distinguished , from one all-wise , all-aware :
my lord ! then place me not with the unjust .
 peace !  - a wordfrom a lord most merciful !
then they will have no excuse but to say : by god our lord , we have not been associaters .
and on the day when people are gathered , they will become their enemies , and will reject their worshippers .
so cause thou a fragment of the heaven to fall upon us , if thou art of the truth-tellers .
you tell them :  in all the commands revealed to me i find nothing which men have been forbidden to eat except carrion and running blood and flesh of the swine for it is unclean , or meat consecrated in the name of some other than god , which is profane . but if one is constrained to eat of these without craving or reverting to it , then surely your lord is forgiving and kind . 
say :  if ye do love allah , follow me : allah will love you and forgive you your sins : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . 
all praise be to allah , lord of all the worlds ,
the life of the world is but a sport and a pastime . and if ye believe and fear , he will give you your hire , and will not require of you your substance .
believers ! shall i direct you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
so we forgave him that , and indeed he hasnearness with us and a good destination .
then we appointed you viceroys in the earth after them , that we might behold how you would do .
you are nothing but a man like us . bring us a token if you speak the truth . 
is he who created the heavens and the earth , and sends down for you water from the sky , whereby we grow delightful gardens , whose trees you could never cause to grow ... ? what ! is there a god besides allah ? indeed , they are a lot who equate .
by the roof elevated .
“ so now you will come to know – upon whom comes the punishment that disgraces him , and upon whom descends the punishment that continues forever . ”
is there not in this strong evidence for a man of sense ?
all that the heavens and the earth contain belongs to god . we have commanded those who were given the scripture before you , and we command you to fear god . if you deny him , know that all that the heavens and the earth contain belongs to god . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
from those who deny and die disbelieving will never be accepted an earthful of gold if proferred by them as ransom . for them is grievous punishment , and none will help them .
it was said to her , 'enter the pavilion . ' but when she saw it , she supposed it was a spreading water , and she bared her legs . he said , 'it is a pavilion smoothed of crystal . she said , 'my lord , indeed i have wronged myself , and i surrender with solomon to god , the lord of all being . '
and there came upon them by morning an abiding punishment .
and when musa said to his people : call to mind allah 's favor to you when he delivered you from firon 's people , who subjected you to severe torment , and slew your sons and spared your women ; and in this there was a great trial from your lord .
but for whosoever comes before him as a believer and having done good works there awaits the most highest degree ;
and know that the messenger of god is among you . if he were to obey you in many things , you would suffer for it . however , god has endeared the faith to you , and beautified it in your hearts , and has made denial of the truth , wickedness , and disobedience hateful to you . people such as these are rightly guided
and of them who say : verily we are nazarenes , we took a bond from them , but they have abandoned a good portion of that wherewith they were admonished . wherefore we have occasioned enmity and hatred amongst them till the day of judgement , and presently allah shall declare unto them that which they have been performing .
if we will , we would make it bitter , why then do you not give thanks ?
said :  away ! whosoever of them follows you will surely have hell with you as requital -- an ample recompense .
indeed you see us best . ’
approved upon condition that i speak concerning allah nothing but the truth . i come unto youwith a clear proof from your lord . so let the children of israel go with me .
and the wife of fir'awn said : a comfort unto me and thee slay him not ; belike he shall be of benefit to us or we might like him for a son ; and they perceived not .
the day when they are shoved into the fire of hell forcefully .
he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
amidst gardens and fountains ,
so what iswith themthey do not believe ,
'this is the day of decision ; we have joined you with the ancients ;
an apostle came to them who was one of them , but they called him a liar . then they were seized by torment for they were sinners .
until the day of the time well-known . 
whoever does righteous deeds , and is a believer , his effort will not be denied . we are writing it down for him .
houris secluded in pavilions .
and the angels say , “ each one of us has an appointed known position . ”
who say :  o our lord , avert from us the torment of hell : its punishment is surely continuous .
they said :  o our people ! verily ! we have heard a booksent down after musa , confirming what came before it , it guides to the truth and to a straight path .
and will drink as the drinking of thirsty camels .
0 prophet ! sufficient unto thou is allah and those who follow thee of believers .
do those whose hearts are sick think that god will never make their malice public ?
now indeed ! whereas thou hast rebelled afore , and wast of the corrupters .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
he verily lived joyous with his folk ,
—there is no denying that it will befall—
 and o my people ! howit is for me to call you to salvation while ye call me to the fire !
they are certainly disbelievers who say , “ indeed allah is the third of the three gods ” ; whereas there is no god except the one god ; and if they do not desist from their speech , undoubtedly a painful punishment will reach those among them who die as disbelievers .
allah only made it to be glad tidings and so that your hearts may be satisfied ; victory comes only from allah ; he is almighty , wise .
indeed , it is allah who is theprovider , the firm possessor of strength .
for those who reject allah , is a terrible penalty : but for those who believe and work righteous deeds , is forgiveness , and a magnificent reward .
indeed you invite them to a straight path ,
the truth from your lord , so be not of the disputers .
and if some women go away from the muslims to the disbelievers – then when you punish the disbelievers , give from the war booty to the muslims who lost their wives the amount they had spent ; and fear allah in whom you believe .
then adam received from his lord words . and his lord pardoned him . verily , he is the one who forgives , the most merciful .
if god had seen any good in them he would surely have made them hear . now even if he makes them hear they will turn away .
andlut when he said to his people : most surely you are guilty of an indecency which none of the nations has ever done before you ;
allah is never unjust in the least degree : if there is any good , he doubleth it , and giveth from his own presence a great reward .
tell them : “ i am not the first of the messengers ; and i do not know what shall be done with me or with you . i follow only what is revealed to me , and i am nothing but a plain warner . ”
we narrate unto thee their story with truth . lo ! they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
then he turned to their gods , and said , “ will you not eat ?
such is the commandment which god has revealed to you . he who fears god shall be forgiven his sins and richly rewarded .
,  eat and drink in satisfaction for what you put forth in the days past . 
upon those rest blessings and mercy from their lord , and those -- they are the truly guided .
they believe in our communications , those who , when reminded of them , fall down prostrate , and glorify their lord with praise , and are not proud .
this our record speaks about you with truth . verily , we were recording what you used to do .
if they turn back , say : ' i have warned you all alike , though i can not tell whether what you are promised is imminent or distant .
this undoubtedly is the true narrative ; there is none worthy of worship except allah ; and allah is the almighty , the wise .
say ,  the bad and the good are not alike , even though the abundance of the bad may appear pleasing to you . so fear god , o men of understanding , so that you may prosper . 
by the fig and the olive
these are they who have purchased the life of the world for the hereafter ; wherefore the torment shall not be lightened for them , nor shall they be succoured .
raising clouds of dust ,
if the marriage is terminated , god will make each one of them financially independent . god is munificent and wise .
recall when moses said to his servant , “ i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two rivers , even if it takes me years . ”
he said ,  , rather , your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth who created them , and i , to that , am of those who testify .
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled on their account and distressed for them , and he said , 'this is a fierce day . '
and when they reached the point where the two met , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the waters , being free .
o prophet , fight the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be severe with them . their abode is hell , an evil destination ?
to him belongs all those who are in the heavens and the earth . those who are closer to him are not too proud to worship him , nor do they get tired of worshipping .
we did not teach himpoetry and it does not behove him . this is none but an admonition , and a clear book
but when we removed from them the chastisement , lo ! they broke the pledge .
and mention , , in the bookmary , when she withdrew from her family to a place toward the east .
say :  no one in the heavens and the earth has knowledge of the unknown except god , nor can they know when they will be raised again .
and moses conceived a fear in his mind .
they have no protectors to help them , apart from god , and whomsoever god leads astray , no way has he . '
exalted is he who carried his worshiperto travel in the night from the sacred mosque to the furthest mosque which we have blessed around it so that we might show him some of our signs . he is the hearer , the seer .
he turned away from them saying ,  my people , i preached the message of my lord to you and gave you good advice . how could i be sorry for the unbelievers ? 
so do not faint and call for peace ; you shall be the upper ones , and god is with you , and will not deprive you of your works .
recognising them by their marks the men of al-a'raf will call :  of what use was your amassingof which you were proud ? 
that ; and whoever respects the sacred ordinances of allah , it is better for him with his lord ; and the cattle are made lawful for you , except that which is recited to you , therefore avoid the uncleanness of the idols and avoid false words ,
o dear prophet ! why do you forbid for yourself the things that allah has made lawful for you ? you wish to please some of your wives ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
so that allah will do away with the worst of what they did and give them their reward for the best of what they do .
o you who believe , do not enter other houses except yours without first asking permission and saluting the inmates . this is better for you : you may haply take heed .
those who affront believing men and believing women without their having deserved itshall bear the weight of slander and flagrant sin .
nor shall they be given permission , so that they can apologize .
and now that a book has come to them from god , fulfilling thatwhich is with them , they deny it , whereas previously they used to pray for victory against the disbelievers , yet when there came to them that which they recognized as the truth , they rejected it . god 's rejection is the due of all who deny the truth .
satan promises you poverty , and urges you to immorality ; but god promises you forgiveness from himself , and grace . god is embracing and knowing .
so his soul incited him to kill his brother – he therefore killed him , and was therefore ruined .
the sovereignty on that day will be allah 's , he will judge between them . then those who believed and did good works will be in gardens of delight ,
the revelation of this book is from allah , the exalted in power , full of wisdom .
and when our manifest signs are rehearsed unto them , thou recognizest repugnance on the countenaces of those who disbelieve ; well- nigh they rush upon these who rehearse unto them our signs . say thou : shall declare unto you something more grievous than that-the fire -- allah hath promised it to those who disbelieve ? an evil destination !
andyour companion is not one possessed ;
it belongs not to any mortal that god should give him the book , the judgment , the prophethood , then he should say to men , 'be you servants to me apart from god . ' rather , 'be you masters in that you know the book , and in that you study . '
say : have you considered your associates which you call upon besides allah ? show me what part of the earth they have created , or have they any share in the heavens ; or , have we given them a book so that they follow a clear argument thereof ? nay , the unjust do not hold out promises one to another but only to deceive .
believers , do not take your fathers and your brothers for allies if they choose denial of truth in preference to faith . those among you who ally themselves with them are wrongdoers .
this is news of the unknown that we send you , for you were not there when they cast lots with quillswho should take care of mary , nor when they disputed it .
some of them say ,  give us leave to stay behind and do not put us to trial .  surely , they have already fallen into trial . surely , hell shall engulf those who deny the truth .
this is god , your lord ; there is no god but he , the creator of all things . so pay homage to him , for he takes care of everything .
he asketh : when will be this day of resurrection ?
and recite to them the news of nuh . when he said to his people :  o my people , if my stay , and my remindingof the ayatof allah is hard on you , then i put my trust in allah . so devise your plot , you and your partners , and let not your plot be in doubt for you . then pass your sentence on me and give me no respite .
regarding those who deliver the messages of allah and who fear him , and fear no one else than allah . allah is sufficient as a reckoner .
we shall ease you to follow the way of ease .
yet most men will not become believers , no matter how eager you may be .
so he looked down and saw him in the midst of the fire .
and the similitude of the foul word is as a foul tree , uprooted from upon the earth , and there is for it no stability .
and has made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
“ o assembly of jinn and humans , did there not come to you messengers from among you , relating to you my revelations , and warning you of the meeting of this day of yours ? ” they will say , “ we testify against ourselves. ” the life of the world seduced them . they will testify against themselves that they were disbelievers .
so you bear with patience what they say , and sing the praises of your lord before the rising and setting of the sun , and honour him in the watches of the night , and then at the two ends of day , that you may find acceptance .
they have taken their oaths as a cover and barred others from the path of allah . evil is what they have done .
then some of them believed in it , and some turned away from it ; yet sufficient is hell , the flaming fire !
and inspired it with its wickedness and its righteousness .
salih said :  this is a she-camel . there is a day set for her to drink and there is a day set for you to drink .
and of his portents is the creation of the heaven and the earth , and of whatever beasts he hath dispersed therein . and he is able to gather them when he will .
 and our duty is only to proclaim the clear message . 
thereafter we annihilated the rest .
and verily for him is an approach with us , and a happy end .
once , he lived joyfully among his family
and the mountains , how they were fixed ;
indeed , this is in the former scriptures ,
and their prayer at the house is nothing but a whistling and a clapping of hands -- therefore taste you now the chastisement for your unbelief !
so he wateredfor them . then he turned aside into the shade , and said : my lord ! i am needy of whatever good thou sendest down for me .
whatever thing you are given is but the material of this world , and its glitter . but what is with god is better , and longer lasting . do you not comprehend ?
seek forgiveness from your lord and turn to him in repentance . my lord is certainly all-merciful and loving . 
said ,  then go . and indeed , it isfor you inlife to say , 'no contact . ' and indeed , you have an appointmentyou will not fail to keep . and look at your 'god ' to which you remained devoted . we will surely burn it and blow it into the sea with a blast .
how many favours of your lord will you then deny ?
and if allah should afflict you with harm , then there is none to remove it but he ; and if he intends good to you there is none to repel his grace ; he brings it to whom he pleases of his servants ; and he is the forgiving , the merciful .
then we raised you after your death that haply ye may return thanks .
until they face the most painful torment .
 and o my people ! who will help me against allah , if i drove them away ? will you not then give a thought ?
they say , 'why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? ' has there not come to them the clear sign of what is in the former scrolls ?
they therefore disobeyed the noble messengers of their lord – so he seized them with an intense seizure .
the truth is that hell awaits him who comes to his lord laden with sin ; he shall neither die in it nor live .
if you are cunning , then try your cunning against me !
and when milch camels roam abandoned .
and they ask you to hasten on the chastisement ; and had not a term been appointed , the chastisement would certainly have come to them ; and most certainly it will come to them all of a sudden while they will not perceive .
certainly we gave moses the book so that they might be guided ,
leave me with him whom i alone have created ,
and yet in spite of having seen these clear proofs they found it proper to incarcerate him for a time .
and most surely you invite them to a right way .
have no doubt as to what they worship . they worship nothing but what their fathers worshipped before . we shall certainly give them their share in full , without diminishing anything .
nothing keeps us from sending signs except that the former peoples denied them . we gave thamud the she-camel as an eye-opener , but they wronged her . we do not send the signs except as warning .
whose punishment will be doubled on the day of judgement , and he will live for ever in disgrace ,
they said , ‘ o salih ! you were a source of hope to us before this . do you forbid us to worship what our fathers have been worshiping ? indeed we have grave doubts concerning that to which you invite us . ’
and lo ! jonah verily was of those sent
when he ran awayto the shipladen ,
if anything can astonish you , you should surely be astonished at their asking ,  what ? when we become dust , shall we be created anew ?  these are the ones who deny their lord : around their necks there shall be fetters . they are the inheritors of the fire , and shall abide therein forever .
say : 'if you love god , follow me , and god will love you , and forgive you your sins ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
such is the guidance of allah wherewith he guideth whom he will of his bondmen . but if they had set upaught beside him , that they did would have been vain .
and when it is said unto them : spend of that wherewith allah hath provided you , those who disbelieve say unto those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah , if he willed , would feed ? ye are in naught else than error manifest .
such are they from whom we shall accept the best of their deeds and pass by their ill deeds : among the companions of the garden : a promise ! of truth , which was made to them .
and cornfields and splendid buildings ,
with a humbled look , overcast by abasement . that is the day they had been promised .
 embrace ye thethis day , for that yerejected . 
private conversation is only from satan that he may grieve those who have believed , but he will not harm them at all except by permission of allah . and upon allah let the believers rely .
when moses said to his people , ‘ remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when he delivered you from pharaoh ’ s clan who inflicted a terrible torment on you , and slaughtered your sons and spared your women , and in that there was a great test from your lord .
then he strutted back to his people .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic qur'an and have diversified therein the warnings that perhaps they will avoidor it would cause them remembrance .
allah sends his salaton the prophetand also his angels too . o you who believe ! send your salat onhim , andgreethim with the islamic way of greeting .
those who reverted after the guidance became clear to them—satan has enticed them , and has given them latitude .
is then one who followeth the pleasure of allah like unto him who hath settled under the displeasure of allah ? his resort is hell , and ill is that destination
and the dwellers of the woods , and the people of tubb ’ a ; each one of them one denied the noble messengers , so my promised punishment proved true .
, consume the pure and lawful sustenance which god has given to you and thank god for his bounty if you are his true worshippers .
and the chief persons of them break forth , saying : go and steadily adhere to your gods ; this is most surely a thing sought after .
' o you unbelievers , do not excuse yourselves today ; you are only being recompensed for what you were doing . '
that is because they have chosen the life of the world rather than the hereafter , and because allah guideth not the disbelieving folk .
and there were , among the desert arabs , men who made excuses and came to claim exemption ; and those who were false to allah and his messengersat inactive . soon will a grievous penalty seize the unbelievers among them .
then say : have youto purify yourself :
have you considered what you sow ?
say : who guards you by night and by day from the beneficent allah ? nay , they turn aside at the mention of their lord .
those suffering in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : “ call upon your lord to lighten the chastisement for us just for a day . ”
verily those who believe and work righteous works - unto them shall be a hire unceasing .
we shall try you in order to know who are the fighters among you , and who are men of fortitude , and verify your histories .
and whenever a surah s sent down , there are some of them who say which of you hath this increased in faith ! as for those who believe , it hath increased them in faith , and they rejoice .
save unto an apostle chosen . and then he causeth to go before him and behind him a guard .
he said ,  my lord , support me because they have denied me . 
so taste . we shall only increase your torment .
say : ' i take refuge with the lord of people ,
those among the children of israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of dawudand 'iesa , son of maryam . that was because they disobeyedand were ever transgressing beyond bounds .
who does greater evil than he who forges a lie about allah or belies his verses ? indeed , the evildoers do not prosper .
and among his signs is that he sends winds heralding glad tidings , to make you taste his mercy , and so that the ships may sail by his command , and so that you may seek his munificence , and for you to give thanks .
and they ask you about menstruation . say : it is a discomfort ; therefore keep aloof from the women during the menstrual discharge and do not go near them until they have become clean ; then when they have cleansed themselves , go in to them as allah has commanded you ; surely allah loves those who turn much , and he loves those who purify themselves .
 and thou didst a deed of thine whichthou didst , and thou art an ungrateful ! 
they said :  no wonder that he steals for a brother of his stole before .  but joseph kept his reaction to himself without disclosing the truth to them . he merely said to himself :  you are an evil lot . allah knows well the truth of the accusation that you are making against me . 
do you feel secure that he whoin the heaven would not cause the earth to swallow you and suddenly it would sway ?
and each and everything they have done is noted inrecords .
and how many a generation before them did we destroy who were greater than them inpower and had explored throughout the lands . is there any place of escape ?
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , so that he exalts it above all other religions . allah is the sufficient witness .
we thus reward the righteous .
will certainly be weighedon the day of judgment . those whose good deeds weigh heavier than their bad deeds will have everlasting happiness .
and he bequeathed upon you their lands , their habitations , and their possessions , and a land you never trod . god is powerful over everything .
no one knows what delights of the eyes are kept hidden for them as a reward for their deeds .
the merciful one
we made them to be mentioned with condemnation in this life and they will be disgraced on the day of judgment .
then it will be said to them , “ where are those you used to deify ?
then i summoned them openly ,
proclaim , “ obey allah and obey the noble messenger ; so if you turn away , then the noble messenger is bound only for what is obligatory upon him , and upon you is the duty placed upon you ” ; and if you obey the noble messenger , you will attain guidance ; and the noble messenger is not liable except to plainly convey .
and when musareturned to his people , angry and grieved , he said :  what an evil thing is that which you have doneduring my absence . did you hasten and go ahead as regards the matter of your lord ?  and he threw down the tablets and seized his brother byhis head and dragged him towards him . harunsaid :  o son of my mother ! indeed the people judged me weak and were about to kill me , so make not the enemies rejoice over me , nor put me amongst the people who are zalimun . 
there will be no kindred relations nor any opportunity to ask about others or seek their assistance after the trumpet has sounded .
hastening towards the crier . those who deny the truth will cry ,  this is such a hard day ! 
have you considered el-lat and el-'uzza
alif-lam-mim-sad.knows their meanings ] .
and he turned away from them and said : alas , my grief for joseph ! and his eyes were whitened with the sorrow that he was suppressing .
and were they to see a portion of the sky falling , they will say , “ it is a heap of clouds . ”
“ we will not die .
yet obedience and honorable words . then , when the matter is decided , if they were true to allah it would be better for them .
no calamity befalls unless god dispenses . he guides the heart of whosoever believes in god ; and god has knowledge of everything .
so there covered them that which covered .
and a fifththat allah ’ s wrath shall be upon her if he were stating the truth .
and set in it lofty firm mountains , and given you agreeable water to drink ?
like those before you who were greater in strength , had more wealth and children than you , who enjoyed their lot in this world , as you have enjoyed your share like them . you indulge in idle talk , as they had indulged in vain discourse . yet nothing of what they did remains in this world or will in the next , and they are the losers .
“ conveying to you the messages of my lord and wishing good for you , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
he said , “ o my child ! do not relate your dream to your brothers , for they will hatch a plot against you ; indeed satan is an open enemy towards mankind . ”
to god belong the names most beautiful ; so call him by them , and leave those who blaspheme his names -- they shall assuredly be recompensed for the things they did .
nay , we gave the luxuries of this life to these men and their fathers until the period grew long for them . see they not that we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? is it then they who will overcome .
and we bestowed upon him isaac and jacob as an additional gift , making each of them righteous .
god has created animals , both small and large . eat from what god has given you for your sustenance and do not follow in the footsteps of satan . he is your sworn enemy .
when the heaven splits open .
verily your lord is infinitely mighty , most compassionate .
say : 'who shall guard you by night and in the daytime from the all-merciful ? ' nay , but from the remembrance of their lord they are turning away .
but to those who receive guidance , he increases theguidance , and bestows on them their piety and restraint .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ you are committing an obscenity not perpetrated before you by anyone in the whole world .
do men imagine that they will be leftbecause they say , we believe , and will not be tested with affliction ?
we are surely going to bring down a punishment from heaven on the people of this town because of their depravities . 
and do not grieve at their speech ; indeed all honour is for allah and he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
it is he who created you from a single soul , and from him made its mate for him to gain comfort with her ; so when the male covered her , she was burdened lightly in her womb , and she therefore moved easily carrying it ; and when she felt the burden heavy , they both cried to their lord allah , “ indeed you may give to us a child as you will , so we will surely be thankful . ”
and allah judges with truth , while those they invoke besides him judge not with anything . indeed , allah - he is the hearing , the seeing .
 who took their religion as an amusement and play , and the life of the world deceived them .  so this day we shall forget them as they forgot their meeting of this day , and as they used to reject our ayat .
we never heard of this in the former faith . this is nothing but a fabrication .
and the chiefs of firon 's people said : do you leave musa and his people to make mischief in the land and to forsake you and your gods ? he said : we will slay their sons and spare their women , and surely we are masters over them .
nor can you make the blind see the way when they have gone astray . you can make none hear except those who believe our signs and have come to submission .
i swear by god i will do something to your idols when you have turned your backs and gone . 
and the lofty roof .
knower of what is open , exalted in might , full of wisdom .
so remember me , and i will remember you . and thank me , and do not be ungrateful .
if god is there to help you none will overcome you ; and if he forsake you , who will help you other than him ? so only in god should the faithful place their trust .
except such as snatches a fragment , and he is pursued by a piercing flame .
and remember moses said to his people :  o my people ! ye have indeed wronged yourselves by your worship of the calf : so turnto your maker , and slay yourselves ; that will be better for you in the sight of your maker .  then he turned towards you : for he is oft-returning , most merciful .
he knows all those who dispute his revelations . they will find no way to escape from .
and we taught him the art of making coats of mail to shield you from each other 's violence . will you not be grateful even then ?
allah intendeth that he shall lighten unto you , and man hath been created weak .
we sent thee not , but as a mercy for all creatures .
and no person can ever die except by allah 's leave and at an appointed term . and whoever desires a reward inworld , we shall give him of it ; and whoever desires a reward in the hereafter , we shall give him thereof . and we shall reward the grateful
a preacher for god by his permission and as a shining torch .
those among the descendants of israel who turned disbelievers were cursed by the tongue of dawud , and of eisa the son of maryam ; it was because of their disobedience and their rebellion .
the disbelievers will be driven to hell in hordes . its gates will be opened when they are brought nearby and the keepers will ask them ,  did messengers from your own people not come to you to recite your lord 's revelations and to warn you about this day ?  they will reply ,  yes , the messengers did come to us , but the unbelievers were doomed to face the torment  .
and increased therein the corruption .
those who impugned shu'ayb became as if they had never lived there . those who impugned shu ‘ ayb were themselves the losers .
allah is he who made the cattle for you that you may ride on some of them , and some of them you eat .
perish man ! how thankless he is !
and he it is who has created the heavens and the earth in truth ; and the very day he will say :  be !  there will be . his word is the truth and his will be the dominion on the day when the-trumpet is blown . he knows all that lies beyond the reach of human perception as well as all that is visible to man ; he is the all-wise , the all-aware . '
this is a day wherein they will not speak ,
and leave those who have taken their religion for a play and an idle sport , and whom this world 's life has deceived , and remindthereby lest a soul should be given up to destruction for what it has earned ; it shall not have besides allah any guardian nor an intercessor , and if it should seek to give every compensation , it shall not be accepted from it ; these are they who shall be given up to destruction for what they earned ; they shall have a drink of boiling water and a painful chastisement because they disbelieved .
and he it is who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of makkah , after he had made you victors over them . and allah is ever the all-seer of what you do .
and when he turned his face towards midian he said , 'it may be that my lord will guide me
guard yourselves against discord among yourselves so that it will not mislead anyone of you , especially the unjust , and know that god 's retribution is most severe .
honorable owner of the throne ,
and built above you seven strong ones ?
and of his signs is , that he created you of dust , then lo ! ye are humankind spreading yourselves .
and of mankind is he who selleth his life even , seeking the pleasure of allah ; and allah is tender unto his bond men
verily , the day of decision is a fixed time ,
and also our forefathers ?
then the news of a good answer will be obscured to them on that day , and they will not be able to ask one another .
when the inevitable event comes ,
and the preceders are the pre-ceders .
the likeness of those who expend their wealth in the way of god is as the likeness of a grain of corn that sprouts seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . so god multiplies unto whom he will ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and how they say that which they do not ?
and fight them until no mischief remains , and only allah is worshipped ; then if they desist , do not harm them , except the unjust .
and leave methose in possession of the good things of life , whodeny the truth ; and bear with them for a little while .
allah knows best what they are accumulating .
in fact man is a witness against himself ,
but to those who commit evil out of ignorance and then repent and amend their ways , thereafter your lord will be much forgiving , most merciful .
slay not your children , fearing a fall to poverty , we shall provide for them and for you . lo ! the slaying of them is great sin .
we helped him against people who denied our ayat . verily , they were a people given to evil . so we drowned them all .
who accumulated wealth and hoarded it , counting .
and who when they are reminded of the verses of their lord , they do not fall down deaf and blind .
and some faces on that day will be covered with dust ,
or , let chunks of sky fall over us , as you assert ; or , bring god and the angels as a surety ;
said :  o aaron ! what kept thee back , when thou sawest them going wrong ,
and those who did wrong , if they had all that is in earth and therewith as much again , they verily , would offer it to ransom themselves therewith on the day of resurrection from the evil torment , and there will become apparent to them from allah , what they had not been reckoning .
believers , remember god very often
and we have sent down to thee the book with the truth , confirming the book that was before it , and assuring it . so judge between them according to what god has sent down , and do not follow their caprices , to forsake the truth that has come to thee . to every one of you we have appointed a right way and an open road . if god had willed , he would have made you one nation ; but that he may try you in what has come to you . so be you forward in good works ; unto god shall you return , all together ; and he will tell you of that whereon you were at variance .
said moosa , “ i did that at a time when i was unaware of the consequences . ”
divorce may betwice , then keepin good fellowship or letgo with kindness ; and it is not lawful for you to take any part of what you have given them , unless both fear that they can not keep within the limits of allah ; then if you fear that they can not keep within the limits of allah , there is no blame on them for what she gives up to become free thereby . these are the limits of allah , so do not exceed them and whoever exceeds the limits of allah these it is that are the unjust .
who had set up another god along with allah and cast him into the severe punishment . ’
but the road to gehenna , therein dwelling forever and ever ; and that for god is an easy matter .
then we gave them in the place of evil good , till they multiplied , and said , 'hardship and happiness visited our fathers . ' so we seized them suddenly , unawares .
only a saying :  peace , peace . 
those who accuse married women of committing adultery - but are not able to prove their accusation by producing four witness - must be flogged eighty lashes . never accept their testimony thereafter because they are sinful ,
the day when neither wealth nor sons shall benefit
we did not make their bodies immune to hunger , nor were they immortal .
then most surely they shall enter the burning fire .
and cups set at hand .
god will say : 'this is the day when the truthful shall profit by their truthfulness . for them will be gardens with streams running by , where they will for ever abide .  god will accept them , and they will be gratified inhim . this will surely be happiness supreme .
and affirms goodness ,
how is it with you , that you believe not in god seeing that the messenger is calling you to believe in your lord , and he has taken compact with you , if you are believers ?
would he not know , he who has created , when he is all-subtle , all-aware ?
the only people to attend god ’ s places of worship are those who believe in god and the last day , and pray regularly , and practice regular charity , and fear none but god . these are most likely to be guided .
they use their oaths as a cover and thus they bar others from god 's way : what they have been doing is truly evil --
so how dreadful have been my torment and my warning !
thou art naught but a mortal , like us ; indeed , we think that thou art one of the liars .
and watchand they soon shall see !
or till thou possessest a house of gold ornament , or till thou goest up into heaven ; and we will not believe thy going up till thou bringest down on us a book that we may read . say : 'glory be to my lord . am i aught but a mortal , a messenger ? '
a book whose verses have been distinguished and explained , a lucid discourse for people who understand ,
he it is who blesseth you , and his angels , that he may bring you forth from darkness unto light ; and he is ever merciful to the believers .
who respond to their lord and attend to their prayers ; who conduct their affairs by mutual consultation and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
therein they shall abide forever . surely with allah a mighty reward awaits them .
when they embark upon ships , they call to allah making their religion sincerely his ; but when he brings them safe to the land , they associate others with him
perhaps , if he divorces you , his lord will give him in exchange wives better than you : submissive , believing , obedient , penitent , devout , fasting—previously married , or virgins .
many a heart will flutter on that day !
and hearkens toits lord , and it must needs ; -
'assembly ' said pharaoh , ' i do not know that you have any god except me ' ' o haman , kindle a fire upon clay and make me a tower so that i can climb to see the god of moses , i think that he is one of the liars '
thus have we appointed unto every prophet an adversary - devils of humankind and jinn who inspire in one another plausible discourse through guile . if thy lord willed , they would not do so ; so leave them alone with their devising ;
o you who have believed , fear allah and seek the meansto him and strive in his cause that you may succeed .
shall i then seek a judge other than allah ? and he it is who has revealed to you the bookmade plain ; and those whom we have given the book know that it is revealed by your lord with truth , therefore you should not be of the disputers .
i believe in your lord , so hear me '
then that is surely a very unjust distribution !
whatever is in the heavens and on earth , let it declare the praises and glory of allah : for he is the exalted in might , the wise .
i will turn away from my revelations those who behave proudly on earth without justification . even if they see every sign , they will not believe in it ; and if they see the path of rectitude , they will not adopt it for a path ; and if they see the path of error , they will adopt it for a path . that is because they denied our revelations , and paid no attention to them .
may the people be condemned those who torturedin ditches
and lot who said to his nation : 'you commit indecency which no other being in all the world has committed before you .
what is then the matter with them , that they turn away from the admonition
whoever is an enemy of allah , his angels , his messengers , gabriel , and michael indeed allah is the enemy of the unbelievers '
how many a habitation given to wickedness have we destroyed , whose roofs tumbled down , which fell into ruins . how many a well and fortress reinforced lie abandoned !
the father said :  abraham , have you turned away from my gods ? if you do not give this up , i shall stone you to death . now begone from me forever . 
just look at him , who belies the religion !
for he believes himself to be self-sufficient .
that , then , will be an unfair division !
do you wonder that admonition should come to you from your lord through a man from amongst yourselves that he may warn you , that you may avoid evil and that mercy may be shown to you ? '
because of the wrongdoing of the jews we forbade them good things which weremade lawful unto them , and because of their much hindering from allah 's way ,
and then we should bestow upon them from our presence an immense reward ,
which then became a leech-like clot ; then god shaped and fashioned him in due proportion ,
he admits whoever he will into his grace and has prepared a painful punishment for the evil doers .
on the day when we shall call all men with their record , and whoso is given his book in his right hand -- those shall read their book , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
do not address the messenger as you would call each other . god knows those who secretly walk away from you and hide themselves . those who oppose the messengers should beware , lest some trouble or a painful torment should befall them .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and bliss ,
the day they encounter him , their greeting will be , ‘ peace , ’ and he holds in store for them a noble reward .
in a few years . god 's is the imperative first and last . on that day the believers will rejoice
surely thy lord knows what their hearts conceal , and what they publish .
i have been sent as a trusted messenger to you .
they said :  do not feel afraid , for we give you the good news of a wise boy . 
they will say , “ we were not of those who prayed .
peace be on the messengers .
is it ever so that when they make a covenant a party of them set it aside ? the truth is , most of them believe not .
as he stood praying in the sanctuary , the angels called out to him : 'allah gives you good tidings of john , who shall confirm a command of allah , shall be outstanding among men , utterly chaste , and a prophet from among the righteous . '
the same did abraham enjoin upon his sons , and also jacob , : o my sons ! lo ! allah hath chosen for you thereligion ; therefore die not save as men who have surrendered .
moses said : 'do not blame me for what i forgot , nor press me to do something which is too difficult '
and most of them believe not in allah except as they are associators .
it is he who withheld their hands from you , and your hands from them , in the valley of makkah , after he had given you victory over them , and allah sees best what you do .
they are dead , not alive ; and they do not know when will the people be raised .
 do you wonder that there has come to you a reminder from your lord through a man from amongst you , that he may warn you , so that you may fear allah and that you may receivemercy ? 
but whoever comes to him a believer , having worked righteousness—these will have the highest ranks .
so verily , youcannot make the dead to hear , nor can you make the deaf to hear the call , when they show their backs , turning away .
they ask ,  when will be the day of judgment and justice ? 
when our revelations are recited before him , he says :  these are fables of long ago . 
so , when they had returned to their father , they said , 'father , the measure was denied to us ; so send with us our brother , that we may obtain the measure ; surely we shall be watching over him . '
and when there are present at the division the relatives and the orphans and the needy , give themout of it and speak to them kind words .
and love wealth with much fondness .
so now suffer . as you forgot the meeting of this your day of doom , so have we forgotten you . now taste the everlasting punishment for your deeds .
and proclaim to mankind the hajj . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , they will come from every deep and distantmountain highway .
wherefore then , if ye are not to be requited
in front of such a one is hell , and he is given , for drink , boiling fetid water .
the parable of those who reject faith is as if one were to shout like a goat-herd , to things that listen to nothing but calls and cries : deaf , dumb , and blind , they are void of wisdom .
your lord has decreed that you shall not worship anyone except him , andkindness to parents . should any of them or both reach old age at your side , do not say to them , ‘ fie ! ’ and do not chide them , but speak to them noble words .
and recall what time they said : o god ! if this indeed be the truth from before thee , then rain down stones upon us from heaven or bring on us a torment afflictive .
they attribute daughters to god , the glorious , but for themselves whatsoever they please .
and we have guarded it from every outcast devil ,
“ and make him a partner in my task . ”
proclaim , “ it is divinely revealed to me that your god is the only one god – allah ; do you therefore become muslims ? ”
it is he who created you from dust , then from adrop , and then aclot . he then brings you forth as an infant , then you reach your strength , after which you come of age though some of you die before it and that you reach an appointed term , in order that you understand .
they shall have a good share from what they have earned . god is swift in his reckoning .
say : 'who provides for you from the heavens and earth ' say : 'allah ' surely , either we or you are rightly guided or in clear error .
those before them diddevise plots ; but in all things the master-planning is allah 's he knoweth the doings of every soul : and soon will the unbelievers know who gets home in the end .
 from the evil of the whispererwho withdraws ,
say , ‘ do you really disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and ascribe partners to him ? that is the lord of all the worlds ! ’
and we have been wading with the waders .
andsay : my lord ! forgive and have mercy , for thou art best of all who show mercy .
they indeed , used to say ,
and when it said unto them : act not corruptly on the earth , they say : we are but reconcilers .
and no one can mislead whomever allah guides ; is not allah the most honourable , the avenger ?
wherefore we destroyed peoples mightier than these in prowess ; and there hath gone forth the example of the ancients .
then we withdrew it to us , a gradual withdrawal .
enter paradise , you and your wives , in happiness .
who can mislead one whom god has guided ? is god not majestic and revengeful ?
as for the wretched , they shall be in the fire , wherein there shall be for them moaning and sighing , therein dwelling forever ,
do people think they will not be tested because they say ,  we have faith ? 
and two young men went to prison along with him ; one of them said , “ i dreamt that i am pressing wine ” ; the other said , “ i dreamt that i am carrying some bread upon my head from which birds were eating ” ; “ tell us their interpretation ; indeed we see that you are virtuous . ”
for those who spend , both in prosperity and adversity , who restrain their anger and are forgiving towards their fellow men -- god loves those who do good works .
he hath let loose the two seas .
who determines and directs ,
said :  get down from this , it is not for you to be arrogant here . get out , for you are of those humiliated and disgraced . 
we did not create them except with consummate wisdom ; but most of them do not know .
nor ever listen to any excessive oath maker , ignoble person .
and sons ever present with him ,
upon that day faces shall be radiant ,
o mankind ! lo ! we have created you male and female , and have made you nations and tribes that ye may know one another . lo ! the noblest of you , in the sight of allah , is the best in conduct . lo ! allah is knower , aware .
‘ and i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear . ’ ”
all those who are in the heavens and the earth will come to the most gracious as his bondmen .
god asked ,  what prevented you from prostrating yourself when i commanded you to ?  he replied ,  i am better than he is ; you created me from fire , while you created him from clay . 
when their brother lot said to them ,  will you not fear allah ?
in a sublime garden ,
never does any sign of their lord come to them , but they turn away from it .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if ye would be sure .
know well that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is also all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the likeness of them is as the likeness of a man who kindled a fire , and when it lit all about him god took away their light , and left them in darkness unseeing
and to establish them in the land , and we let fir'aunand haman and their hosts receive from them that which they feared .
shell we be brought back when we are dead and have become dust ? that is a return remote !
joseph brought you the clear signs before , yet you continued in doubt concerning that he brought you until , when he perished , you said ,  god will never send forth a messenger after him .  even , so god leads astray the prodigal and the doubter . '
allah ! there is no allah save him . in allah , therefore , let believers put their trust .
allah advises you lest you should ever repeat the like of it , should you be faithful .
surely those who disbelieve after they have believed and then increase in unbelief -- their repentance shall not be accepted ; those are the ones who stray .
and it is he who made the night and the day to follow each other : for such as have the will to celebrate his praises or to show their gratitude .
said : o chieftains ! lo ! there hath been thrown unto me a noble letter .
now this is the hell of which you were warned .
deaf , dumb , blind ; wherefore they will not return .
it is not meet for them , nor is it in their power ,
and god knows what you keep secret and what you publish .
a. l. r.a book , with verses basic or fundamental , further explained in detail , - from one who is wise and well-acquainted :
and thus we established joseph in the land , to live therein wherever he wished . we touch with our mercy whomever we will , and we never waste the reward of the righteous .
what aileth ye that ye speak not ?
and it is not attributable to a prophet that he should act unfaithfully ; and he who acts unfaithfully shall bring that in respect of which he has acted unfaithfully on the day of resurrection ; then shall every soul be paid back fully what it has earned , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
moses said to his nation : 'remember the blessing of allah to you when he saved you from pharaoh 's family , who had oppressed you cruelly , and who slew your sons and spared your women . surely , that was a great trial from your lord .
and this qur'an is not such as could be fabricated as against allah . but it is a confirmation of that a which is before it , and and a d etailing of the decree , whereof there is no doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
o prophet , say to those you have taken captive in your hand : 'if allah finds goodness in your hearts , he will give you that which is better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , the most merciful '
we shall advance upon what work they have done , and make it a scattered dust .
and to lut , too , we gave judgment and knowledge , and we saved him from the town which practised abominations : truly they were a people given to evil , a rebellious people .
and in this wise we showed unto ibrahim the governance of the heavens and the earth , and that he might become of the convinced .
those who believe in allah and the last day will not ask your permission so that they may struggle with their wealth and their selves . allah knows best the righteous .
and in thamood . they were told , “ enjoy yourselves for a while . ”
we had strengthened them as we have not strengthened you , had given them ears and eyes and hearts ; but nothing stood them in good stead , neither their ears nor eyes nor hearts , for they rejected the signs of god , and were seized by what they had mocked .
so these , it may be , allah will pardon them , and allah is pardoning , forgiving .
those who observe the prayer , and pay the obligatory charity , and are certain of the hereafter .
when they repented , and saw that they had erred , they said :  if our lord have not mercy upon us and forgive us , we shall indeed be of those who perish . 
until the inevitable came upon us . ”
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the fact of their having to meet him : vain will be their works , nor shall we , on the day of judgment , give them any weight .
and subjugated the sun and moon for you so that they perform their tasks diligently ; and subdued the night and day for your service .
and to warn those who say ,  god has taken to himself a son . 
the dominion of the heavens and the earth belongs to allah . he creates whatever he pleases . he grants females to whomever he pleases and males to whomever he pleases ,
they said 'woe to us , truly we were insolent '
so , go to him , and say : 'behold , both of us are the messengers of your lord . let the children of israel go with us , and do not chastise them . we have come to you with a sign from your lord ; and peace shall be for him who follows the true guidance .
everyman , that day , will have enough to make him careless of others .
whether you conceal what you say or reveal it , god knows best all that the hearts contain .
did you not see those who received a portion of the book , that they believe in idols and the devil , and say regarding the disbelievers that they are more rightly guided than the muslims ?
should i tell you on whom the devils descend ?
and we made the sky a protected ceiling ; yet they turn away from its wonders .
so we delivered him and all his family ,
as for those who deserved goodness from us—these will be kept away from it .
—those who spend in ease and adversity , and suppress their anger , and excusethe people , and allah loves the virtuous ;
believers , do not be dishonest to god and the messengers or knowingly abuse your trust .
and whoever does righteous deeds , whether male or female , should he be faithful—such shall enter paradise and they will not be wrongedthe speck on a date-stone .
we had established them more firmly in the land than you are . we had given them ears , eyes , and hearts but none of their ears , eyes , and hearts proved to be of any benefit to them ; they rejected the revelations of god and the torment which they mocked brought upon them utter destruction .
and lut ! we vouchsafed unto him judgment and knowledge , and we delivered him out of the city which had been working foul deeds ; verily they were a people evil , wicked .
should a temptation from satan disturb you , invoke the protection of allah ; indeed he is all-hearing , all-knowing .
nor can good and evil be equal . repel thou evil with that which is goodly then behold he between whom and thee there was enmity , will be as though he was a warm friend .
then when they entered the presence of joseph , he provided a home for his parents with himself , and said :  enter ye egyptin safety if it please allah . 
lo ! those who believe and do good works , for them are the gardens of delight ,
my lord ! surely they have led many men astray ; then whoever follows me , he is surely of me , and whoever disobeys me , thou surely art forgiving , merciful :
but allah was not to punish them whilst you were living in their midst . nor would allah punish them if they repeatedly ask forgiveness of him .
thrust thy hand into the bosom of thy robe it will come forth white without hurt . and guard thy heart from fear . then these shall be two proofs from your lord unto pharaoh and his chiefs . lo ! they are evil-living folk .
allah is he who has created the heavens and the earth and sends down waterfrom the sky , and thereby brought forth fruits as provision for you ; and he has made the ships to be of service to you , that they may sail through the sea by his command ; and he has made riversto be of service to you .
he said : did i not say to you that you will not be able to have patience with me ?
you shall eatof the tree of zakkum .
to the day of judgement .
woe , therefore , unto such performers of prayer .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
no people can hasten on their doom nor can they postpone .
and certainly did we send moses with our signs to pharaoh and his establishment , and he said ,  indeed , i am the messenger of the lord of the worlds . 
whosoever repents and does the right , will have turned back to god by way of repentance ;
i feel nervous and my tongue is not fluent , so send aaron with me .
say : he it is who multiplied you in the earth and to him you shall be gathered .
ta . sin . mim .
o mankind , indeed the promise of allah is truth , so let not the worldly life delude you and be not deceived about allah by the deceiver .
so coin not similitudes for allah . lo ! allah knoweth ; ye know not .
or should say : if allah had but guided me i should have been among the dutiful !
indeed this , my brother , has ninety-nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; so he said , 'entrust her to me , ' and he overpowered me in speech . 
it is the day when no soul can do a thing for another soul . that day , the command belongs to allah .
 and ordain for us that which is good , in this life and in the hereafter : for we have turned unto thee .  he said :  with my punishment i visit whom i will ; but my mercy extendeth to all things . thati shall ordain for those who do right , and practise regular charity , and those who believe in our signs ; -
and that it is he who makes to laugh , and that makes to weep ,
so turnaway from them for a while ,
among the believers are men true to what they promised allah . among them is he who has fulfilled his vow , and among them is he who awaits . and they did not alterby any alteration -
ta , ha .
so that they may eat of its fruit and what their hands have cultivated . will they not then give thanks ?
and similarly we have made some as a trial for others – that the wealthy disbelievers upon seeing the needy muslims say , “ are these whom allah has favoured among us ? ” does not allah recognise those who are thankful ?
soturn away from them and wait ; they too are waiting .
and we will present hell that day to the disbelievers , on display -
when our signs are recited to them as clear signs , the unbelievers say to the believers , 'which of the two parties is better in station , fairer in assembly ? '
and never therefrom will they be absent .
have they taken others for intercessors beside allah ! say thou : what ! even though they own not aught and understand not ?
do not those who deny the truth see that the heavens and the earth were joined together and that we then split them asunder ? and that we have made every living thing out of water ? will they still not believe ?
a book whose signs have been elaborated for a people who have knowledge , an arabic quran ,
they ask : when is the day of judgment ?
and made of him the two sexes , male and female .
“ and whenever i called them , so that you may forgive them , they always thrust their fingers into their ears , and covered themselves with their clothes , and remained stubborn and were extremely haughty . ”
 and why should we not believe in allah and in that which has come to us of the truth ? and we wish that our lord will admit usalong with the righteous people . 
in some few years . allah 's is the command , before and after . and on that day the believers wiil rejoice .
those who obey god and his messenger , and fear god , and are mindful of their duty to him , are the ones who will triumph .
firmly established in the favour of a mighty king .
say , ‘ shall i inform you concerning something worse than that as a requital from allah ? those whom allah has cursed and with whom he is wrathful , and turned some of whom into apes and swine , and worshippers of fake deities ! such are in a worse situation and more astray from the right way . ’
therefore we prescribed for the children of israel that whoso slays a soul not to retaliate for a soul slain , nor for corruption done in the land , shall be as if he had slain mankind altogether ; and whoso gives life to a soul , shall be as if he ha given life to mankind altogether . our messengers have already come to them with the clear signs ; then many of them thereafter commit excesses in the earth .
and they say : we shall by no means believe in thee until thou causest for us to gush forth from the earth a foun tain .
allah it is who taketh away souls at the time of their death , and those which die not in their sleep : then he withhold those on which he hath decreed death , and sendeth back the rest for an appointed term . verily herein are signs for a people who ponder .
they have no knowledge of it , they nor their fathers ; a monstrous word it is , issuing out of their mouths ; they say nothing but a lie .
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter - we increase for him in his harvest . and whoever desires the harvest of this world - we give him thereof , but there is not for him in the hereafter any share .
they said :  glory to our lord ! verily we have been doing wrong ! 
forgiver of trespasses , acceptor of repentance , severe of retribution , lord of power . there is no god but he . towards him is your destination .
indeed we have put iron collars around their necks , which are up to the chins , so their heads are upturned .
say : if i had that for which ye are impatient , then would the casehave been decided between me and you . allah is best aware of the wrong-doers .
that you may not transgress in the balance ,
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared a painful punishment for them .
 so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
the reward of goodness shall be nothing but goodness .
laughing and rejoicing .
and approach not fornication ; surely it is an indecency , and evil as a way .
and the heaven and him who built it ,
glorified be he who carried his servant by night from the inviolable place of worship to the far distant place of worship the neighbourhood whereof we have blessed , that we might show him of our tokens ! lo ! he , only he , is the hearer , the seer .
and the jinn race , we had created before , from the fire of a scorching wind .
they had only to wait for the single inevitable blast .
lo ! allah will cause those who believe and do good works to enter gardens underneath which rivers flow ; while those who disbelieve take their comfort in this life and eat even as the cattle eat , and the fire is their habitation .
in response firaun disobeyed the noble messenger , so we seized him with a severe seizure .
and the servants ofmost gracious are those who walk on the earth in humility , and when the ignorant address them , they say ,  peace !  ;
houris cloistered in pavilions --
so now we have no intercessors ,
what ? is he who has been a believer like unto him who has been ungodly ? they are not equal .
lo ! allah ! he it is that giveth livelihood , the lord of unbreakable might .
if ye do good openly or keep it secret , or forgive evil , lo ! allah is ever forgiving , powerful .
indeed , those for whom the besthas preceded from us - they are from it far removed .
therefore , proclaim the purity of your lord , the greatest .
and you can not escape in the earth ; and you have neither a friend nor any supporter against allah .
and that you should worship me . that is a straight path .
he could stop the wind if he pleased , then they would be stranded on its surface . surely there are signs in this for every one who perseveres and is grateful .
so do not make haste against them ; indeed we are counting for them , a counting .
 'and made the moon a light in their midst , and made the sun as alamp ?
a deceitful , sinful forelock .
do not make allah an obstacle , through your oaths , to being pious and godwary , and to bringing about concord between people . and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
on the day when allah will resurrect them all together , then they will swear to him as they swear to you . and they think that they have something . verily , they are liars !
and recall what time it was said unto them : dwell in yonder town and eat plentifully therefrom an ye list , and say : fergiveness , and enter the gate bowing ; and we will forgive you your trespasses : anon we will increase unto the well-doers .
o you who believe ! believe in god and his messenger , and the book he sent down to his messenger , and the book he sent down before . whoever rejects god , his angels , his books , his messengers , and the last day , has strayed far in error .
in an emergency you may say your prayers while walking or riding ; but when you are safe , remember god , as he has taught you what you did not know before .
“ you have indeed made the dream come true ” ; and this is how we reward the virtuous .
be secret in your speech , or proclaim it , he knows the thoughts within the breasts .
onright andleft in separate groups ?
and we send down blessed waterfrom the sky , then we produce therewith gardens and grainthat are reaped .
and indeed we gave moosa the book , that they may attain guidance .
surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture of which is camphor
god is gracious to his creatures , and bestows favours on whosoever he will . he is all-powerful and all-mighty .
by this luminous book .
or lest it should say , 'if only god had guided me , i should have been or lest among the godfearing , '
say :  o ye my servants who believe ! fear your lord , good isfor those who do good in this world . spacious is allah 's earth ! those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without measure ! 
to him belongs what is in the heavens and on earth , and all between them , and all beneath the soil .
and they swear by allah with the strongest of their oaths , that if a sign came to them they would most certainly believe in it . say : signs are only with allah ; and what should make you know that when it comes they will not believe ?
when your lord said to the angels , ‘ indeed i am about to create a human being out of clay .
one who obeys god and the messenger is the friend of the prophets , saints , martyrs , and the righteous ones to whom god has granted his favors . they are the best friends that one can have .
haply we may follow the magicians , if they are the vanquishers .
lord of the heavens and earth , and all that between them is if you have faith .
full of varieties .
say :  who islord of the seven heavens , andlord of the great throne ? 
give to the orphans their property . do not exchange the pure for the filthy and do not spend the property of orphans along with your own ; this would be a great sin .
glory to thy lord , the lord of honour and power ! from what they ascribe !
neither their possessions nor their offspring will be of any avail to them against allah . they are the people of the fire ; therein they shall abide .
but if they turn away , then say ,  i have warned you of a thunderbolt like the thunderbolt'aad and thamud .
neither inaccessible , nor forbidden ,
nor will they be allowed to proffer excuses .
he said , ‘ moses , throw it down . ’
but they said : our lord ! make the stage between our journeys longer . and they wronged themselves , therefore we made them bywordsand scattered them abroad , a total scattering . lo ! herein verily are portents for each steadfast , grateful .
and there should be a group among you that invites to goodness , and enjoins good deeds and forbids immorality ; it is they who are the successful .
said : and what hast thou to say , o samiri ?
on that day , the wrongdoer will bite his hands , and say , “ if only i had followed the way with the messenger .
so pray unto thy lord and sacrifice .
and for his saying : 'my lord , these are an unbelieving nation '
preventer of good , aggressor , and doubter ,
and there is not a thing but that with us are its depositories , and we do not send it down except according to a known measure .
therefore call thou , and go straight as thou hast been commanded ; do not follow their caprices . and say : ' i believe in whatever book god has sent down ; i have been commanded to be just between you . god is our lord and your lord . we have our deeds , and you have your deeds ; there is no argument between us and you ; god shall bring us together , and unto him is the homecoming . '
the shaitan only desires to cause enmity and hatred to spring in your midst by means of intoxicants and games of chance , and to keep you off from the remembrance of allah and from prayer . will you then desist ?
with a humbled look , they will be overcast by abasement . certainly , they were summoned to prostrate themselves while they were yet sound .
so he followed a way .
those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies , save lesser offences surely thy lord is wide in his forgiveness . very well he knows you , when he produced you from the earth , and when you were yet unborn in your mothers ' wombs ; therefore hold not yourselves purified ; god knows very well him who is godfearing .
lo ! these love fleeting life , and put behind thema grievous day .
and when he reached his maturity we vouchsafed unto him judgement and knowledge ; and thus we recompense the well-doers .
“ priding yourself in serving the sacred mosque ; at night you utter indecent stories in it , while discarding the truth . ”
and he drew forth his hand , thereupon it shone bright before the beholders .
and they have made the angels , who are servants of the most merciful , females . did they witness their creation ? their testimony will be recorded , and they will be questioned .
nay ! on that day they shall be submissive .
such are the ones who believeand whose hearts find rest in the remembrance of allah . surely in allah 's remembrance do hearts find rest .
prostrate yourselves before god , and worship him alone !
no indeed ; soon will they come to know ;
and indeed the vicious shall be in hell ,
then to eat of all the produce , and find with skill the spacious paths of its lord : there issues from within their bodies a drink of varying colours , wherein is healing for men : verily in this is a sign for those who give thought .
by no means ! they shall soon deny their worshipping them , and they shall be adversaries to them .
say :  i find not in that which has been inspired to me anything forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it , unless it be maytatahor blood poured forth , or the flesh of swinefor that surely is impure , or impiousmeatwhich is slaughtered as a sacrifice for others than allah . but whosoever is forced by necessity without wilful disobedience , nor transgressing due limits , certainly , your lord is oft-forgiving , most merciful . 
they say ,  what sort of a messenger is he that he eats food and moves about in the streets ? why has not an angel been sent down to accompany him and threaten ?
on the day when the earth and the heavens will be replaced by another earth and heavens and everyone will be brought before the one almighty god ,
indeed allah does not wrong an atom ’ s weight , and if it be a good deed he doubles it , and gives from himself a great reward .
when vision is dazzled .
so they set out till theyand went on board a ship in which he made a hole ,  you have made a hole in the boat to drown its passengers ? you have done a strange thing ! 
they will be exposed to the fire in the mornings and the evenings and on the day of judgment , they will be told ,  people of the pharaoh , suffer the most severe torment . 
when they are thrown into it , they will hear it roaring , as it seethes .
it is he who sends the wind ahead of his mercy . then , when they have gathered up heavy clouds , we drive them to a dead land , where we make water come down , and with it we bring out all kinds of fruits . thus we bring out the dead—perhaps you will reflect .
they said : ye are but mortals like unto us . the beneficent hath naught revealed . ye do but lie !
they will wish to get out of the fire , but never are they to emerge therefrom , and for them is an enduring punishment .
some of them are illiterate and have no knowledge of the book except for what they know from legends and fantasy . they are only relying on conjecture .
o people who believe ! allah will surely test you with some prey that is within reach of your hands and your spears , so that allah may make known those who fear him without seeing ; so henceforth , a painful punishment is for anyone who transgresses .
perhaps allah will put , between you and those to whom you have been enemies among them , affection . and allah is competent , and allah is forgiving and merciful .
, people have mocked the messengers who lived before you . i gave a respite to the unbelievers . then i struck them with a terrible retribution .
then exalted be allah , the true king ! and hasten notwith the qur'an ere its revelation hath been perfected unto thee , and say : my lord ! increase me in knowledge .
and we ransomed him with a great sacrifice ,
and if allah was to hasten for the people the evilas he hastens for them the good , their term would have been ended for them . but we leave the ones who do not expect the meeting with us , in their transgression , wandering blindly
then spread abroad a message ,
and they will be given to drink a cupwhose mixture is of ginger
and did not feed the needy ,
o my people ! i ask of you no hire therefor , my hire is cnly on him who created me , will ye not then reflect ?
so he wateredfor them , then went back to the shade and said : my lord ! surely i stand in need of whatever good thou mayest send down to me .
those who , if we granted them power in the land , will maintain the prayer , give the zakat , bid what is right and forbid what is wrong . and with allah rests the outcome of all matters .
until there came to us the certainty .
their beds and their coverings – both are fire ; and this is the sort of reward we give the unjust .
that we may hallow thee oft .
in fact , we have been deprived of everything  .
then , on the day of judgment , he will cover them with shame , and say :  where are my 'partners ' concerning whom ye used to dispute ?  those endued with knowledge will say :  this day , indeed , are the unbelievers covered with shame and misery , -
] said :  o my lord ! open for me my chest .
so when the night over-shadowed him , he saw a star ; said he : is this my lord ? so when it set , he said : i do not love the setting ones .
thus was the word of thy lord concerning those who disbelieve fulfilled : that they are owners of the fire .
indeed , we have guided him to the path , he is either grateful or ungrateful .
they would still not have believed in it .
said iblis , “ i am better than him ; you made me from fire , and you have created him from clay ! ”
for a known term ?
so do thou fight in the way of god ; thou art charged only with thyself . and urge on the believers ; haply god will restrain the unbelievers ' might ; god is stronger in might , more terrible in punishing .
when our emissaries came to lot he was distressed and embarrassed on their account . they said : “ do not fear nor be distressed . we shall save you and all your household except your wife who is among those that will stay behind .
yea , verily . we are able to restore his very fingers !
for as long as the heavens and the earth exist , unless your lord decides otherwise . your lord will certainly accomplish whatever he wants .
we delivered him and his household from the great calamity ;
and their brethren drag them on toward error , so they stop not short .
naught doth it permit to endure , and naught doth it leave alone ! -
your lord has said ,  call on me , and i will answer your prayers .  but those who are too arrogant to worship me will certainly enter hell , in disgrace .
you have received this quran from one who is all-wise , all-knowing .
they will say :  yes indeed ; a warner did come to us , but we rejected him and said , 'allah never sent down any : ye are nothing but an egregious delusion ! ' 
its spathes are as the heads of satans ,
have they not pondered the word , or hath that come unto them which came not unto their fathers of old ?
say : 'had there been in the earth angels walking . at peace , we would have sent down upon them out of heaven an angel as messenger . '
it is he who creates in the first instance and it is he who will repeat the creation , and that is easier for him . his is the loftiest attribute in the heavens and the earth . he is the most mighty , the most wise .
so verily unto those who do wrong there is a portion like unto the portion of their fellows ; wherefore let them not ask me to hasten on .
yes , whoever fulfils his pledge and fears allah much ; verily , then allah loves those who are al-muttaqun .
they shall haveportion of what they have earned , and allah is swift in reckoning .
our lord , make not our hearts to swerve after that thou hast guided us ; and give us mercy from thee ; thou art the giver .
but when there comes the greatest catastrophe ,
again surely yes , they will soon come to know !
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are open to them ,
that we might make it a reminder for you and for heeding ears to hold .
wherever you might be , death will overtake you even though you be in massive towers . and when some good happens to them , they say : 'this is from allah ' ; whereas when some misfortune befalls them , they say : 'this is because of you ' . say : 'all is from allah . ' what has happened to this people that they seem to understand nothing ?
it is he who created you of dust then of a sperm-drop , then of a blood-clot , then he delivers you as infants , then that you may come of age , then that you may be old men -- though some of you there are who die before it -- and that you may reach a stated term ; haply you will understand .
they shall say , 'our lord , thou hast caused us to die two deaths and thou hast given us twice to live ; now we confess our sins . is there any way to go forth ? '
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
when heaven shall be split
thus the wrongdoing lot were rooted out , and all praise belongs to allah , the lord of all the worlds .
you are truly among the messengers ,
‘ my lord ! deliver me and my family from what they do . ’
till the appointed time .
the promise of god—god never breaks his promise , but most people do not know .
verily , those who hope not for their meeting with us , but are pleased and satisfied with the life of the present world , and those who are heedless of our ayat ,
then will allah say :  o jesus the son of mary ! recount my favour to thee and to thy mother . behold ! i strengthened thee with the holy spirit , so that thou didst speak to the people in childhood and in maturity . behold ! i taught thee the book and wisdom , the law and the gospel and behold ! thou makest out of clay , as it were , the figure of a bird , by my leave , and thou breathest into it and it becometh a bird by my leave , and thou healest those born blind , and the lepers , by my leave . and behold ! thou bringest forth the dead by my leave . and behold ! i did restrain the children of israel fromthee when thou didst show them the clear signs , and the unbelievers among them said : 'this is nothing but evident magic . '
he said , “ my lord knows what is said in the heaven and the earth ; and he is the hearer , the knower . ”
had we revealed this as a non-arabic qur'an they would have said : “ why were its verses not clearly expounded ? how strange , a non-arabic scripture and an arab audience ! ” tell them : “ it is a guidance and a healing to the believers . but to those who do not believe , it serves as a plug in their ears and a covering over their eyes . it is as if they are being called from a place far away .
o prophet ! be wary of allah and do not obey the faithless and the hypocrites . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and of the devils were those who dived for him and did work other than that . and we were of them a guardian .
bring me ingots of iron ,  until the space between two mountain sides was filled up .  blow your bellows ,  he said ; until it was red hot .  bring me molten brass ,  he said ,  that i may pour over it . 
there are some among you who lag behindand if you were to experience hardship , they would say ,  it was certainly due to god 's favors to us that we were not present with them , 
verily the satan is an enemy unto you , wherefore hold him for an enemy ; he only calleth his confederates that they become of the fellows of the blaze .
who would have read it to them , theywould not have believed in it .
we shall invest whosoever works for good , whether man or woman , with a pleasant life , and reward them in accordance with the best of what they have done .
and we shall provide them with fruit and meat , such as they desire .
those to whom we have given the book know this as they know their own sons . those who have lost their own souls refuse therefore to believe .
this is the garden which ye have been made to inherit for that which ye have been working .
we shall turn to their deeds and scatter them like particles of dust .
thereupon allah granted them the reward of this world as well as a better reward of the world to come . allah loves those who do good .
the word of thy lord doth find its fulfilment in truth and in justice : none can change his words : for he is the one who heareth and knoweth all .
andwhen ibrahimsaid ,  my lord , make this citya place of security and provide its people with fruits , such of them as believe in allah and the last day .  heanswered :  as for him who disbelieves , i shall leave him in contentment for a while , then i shall compel him to the torment of the fire , and worst indeed is that destination ! 
 if you punish them , they are your slaves , and if you forgive them , verily you , only you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . 
and when he arrived at the waters of median , he found there a crowd of people drawing water , and he noticed two women waiting on the side . he said , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they said , “ we can not draw water until the shepherds depart , and our father is a very old man . ”
your lord is god who established his dominion over the throneafter having created the heavens and the earth in six days . he made the night darken the day which it pursues at aspeed and he made the sun and the moon submissive to his command . is it not he who creates and governs all things ? blessed is god , the cherisher of the universe .
they will say , “ you used to come at us from the right . ”
then we gave him the good tidings of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and for them are rods of iron .
have they settled on someplan ? indeed , we too are settling .
and recite unto them the story of ibrahim .
we have not taughtto versify , nor is it worthy of him . this is nothing but a reminder and illuminating discourse ,
but allah bears witness to that which he has sent downunto you , he has sent it down with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness . and allah is all-sufficient as a witness .
or that have we created the angels as females , while they were present ?
ha . mim .
and overflowing cups .
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and we caused the earth to swallow him and his home . and there was for him no company to aid him other than allah , nor was he of those whodefend themselves .
then we revealed to you , , to follow the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth ; and he was not of those who associate with allah .
do they feel secure from being overtaken by a blanket punishment from allah , or being overtaken by the hour , suddenly , while they are unaware ?
they said , “ we found our forefathers worshipping them . ”
those who tremble in fear of their lord ,
having numerous branches .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ? and enough is thy lord to note and see the sins of his servants .
pardon them , and say : 'peace ' , soon they will know .
no nation can advance its time , nor can they postpone it .
strengthen me through him
to-day are allowed unto you all clean foods , and the meat of those vouchsafed the book is allowable for you , and your meat is allowable for them as also are the wedded believing women and the wedded women of those vouchsafed the book before you , when ye have given them their dowers , taking them in wedlock , neither fornicating , nor taking them is secret paramours . and who soever rejecteth the faith , his work will surely come to naught , and in the hereafter he shall be of the losers .
we let them enjoy themselves only for a while , then we shall drag them to a severe punishment .
if you are slain or die in god 's way , forgiveness and mercy from god are a better thing than that you amass ;
 and verily we shall cause you to abide in the land , and succeed them . this for such as fear the time when they shall stand before my tribunal , - such as fear the punishment denounced . 
as for those who believe and do good works , there are for them the gardens of refuge , in hospitality for that which they have done .
his is all that the heavens and the earth contain . to god shall all things return .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands made it not . will they not , then , give thanks ?
and indeed , among the people of the scripture are those who believe in allah and what was revealed to you and what was revealed to them , humbly submissive to allah . they do not exchange the verses of allah for a small price . those will have their reward with their lord . indeed , allah is swift in account .
such people will be subject to the punishment of god , which was also decreed for many human beings and jinn before them . these people are certainly lost .
lo ! those who believe , and those who are jews , and the sabaeans and the christians and the magians and the idolaters - lo ! allah will decide between them on the day of resurrection . lo ! allah is witness over all things .
to god belongs what is in the heavens and the earth . verily he is all-sufficient , worthy of praise .
the established way of allah with those who passed on before ; and you will not find in the way of allah any change .
and that his efforts will be witnessed .
evil as an example are people who reject our signs and wrong their own souls .
the wickedness of all this is hateful with your lord .
does he not know , who created ? and he is the knower of the subtleties , the aware .
and say : o my lord ! cause me to disembark a blessed alighting , and thou art the best to cause to alight .
o you who believe , let not your wealth and children make you negligent of the remembrance of god . those who do so will be losers .
those who do evil deeds , the recompense of an evil deed is its like , and humiliation shall spread over them and there will be none to protect them from allah . darkness will cover their faces as though they were veiled with the dark blackness of night . these are the people of the fire and in it they shall abide .
and had allah expanded the provision for his bondmen they surely would have rebelled in the earth , but he sendeth down by measure as he willeth ; verily he is , in respect of his bondmen . aware and beholder .
and thosewho bring criterion
do they not know that allah makes ample the means of subsistence to whom he pleases , and he straitens ; most surely there are signs in this for a people who believe .
and surely in the cattle there is a lesson for you ; we give you to drink of what is in their bellies , between filth and blood , pure milk , sweet to drinkers .
that was because their messengerskept coming unto them with clear proofs , but they said : shall mere mortals guide us ? so they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was independent . allah is absolute , owner of praise .
the others said :  bring him , then , before the eyes of the people that they may see . 
if we grant long life to any , we cause him to be reversed in nature : will they not then understand ?
they willburn in an intensely hot fire .
so we cast him , sick , on a barren shore ,
allah will say : 'this is the day the truthful shall benefit by their truthfulness . they shall live for ever in gardens underneath which rivers flow . allah is pleased with them , and they are pleased with him . that is the great winning '
say to those of the dwellers of the desert who were left behind : you shall soon be invitedagainst a people possessing mighty prowess ; you will fight against them until they submit ; then if you obey , allah will grant you a good reward ; and if you turn back as you turned back before , he will punish you with a painful punishment .
and do you make it your living to cry lies ?
 to establish regular prayers and to fear allah : for it is to him that we shall be gathered together . 
say ,  whatever payment i might have asked of you - it is yours . my payment is only from allah , and he is , over all things , witness . 
and we turned all the deeds they had performed into scattered floating specks of dust .
so travel with thy household in a portion of the night , and follow thou their backs . let none of you turn round , but go whither ye are commanded .
do they possess the treasuries of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the all-munificent ?
say , : “ i call on my lord alone , and i do not associate aught with him in his divinity . ”
no ! i swear by the day of resurrection .
deem ye that we have created youl in vain and that unto us ye are not to be returned ?
and we denied the day of judgement
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth ; and those who are with him wax not too proud to do him service neither grow weary ,
it is most hateful to god that you do not practise what you preach ;
indeed , only exclusive faith is worthy of allah , and those who take other as awliya besides him ‘ we only worship them so that they may bring us near to allah , ’ allah will judge between them concerning that about which they differ . indeed allah does not guide someone who is a liar and an ingrate .
surely we revealed the torah , wherein there is guidance and light . thereby did prophets - who had submitted themselves- judge for the judaized folk ; and so did the scholars and jurists . they judged by the book of allah for they had been entrusted to keep it , and bear witness to it . sodo not fear men but fear me , and do not barter away my signs for a trivial gain . those who do not judge by what allah has revealed are indeed the unbelievers .
if all the trees in the earth were pens and the ocean , with seven more oceans , were ink still these could not suffice to record all the words of god . god is majestic and all-wise .
say :  it has been revealed to me that a groupof jinns listened . they said : 'verily ! we have heard a wonderful recital !
and what imagine those who fabricate a lie against allah of the day of resurrection ? verily allah is the owner of grace unto mankind , but most of them return not thanks .
of camels two , of oxen two . say : 'is it the two males he has forbidden or the two females ? or what the wombs of the two females contain ? or were you witnesses when god charged you with this ? then who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , in order that he may lead mankind astray without any knowledge ? surely god guides not the people of the evildoers . '
and we admitted him into our mercy ; for he was one of the righteous .
o you who believe ! retaliation for the murdered is ordained upon you : the free for the free , the slave for the slave , the female for the female . but if he is forgiven by his kin , then grant any reasonable demand , and pay with good will . this is a concession from your lord , and a mercy . but whoever commits aggression after that , a painful torment awaits him .
we sent down thein truth , and in truth has it descended : and we sent thee but to give glad tidings and to warn .
and those who are vouchsafed the book divided not save after there had come unto them the evidence .
by the night , when it envelops it !
so verily thou canst not make the dead to hear , nor canst thou make the deaf to hear the call , when they show their backs and turn away .
can he who will have to shield himself against the torment of the day of resurrection ? the evil-doers will be told :  so taste what you earned . 
all those who take allah and his messenger and those who believe as their allies , should remember that the party of allah will be triumphant .
that is the recompense of god 's enemies -- the fire , wherein they shall have the abode of eternity as a recompense , for that they denied our signs .
they replied :  he in whose saddlebag the cup is found , he himself shall be its recompense .  thus do we punish the wrong-doers .
thereupon spake two men of those who feared and whom allah had favoured ; enter ye the gate against them , then as ye enter it ye are the over - and put your trust in allah , if ye are indeed believers .
they say , 'there is nothing but our present life ; we die , and we live , and nothing but time destroys us . ' of that they have no knowledge ; they merely conjecture .
verily in that is a sign for the believers .
whenever adversity touches the human being , he prays to us—reclining on his side , or sitting , or standing . but when we have relieved his adversity from him , he goes away , as though he had never called on us for trouble that had afflicted him . thus the deeds of the transgressors appear good to them .
allah said : cast it down , o musa !
and when the time comes for raising the little girls --
and they say : when will this threat come about , if you are truthful ?
they would hasten forward , heads lifted upwards , gazes fixed , and emptied out their hearts .
oh , would that it had been death !
say , “ in god ’ s grace and mercy let them rejoice . that is better than what they hoard . ”
they said , “ and what shall be the punishment for it , if you are liars ? ”
and when musa said to his people : surely allah commands you that you should sacrifice a cow ; they said : do you ridicule us ? he said : i seek the protection of allah from being one of the ignorant .
then when we decreed death for him ] , nothing informed themof his death except a little worm of the earth , which keptgnawing away at his stick , so when he fell down , the jinns saw clearly that if they had known the unseen , they would not have stayed in the humiliating torment .
fie on you and on what you serve besides allah ; what ! do you not then understand ?
but they hamstrung her , then regretted ;
that no one who carries a burden bears another 's load ;
their eyes shall be downcast and ignominy shall overwhelm them . for when they were safe and sound , they were summoned to prostrate themselves , .
yes indeed ; we have the power to remould even his finger-tips .
and why is it that you do not spend in the cause of god , when to god belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth ? not equal among you are those who contributed before the conquest , and fought . those are higher in rank than those who contributed afterwards , and fought . but god promises both a good reward . god is well experienced in what you do .
strongest among men in enmity to the believers wilt thou find the jews and pagans ; and nearest among them in love to the believers wilt thou find those who say ,  we are christians  : because amongst these are men devoted to learning and men who have renounced the world , and they are not arrogant .
to him is due the true prayer ; and those whom they pray to besides allah give them no answer , butlike one who stretches forth his two hands towards water that it may reach his mouth , but it will not reach it ; and the prayer of the unbelievers is only in error .
others have confessed their sins , having mixed good deeds with bad deeds . perhaps god will redeem them . god is forgiving and merciful .
and glorify him during the night , and at the receding of the stars .
we will make smooth for him the path of ease .
those are they whom allah guideth , so follow their guidance . say : i ask of you no fee for it . lo ! it is naught but a reminder tocreatures .
and should you stumble after the manifest proofs that have come to you , know that allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and of the people are some who say ,  we believe in allah ,  but when oneis harmed forallah , they consider the trial of the people asthe punishment of allah . but if victory comes from your lord , they say ,  indeed , we were with you .  is not allah most knowing of what is within the breasts of all creatures ?
that allah may requite each soul according to that which he hath earned : verily allah is swift in reckoning .
they will say ,  to allah .  say ,  then how are you deluded ? 
and entry into hell .
god charges you , concerning your children : to the male the like of the portion of two females , and if they be women above two , then for them two-thirds of what he leaves , but if she be one then to her a half ; and to his parents to each one of the two the sixth of what he leaves , if he has children ; but if he has no children , and his heirs are his parents , a third to his mother , or , if he has brothers , to his mother a sixth , after any bequest he may bequeath , or any debt . your fathers and your sons -- you know not which out of them is nearer in profit to you . so god apportions ; surely god is all-knowing , all-wise .
and mention in the book , idrees . indeed , he was a man of truth and a prophet .
on the day when we shall summon all men with their record , whoso is given his book in his right hand - such will read their book and they will not be wronged a shred .
peace be unto musa and harun .
o you enwrapped in the cloak ,
but whoso craveth beyond that , such are transgressors -
and mention in the bookidris . verily ! he was a man of truth , a prophet .
with him are the keys of the unseen , none knows them but he . he knows that which is in the land and sea . no leaf falls except he knows it , and there is no grain in the darkness of the earth , fresh or withered , but is recorded in a clear book .
no intercession can avail with allah except for him whom allah permits . when their hearts are relieved of fright they will ask the intercessors : “ what did your lord say ? ” they will reply : “ what is right , and he is the high , the great . ”
and verily my torment ! that is the torment afflictive
we certainly tried those who have gone before them , so god will certainly distinguish between those who are truthful and those who are lying .
have you not considered those who attribute purity to themselves ? nay , allah purifies whom he pleases ; and they shall not be wronged the husk of a date stone .
o you who believe ! when it is said to you , make room inassemblies , then make ample room , allah will give you ample , and when it is said : rise up , then rise up . allah will exalt those of you who believe , and those who are given knowledge , in high degrees ; and allah is aware of what you do .
so arrange your plan , and come in battle line . whoso is uppermost this day will be indeed successful .
god wants to guide you , explain to you the customs of those who lived before you , and grant you forgiveness . he is all-knowing and all-wise .
and indeed we created manout of an extract of clay .
they glorifyby night and day ; they are never languid .
we will surely guide in our ways those who strive hard for our cause , god is surely with the righteous .
for she desired him ; and he would have taken her , but that he saw the proof of his lord . so was it , that we might turn away from him evil and abomination ; he was one of our devoted servants .
what is the matter with you that you do not look upon allah with veneration ,
say , ‘ shall i seek a lord other than allah , while he is the lord of all things ? ’ no soul does evil except against itself , and no bearer shall bear another ’ s burden ; then to your lord will be your return , whereat he will inform you concerning that about which you used to differ .
on this world and the hereafter . and they ask you concerning the orphans say : to set right for themis good , and if you become co-partners with them , they are your brethren ; and allah knows the mischief-maker and the pacemaker , and if allah had pleased , he would certainly have caused you to fall into a difficulty ; surely allah is mighty , wise .
who shall inherit the paradise ; they shall abide therein .
then lo ! ye , the erring , the deniers ,
indeed those who have faith , do righteous deeds , maintain the prayer and give the zakat , they shall have their reward near their lord , and they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
the night when it covers him over ,
verily , we , we stand in rows for the prayers ;
the thamud and the 'ad peopleas false the stunning calamity !
these are revelations of god which we recite to you correctly : in what other lore but god and his manifestations would they then believe ?
those who will be musteredon their faces toward hell , they are the worse situated and further astray from theway .
a recompense from your lord , a gift , a reckoning ,
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and he shaped you , and shaped you well ; and unto him is the homecoming .
and we have put coverings over their hearts lest , they should understand it , and in their ears deafness . and when you make mention of your lord aloneislamic monotheism ] in the quran , they turn on their backs , fleeing in extreme dislikeness .
he utters not a word , but there is a vigilant watcher at hand .
the event will be abasing some , and exalting some .
provision should be made for divorced women with kindness . that is a right on the cautious .
then the pharaoh sent announcers to the cities ,
pharaoh said , “ o nobles , i know of no god for you other than me . so fire-up the bricks for me o hamaan , and build me a tower , that i may ascend to the god of moses , though i think he is a liar . ”
no blame is on you if ye divorce women while yet ye have not touched them nor settled unto them a settlement . benefit them on the affluent is due according to his means , and on the straitened is due according to his means . a reputable present , and duty on the well-doers .
then as he turned his face to midian , he said :  maybe my lord will show me the right way . 
for their disbelief and their mocking our revelations and messengerss , their recompense will be hell .
whom we made the target of our derision ? or are they here , and our eyes have missed them ? 
therein a fountain whose name is called salsabil .
does he possess the knowledge of the unseen , thus , he sees ?
as they were themselves witnesses to what they did to the faithful .
for a guidance and for a reminder to men possessed of minds .
and earth yieldeth up her burdens ,
they are the ones who denied revelation and hindered you from the sacred mosque and the sacrificial animals , detained from reaching their place of sacrifice . had there not been believing men and believing women whom ye did not know that ye were trampling down and on whose account a crime would have accrued to you withoutknowledge , that he may admit to his mercy whom he will . if they had been apart , we should certainly have punished the unbelievers among them with a grievous punishment .
indeed you and whatyou worship besides allah shall be fuel for hell , and you will enter it .
and the brethren of joseph came , and entered unto him , and he knew them , but they knew him not .
although it is decreed about him that he shall lead into error whosoever takes him for a friend , and will direct him to the torment of the fire .
said moses to his people ,  seek help through allah and be patient . indeed , the earth belongs to allah . he causes to inherit it whom he wills of his servants . and theoutcome is for the righteous . 
andthose who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the evidence of one of thesefour times , bearing allah to witness that he is most surely of the truthful ones .
what will show you what is the besieger ? !
woe on that day to those who deny the truth ,
say :  he who created you the first time . he has knowledge of every creation ,
and let them not turn thee aside from the signs of allah after they have been sent down unto thee . and call thou men unto thy lord , and be thou not of the associaters .
as also 'ad and thamud , and the companions of the rass , and many a generation between them .
have they not seen that allah , who has created the heavens and the earth , has power to create their like ? there is no doubt that he has appointed for them aterm , yet the unbelievers refuse all but disbelief .
and how can you disbelieve , whereas allah ’ s verses are recited to you and his noble messenger is present amongst you ? ! and whoever takes the support of allah is indeed guided to the right path .
lo ! man is in a state of loss ;
blessed is he to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be brought back .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth - that he may recompense those who do evil withwhat they have done and recompense those who do good with the best-
, let not their words disappoint you ; all dignity belongs to god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
this is because allah has sent down the book with the truth ; and indeed those who caused disagreement in the book are , surely , disputants in the extreme .
he will go ahead of his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire , and evil indeed is the place to which they are led .
but those whofear their lord , for them are lofty chambers with lofty chambers above them , built whereunder rivers flow : the promise of allah , and allah faileth not the appointment .
lo ! we have revealed the scripture unto theewith truth ; so worship allah , making religion pure for him .
she said to moses ' sister ,  go , and follow him .  so she watched him from a distance , like a stranger , without anyone noticing her .
then when he pleases , he will raise him to life again .
your comrade is not astray , neither errs ,
is he then who createth as him who createth not ? will ye not then remember ?
and the jinn we created before , of intensely hot fire .
noah said :  o lord , do not leave a single habitation of unbelievers on the earth .
the brothers of joseph cameand visited him . he recognised them , though they did not recognise him .
‘ o children of adam ! do not let satan tempt you , like he expelled your parents from paradise , stripping them of their garments to expose to them their nakedness . indeed he sees you—he and his hosts—whence you do not see them . we have indeed made the devils friends of those who have no faith . ’
nor cease to endeavour praising him night and day .
verily those who cause annoyance to allah and his messenger - allah has cursed them in this world and in the hereafter and has prepared for them a humiliating chastisement .
look then at the effectsof allah 's mercy , how he revives the earth after its death . verily ! thatwho revived the earth after its death shall indeed raise the dead , and he is able to do all things .
they said :  it is the same to us whether you preach or be not of those who preach .
among the people given the book is one who , if you trust him with a heap of treasure , will return it to you ; and among them is one who , if you trust him withone coin , will not return it to you unless you constantly stand over him ; that is because they say , “ we are not obliged in any way , in the case of illiterates ” ; and they purposely fabricate lies against allah .
it has already been revealed to you and to those who have gone before you , that if you associatewith allah , your works would be annulled and you will be among the losers .
allah sendeth down water from the sky and therewith reviveth the earth after her death . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for a folk who hear .
should i seek a judge other than god , when it is he who has revealed the book , clearly explained . those to whom we gave the book earlier know that it is the truth revealed by your lord . therefore , have no doubts .
say ,  i possess not for myself any harm or benefit except what allah should will . for every nation is aterm . when their time has come , then they will not remain behind an hour , nor will they precede . 
when the angels said ,  o mary , indeed allah gives you good tidings of a word from him , whose name will be the messiah , jesus , the son of mary - distinguished in this world and the hereafter and among those brought near .
they will ask thee of the mountains . say : my lord will break them into scattered dust .
and what is in your right hand , o moses ? 
was he not an emitted drop of semen ,
tell the believers to forgive those who do not have faith in the days of godand resurrection . god will give due recompense to all the people for their deeds .
and those to whom we gave the book * rejoice at what is divinely revealed to you * * ; and of those groups are some who deny parts of it ; proclaim , “ i am commanded only that i worship allah and not ascribe any partner to him ; towards him do i call , and towards him only i have to return . ”
even if the sinners possessed whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and as much more , they would offer it to ransom themselves from the torment of the day of resurrection ; yet what they did not even imagine would appear to them from god ;
go back to your father , and say , ‘ ‘ father ! your son has indeed committed theft , and we testified only to what we knew , and we could not have forestalled the unseen .
let a part of the sky fall on us if what you say is true  .
o my people , let not the breach with me move you , so that there smite you the like of what smote the people of noah , or the people of hood , or the people of salih ; and the people of lot are not far away from you .
do not be deceived by the actions of those who deny the truth in the land :
and on the day whereon he shall call unto them and say : where are my associates whom ye were wont to assert ?
and we gave him good in the world , and in the hereafter he is among the righteous .
and verily , if we cause him to taste mercy after some hurt that hath touched him , he will say : this is my own ; and i deem not that the hour will ever rise , and if i am brought back to my lord , i surely shall be better off with him - but we verily shall tell those who disbelievethat they did , and we verily shall make them taste hard punishment .
on the day whereon the torment shall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he shall say : taste that which ye have been working !
did you see him who denies the retribution ?
they can not help them , nor can they help themselves .
and produced therefrom the water thereof and the pasture thereof ,
and what allah restoredto his messenger from them - you did not spur for itany horses or camels , but allah gives his messengers power over whom he wills , and allah is over all things competent .
he it is who enableth you to traverse through land and sea ; so that ye even board ships ; - they sail with them with a favourable wind , and they rejoice thereat ; then comes a stormy wind and the waves come to them from all sides , and they think they are being overwhelmed : they cry unto allah , sincerely offeringduty unto him saying ,  if thou dost deliver us from this , we shall truly show our gratitude ! 
depart to that which you belied !
and when they saw them , they said : most surely these are in error ;
the lord said ,  tell them , 'my lord knows all that is said in the heavens and the earth . he is all-hearing and all-knowing  .
and what can make you know what is 'illiyyun ?
so whatever you have been given is but a passing enjoyment for this worldly life , but that which is with allahis better and more lasting for those who believeand put their trust in their lord .
how then can you comprehend what the day of judgement is ?
they would like to extinguish the light of god with a blow from their mouths , but even though the unbelievers may dislike it , god has decided to let his light shine forever .
an unerringly straight book , meant to warn of a stern punishment from allah , and to proclaim , to those who believe and work righteous deeds , the tiding that theirs shall be a good reward
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth . we have charged those who were given the book before you , and you , 'fear god . ' if you disbelieve , to god belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth ; god is all-sufficient , all-laudable .
ask them : 'are there among ones whom you associate with allah in his divinity those who can guide to the truth ? say : 'it is allah alone who guides to the truth . ' then , who is more worthy to be followed - he who guides to the truth , or he who can not find the right way unless others guide him to it ? what is wrong with you ? how ill do you judge !
and we sent to thamood their brother salih : 'serve you god ! ' and behold , they were two parties , that were disputing one with another .
nay , but we brought them the truth and they are truly liars .
zachariah , john , jesus , and elijah , every one of them was righteous ,
so do not deem that god will fail in his promise to his messengers ; surely god is all-mighty , vengeful .
and your lord inspired the bee : “ set up hives in the mountains , and in the trees , and in what they construct . ”
those against whom thy lord 's word is realized will not believe ,
those who believe , and suffer exile and strive with might and main , in allah 's cause , with their goods and their persons , have the highest rank in the sight of allah : they are the people who will achieve .
should a whiff of your lord ’ s punishment touch them , they will surely say , ‘ woe to us ! we have indeed been wrongdoers ! ’
and others are awaiting the decree of allah , whether he shall torment them or whether he will relent toward them ; and allah is knowing , wise .
give to the orphans their possessions , and do not replace things of your own which are bad with things which are good among theirs , and do not intermix their goods with your own and make use of them , for this is a grievous crime .
lo ! those who disbelieve the revelations of allah , and slay the prophets wrongfully , and slay those of mankind who enjoin equity : promise them a painful doom .
do then those who devise evilfeel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them up , or that the wrath will not seize them from directions they little perceive ? -
and many an angel is in the heavens , whose intercession does not benefit the least unless allah gives permission for whomever he wills , and whom he likes .
has not the news of those before you , the people of noah and 'ad and thamud , and those who came after them , come to you ? none knowsthem except god . their apostles came to them with clear proofs , but they tried to silence them and said :  we do not believe in what you have been sent with , and we are in doubt of what you call us to , about which we are in disquiet . '
have they not journeyed through the land , and seen the outcome for those before them ? they were more numerous than they , and had greater power and influence in the land . but what they had achieved availed them nothing .
and that our host , they verily would be the victors .
then they would not be able to make a will , or go back to their people .
this is my path and it is straight . follow it and not other paths which will lead you far away from the path of god . thus does god guide you so that you may become pious .
o prophet ! urge on the faithful to fight : if there be twenty patient men among you , they shall overcome two hundred ; and if there be a hundred of you , they shall overcome a thousand of the faithless , for they are a lot who do not understand .
we created them not save with truth ; but most of them know not .
and whoever strives hard , he strives only for his own soul ; most surely allah is self-sufficient , abovethe worlds .
and if his shirt be rent from behind , then she lieth , and he is of the truth-tellers .
the people of the right hand—and what are the people of the right hand ? !
mother and father ,
none except allah can disclose it .
we have certainly sentto nations before you , then we seized them with stress and distress so that they might entreat .
“ so shall i seek the command other than that of allah , whereas it is he who has sent down the detailed book towards you ? ” and those whom we gave the book know that this is the truth sent down from your lord , so o listener , do not ever be of those who doubt .
and had we willed , we verily could have fixed them in their place , making them powerless to go forward or turn back .
those who take unbelievers for their friends instead of believers -- do they seek glory in them ? but glory altogether belongs to god .
who seeks to drive you from your land what do you command '
 we shall ignore you today ,  they will be told ,  as you had forgotten the meeting of this day . your dwelling place is hell , and there is none to save you :
say : can ye see yourselves , if the punishment of allah come upon you or the hour come upon you , ? do ye then callto any other than allah ? if ye are truthful .
so they began to think , even as you do , that god would not resurrect any one .
while the unbelievers got up in their hearts heat and cant - the heat and cant of ignorance , - allah sent down his tranquillity to his messenger and to the believers , and made them stick close to the command of self-restraint ; and well were they entitled to it and worthy of it . and allah has full knowledge of all things .
truly , did he think that he would not have to return !
they found their fathers in error ,
he shall say , 'how long have you tarried in the earth , by number of years ? '
and for all persons are ranks according to their deeds ; and so that he may repay them in full for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
now hath allah lightened your burden , for he knoweth that there is weakness in you . so if there be of you a steadfast hundred they shall overcome two hundred , and if there be of you a thousandthey shall overcome two thousand by permission of allah . allah is with the steadfast .
but when the shout cometh
those are the ones who will have lost themselves , and lost from them is what they used to invent .
nay , those who desbelieve are in false pride and opposition .
nor invoke besides allah that which neither benefits you nor can do you any harm . for if you do so , then you will indeed be among the wrongdoers . ’ ’ ’
surely your lord is the all knowing creator !
and behold ! allah will say :  o jesus the son of mary ! didst thou say unto men , worship me and my mother as gods in derogation of allah ' ?  he will say :  glory to thee ! never could i say what i had no right . had i said such a thing , thou wouldst indeed have known it . thou knowest what is in my heart , thou i know not what is in thine . for thou knowest in full all that is hidden .
and kept herself in seclusion from them . we sent her our angel , who presented himself to her as a full-grown human being .
 ah ! woe is me ! would that i had never taken such a one for a friend !
“ and i do not ask from you any fee for it ; my reward is only upon the lord of the creation . ”
. on this day friends will be of no benefit to one another , nor will they receive any help
until you come to the graves .
 that we may follow the sorcerersreligion of disbelief ] if they are the winners . 
could it be , that if you turn away , you might make corruption in the land and break the ties of kinship ?
for all that they used to do .
they say :  what ! when we are reduced to bones and dust , should we really be raised upa new creation ? 
therefore the earthquake seized them – so at morning they remained lying flattened in their homes .
and made his progeny survive ,
o ye who believe ! when death approaches any of you , witnesses among yourselves when making bequests , - two just men of your ownor others from outside if ye are journeying through the earth , and the chance of death befalls you . if ye doubt , detain them both after prayer , and let them both swear by allah :  we wish not in this for any worldly gain , even though thebe our near relation : we shall hide not the evidence before allah : if we do , then behold ! the sin be upon us ! 
the disbelievers told the messengers ,  we shall expel you from our land unless you revert to our religion .  their lord then sent thema revelation ,  we have decided to destroy the unjust
when we made a covenant with you and raised the mountain above you saying ,  hold firmly to what we have given you and listen ,  you said ,  we hear , but we disobey ,  and their hearts were filled with the love of the calf , because of their refusal to acknowledge the truth . say ,  evil is that to which your faith enjoins you if you are indeed believers . 
and what will make you comprehend what the day of decision is ?
‘ read your book ! today your soul suffices as your own reckoner . ’
god is pleased with the believers for their pledging obedience to you under the tree . he knew whatever was in their hearts , thus , he granted them confidence and rewarded them with an immediate victory
if then they run away , we have not sent thee as a guard over them . thy duty is but to convey . and truly , when we give man a taste of a mercy from ourselves , he doth exult thereat , but when some ill happens to him , on account of the deeds which his hands have sent forth , truly then is man ungrateful !
and if they belie thee , then surely there have belied before them the people of nuh and the 'aad and the thamud .
this quran explains to the children of israel much of what they differ over ,
take heed that the day the crier calls from a place close ,
wealth and children areadornment of the worldly life . but the enduring good deeds are better to your lord for reward and better forhope .
he maketh whom he will to enter his mercy , and for evil-doers hath prepared a painful doom .
lo ! we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden when they vowed that they would pluck its fruit next morning ,
not long after the hoopoe came forward and said ,  i have information which you do not have . i have come from the land of sheba with a true report .
this is how allah the most honourable , the all knowing sends the divine revelation to youand to those before you .
indeed , we showed our favour to you before also ,
and who can not succour them , nor can succour themselves .
thisis enlightenment for mankind and guidance and mercy for a people who are certain .
yet it is purely an admonition to mankind .
say ,  mankind , truth has come to you from your lord ! anyone who accepts guidance is guided only for his own sake ; and he who goes astray does so at his own peril . i am not appointed as your keeper . 
say :  if the sea were to become ink to record the words of my lord , indeed the sea would be all used up before the words of my lord are exhausted , and it would be the same even if we were to bring an equal amount of ink . 
they will be guided with gentle words , and guided to the commended path .
those who defame such of the believers who give charityvoluntarily , and those who could not find to give charityexcept what is available to them , so they mock at them , allah will throw back their mockery on them , and they shall have a painful torment .
when the flood rose high and covered the whole land , we carried you in the ark .
 what is the matter with you ? why do you not help one another ? 
and verily we made a covenant of old with adam , but he forgot , and we found no constancy in him .
and never will it benefit you that day , when you have wronged , that you aresharing in the punishment .
and before it the book of musa was a guide and a mercy : and this is a book verifyingin the arabic language that it may warn those who are unjust and as good news for the doers of good .
it was he who produced for you hearing , eyes , and hearts , yet little is that you thank .
when a satanic thought starts to bother the pious ones , they understand and see the light
and his wife , the carrier of the firewood ,
and drive the guilty as a thirsty herd towards hell ,
your friend is but allah and his apostle and those who have believed- those who establish the prayer and give the poor-rate while they bow down .
but when there came to them the truth from us , they said , ‘ why has he not been given the like of what moses was given ? ’ did they not disbelieve what moses was given before , and said , ‘ two magicians abetting each other , ’ and said , ‘ indeed we disbelieve both of them ’ ?
except the men , women , and children , who , being abased have no means and they are unable to guide themselves to a way .
when the hypocrites and those who were filled with doubt , said :  the promise of god and his apostle was nothing but deceit . 
you have a lesson in livestock . we provide you with drink from what is in their bellies , and you have many other benefits from them ; some of them you eat ,
we have revealed to them the truth . but they are certainly liars .
those who deny the truth will be told ,  god 's abhorrence of you is greater than your hatred of yourselves . you were called to the faith but you denied it . 
have they not seen the earth in which we have made gracious plants grow ?
on that day ye will be exposed ; not a secret of you will be hidden .
they said , “ you are under a magic spell . ”
then you shall most certainly see it with the eye of certainty ;
for him who stands in awe of his lord will be two gardens .
then their prophet said to them , 'verily god has raised up saul for you as king . ' they said , 'how should he be king over us who have better right than he to kingship , seeing he has not been given amplitude of wealth ? ' he said , 'god has chosen him over you , and has increased him broadly in knowledge and body . god gives the kingship to whom he will ; and god is all-embracing , all-knowing . '
therein there will be all kinds of fruits to eat , and they shall have all that they desire .
fruits , and they shall be highly honored ,
and when it is said to them ,  follow what allah has revealed ,  they say ,  rather , we will follow that upon which we found our fathers .  even if satan was inviting them to the punishment of the blaze ?
, nothing is said to you but what was already said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of grievous chastisement .
so turn aside from themand await , verily theyare awaiting .
but as for him who came to you seeking .
so theywere not able to scale it , nor were they able to bore through it ,
or do those who earn evil deeds think that we shall hold them equal with those who believeand do righteous good deeds , in their present life and after their death ? worst is the judgement that they make .
, you do not have to guide them . god guides whomever he wants . whatever you spend for the cause of god is for your own good , provided you do not spend anything but to please god . for anything good that you may give for the cause of god , you will receive sufficient reward and no injustice will be done to you .
let not the believers take the disbelievers as auliyainstead of the believers , and whoever does that will never be helped by allah in any way , except if you indeed fear a danger from them . and allah warns you against himself , and to allah is the final return .
have you not seen those who were forbidden to whisper and yet they engaged in what they had been forbidden ? they secretly converse among themselves concerning sin and transgression and disobedience to the messenger . and when they come to you , they greet you in a manner that allah does not greet you , and say to themselves : “ why does allah not chastise us for these utterances of ours ? ” hell it is that shall suffice them , and in it will they burn . how woeful is their destination !
and couldst thou see what time they shall be held over the fire , and then they will say : would that we were sent back and now we shall not belie the signs of our lord and we shall be of the believers .
their example is like that of one who kindled a fire ; and when it lit up all that was around it , allah took away their light and left them in darkness , unable to see anything .
andwhen moses said unto his people : o my people ! why persecute ye me , when ye well know that i am allah 's messenger unto you ? so when they went astray allah sent their hearts astray . and allah guideth not the evil-living folk .
say , ‘ if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter would surely have been decided between you and me , and allah knows best the wrongdoers . ’
hell , wherein they roast : a wretched couch .
and whoever earns sin , his earnings will only be against himself ; and allah is the knowing , wise .
turn away from them and say :  peace .  they will come to know soon .
thus do we test them by means of one another so that they should say , ‘ are these the ones whom allah has favoured from among us ? ! ’ does not allah know best the grateful ? !
and by the night when it covers ,
indeed the pious are in a place of peace .
yet they ascribe as partners unto him the jinn , although he did create them , and impute falsely , without knowledge , sons and daughters unto him . glorified be he and high exalted abovethat they ascribe .
and do not obey any vile swearer .
and it shall be said to them : where are those that you used to worship ;
so keep your duty to allah , and obey me .
he is lofty in degrees , lord of the throne . he casteth the spirit of his command upon whomsoever he will of his bondmen , that he may warn people of the day of meeting .
then ‘ peace be on you , from the people of the right hand ! ’
and plenty of war booty , to take ; and allah is most honourable , wise .
the sending down of this book is from allah the most honourable , the wise .
so exalt the name of your lord , the most great .
as for him who says to his parents , “ enough of you ! are you promising me that i will be raised up , when generations have passed away before me ? ” while they cry for god ’ s help , “ woe to you ! believe ! the promise of god is true ! ” but he says , “ these are nothing but tales of the ancients . ”
when you meet the faithless in battle , strike their necks . when you have thoroughly decimated them , bind the captives firmly . thereafter either oblige themor take ransom , until the war lays down its burdens . that . had allah wished he could have taken vengeance on them , but that he may test some of you by means of others . as for those who were slain in the way of allah , he will not let their works go fruitless .
taha .
are they not aware that allah knows what they conceal and what they secretly discuss , and that allah has full knowledge even of all that is beyond the reach of perception .
and it is he who hath made for you the night a covering , and the sleep ; repose , and hath made the day a resurrection .
then we placed him as a drop of fluid in a safe place ,
those who believe fight in the way of god ; and those who do not , only fight for the powers of evil ; so you should fight the allies of satan . surely the stratagem of satan is ineffective .
and for each community there hath been sent an apostle ; and when their apostle hath arrived , the matter between them is decreed in equity , and they are not wronged .
he answered : 'you are among those reprieved
when they sat by it ,
your possessions and your children are a test , but with god is a splendid reward .
that they may understand my saying .
blame attaches only to those who subject people to wrong and commit excesses on earth . a painful chastisement awaits them .
those who despise our revelations are not hidden from us . is he who is hurled into the fire better ? or he who arrives safely on the day of resurrection ? do as you please ; he is seeing of everything you do .
and the sea that is full
there have already come to them reports containing admonishment ,
and when the angels said : ' o mary ! allah gives you the glad tidings of a command from him : his name shall be messiah , jesus , the son of mary . he shall be highly honoured in this world and in the next , and shall be one of those near stationed to allah .
indeed those before them had plotted , so allah seized the foundations of their building , therefore the roof fell down upon them from a height , and the punishment came upon them from a place they did not know .
the devils can not hear those high above . they would be struck from all sides
or lest you say ,  if only the scripture had been revealed to us , we would have been better guided than they .  so there hascome to you a clear evidence from your lord and a guidance and mercy . then who is more unjust than one who denies the verses of allah and turns away from them ? we will recompense those who turn away from our verses with the worst of punishment for their having turned away .
i found her and her people prostrating before the sun instead of god . satan has made their deeds attractive to them . he has kept them away from the right path and they have no guidance .
your lord is the best knower of you ; if he willeth he will have mercy upon you , or if he willeth he will torment you . and we have not sent thee over them as a trustee .
give full measure , and be not of those who cause others to lose .
he replied ,  it is my staff . i lean on it , and with it , i beat down the leaves for my flock ; i also have other uses for it . 
allah has promised you plenty of booty which you will take , and has bestowed this to you quickly , and restrained peoples ’ hands from you ; and in order that it may be a sign for the believers , and to guide you on the straight path .
the people who had received knowledge would tell them ,  woe to you ! the reward of god is far better for the righteously striving believers . no one can receive such reward except those who exercise patience . 
those who were abased will say to those who were arrogant , ‘ no , night and day plotting , when you prompted us to forswear allah and to set up equals to him. ’ they will hide their remorse when they sight the punishment , and we will put iron collars around the necks of the faithless . shall they not be requited for what they used to do ?
o my nation , the life of this world is nothing but an enjoyment , but surely , the life of the everlasting life is the stable abode .
they did not precede him in their speech , and acted on his command .
and what is the matter with you that you believe not in allah ! while the messengerinvites you to believe in your lord , and hehas indeed taken your covenant , if you are real believers .
for them is chastisement in the present life ; and the chastisement of the world to come is yet more grievous ; they have none to defend them from god .
thus do we keep opponents among the sinners for every apostle ; yet your lord is sufficient as a guide and helper .
this is the true account . there is no deity save him . god is mighty and wise . 
the straight way leads to god and there are ways which deviate from the right course . if he so wished , he would guide you all .
indeed , within the heavens and earth are signs for the believers .
allah admonishes you that in future you should never repeat a thing like this , if you are true believers .
so set out with your family during a portion of the night and follow behind them and let not anyone among you look back and continue on to where you are commanded . 
and who are shepherds of their pledge and their covenant ,
a spring , the nearest ones to god will drink from it .
o man ! what has seduced thee from thy lord most beneficent ? -
faces , that day , will show pleasure .
so announce to them a penalty grievous ,
enter them in peace , secure .
saying , “ hand over god ’ s servants to me . i am an honest messenger to you . ”
those who deny the day of justice .
'do not run away . return to your luxury that you rejoiced in , and your homes in order that you be questioned '
there is no compulsion in religion . certainly , right has become clearly distinct from wrong . whoever rejects the devil and believes in god has firmly taken hold of a strong handle that never breaks . god is all-hearing and knowing .
by him confirm my strength
sad : by the qur'an , full of admonition : .
these towns -- we relate to you some of their stories , and certainly their apostles came to them with clear arguments , but they would not believe in what they rejected at first ; thus does allah set a seal over the hearts of the unbelievers
blessed be he who , if he will , will assign you better thanthat , - gardens under which rivers flowand will assign you palaces .
and who could be a greater wrongdoer than the one who forbids the mention of allah 's name in places of worship and strives for their ruin ? such people do not deserve to enter the places of worship , and , if they enter at all , they should do so in fear ; for there is ignominy for them in this world and an awful punishment in the hereafter .
for one whom allah sends astray , there is none to guide him ; and he leaves them to wander in their rebellion .
it was but one saihahand lo ! theywere silent .
allah hath created every animal of water . of them isthat goeth upon its belly andthat goeth upon two legs andthat goeth upon four . allah createth what he will . lo ! allah is able to do all things .
and if someone is in hardship , thenpostponement untilease . but if you givecharity , then it is better for you , if you only knew .
a guidance and glad tidings unto the believers .
in that case we would have surely made thee taste the double of the tornment of the life and the double of the torment of death , and then thou wouldst not find against us a helper .
those who do not believe , say :  when we and our fathers have turned to dust , how shall we be raised again ?
and if the truth be on their side , they come to him quickly , obedient .
say :  do you verily disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days and you set up rivalswith him ? that is the lord of the 'alamin .
the people of the book are happy with what has been revealed to you . among the different parties , there are some who dislike part of what has been revealed to you . , tell them ,  i have been commanded to worship god alone , not to consider anything equal to him . to him do i pray and to him shall i return . 
surely god shall not wrong so much as the weight of an ant ; and if it be a good deed he will double it , and give from himself a mighty wage .
abraham was gentle , kind , penitent .
some of them have promised god that if he will favor them , they will certainly spend for his cause and be righteous ones .
with some of their forefathers and their offspring and their brethren ; and we chose them and guided them unto a straight path .
to him belong the heavens and the earth and to him all things return .
believers , do not let either your possessions or your children divert you from the remembrance of allah . those who do that shall be the losers .
and those who disbelieve say : why is the qur'an not revealed unto him all at once ? thus that we may strengthen thy heart therewith ; and we have arranged it in right order .
they will never be denied the rewards of their good deeds . god knows well about the pious .
'allah alone has the knowledge ' he said , ' i am sent to deliver to you the message . but i can see that you are ignorant people '
and all that you do not see ,
and lo ! it is a warrant unto those who ward off .
inspected the birds and said ,  how is it that i can not see the hoopoe . is he absent ?
does not man remember that we created him before when he was nothing ?
and there entered with him into the prison two pages . one of them said : verlly i saw myself pressing wine ; and the other said : verily i saw myself carrying upon my head bread whereof the birds were eating . declare unto us the interpretation thereof , verily we see thee of the well-doers .
yet we delivered those who believed and were god-fearing .
therefore , , have patience . surely allah 's promise is true . let those who lack certainty not cause you to be unsteady .
then on the day of resurrection you shall surely be raised up .
allah sets forth , for an example to the unbelievers , the wife of noah and the wife of lut : they wereunder two of our righteous servants , but they were false to their , and they profited nothing before allah on their account , but were told :  enter ye the fire along withthat enter ! 
and of his signs is that he created for you mates from among yourselves , so that you may find tranquility in them ; and he planted love and compassion between you . in this are signs for people who reflect .
say : 'do any of your partners guide you to the truth ' say : 'allah , he guides to the truth . who then is worthier to be followed he who guides to the truth or he who can not guide unless heis guided ? what is the matter with you , how then can you judge '
is it not sufficient for them that we have revealed the book to you which is read out to them ? it is indeed a grace and reminder for people who believe .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
shall all eat from the tree of al-zaqqum ,
and lot ! when he said unto his folk : will ye commit abomination such as no creature ever did before you ?
nay more , it is for us to explain it :
if the people of the book had believed and kept from evil , we would pardon them their sins and admit them to the gardens of delight .
and spend your wealth in allah 's cause , and do not fall into ruin with your own hands ; and be virtuous ; undoubtedly the righteous are the beloved of allah .
this is a part of the news of the ghaibwhich we inspire you with . you were not with them , when they cast lots with their pens as to which of them should be charged with the care of maryam ; nor were you with them when they disputed .
for them there is in store a goodly portion out of that which they have earned . allah is swift at reckoning .
so when musa came to them with our clear signs , they said : this is nothing but forged enchantment , and we never heard of it amongst our fathers of old .
this is from the news of the unseen . we reveal it to you . you were not present when they cast their quills to see which of them should look after mary , nor were you present when they were disputing .
and the one who does some good deeds , and is a muslim – he shall have no fear of injustice , nor suffer any loss .
allah sends down water from the heaven , and thereby he instantly revives the earth after it lay dead . verily there is a sign in it for those who have ears .
abundance distracts you .
when your lord called out to moses : ‘ go to those wrongdoing people ,
and noah was informed through revelation :  apart from those who have come to believe already not one of your people is going to believe . so grieve not for what they are doing .
and the evils they earned appeared to them , and the thing they used to mock at descended upon them .
the daywhen every soul will come pleading for itself and every soul will be recompensed fully for what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
that is because allah is thereality , and because whatever else they invoke besides him is falsehood ; and because allah , - he is the most high , most great .
it is god who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . how do you know the hour is not near ?
therefore , patiently forbear upon their speech , and praising your lord proclaim his purity , before the sun rises and before it sets ; and proclaim his purity at some times of the night and at the two ends of the day , in the hope that you be pleased .
wherefore let thou them alone plunging in vanity and sporting until they meet their day which they are promised .
we send down in the quran that which is a cure and mercy for the faithful ; and it increases the wrongdoers only in loss .
have you not seen that god sends down water from the sky , guides it to form springs in the earth , and then , with it , brings forth vegetation of various colours , which later withers , turns yellow before your eyes , and then he makes it crumble away ? there is truly a reminder in this for those who possess understanding .
in joseph and his brothers there are certainly signs for the seekers .
moses asked :  o sameri , what was the matter ? 
it is the freeing of a slave
he sends down the angels , with the inspiration of his command , upon whom he wills of his servants , ,  warn that there is no deity except me ; so fear me . 
and when the graves are laid open ,
did not the news reach him , of that which is mentioned in the books of moosa ?
will you not then mind ?
and out of the fruits of date-palms and grapes you derive intoxicants as well as wholesome sustenance . surely there is a sign for those who use reason .
nay ! you shall soon know ,
those will have lost who killed their children in foolishness without knowledge and prohibited what allah had provided for them , inventing untruth about allah . they have gone astray and were notguided .
indeed those who suppress their voices in the presence of allah ’ s noble messenger , are the ones whose hearts allah has tested for piety ; for them is forgiveness , and a great reward .
and no one has done a favour to him , for which he should be compensated .
and we sent not before thee any save men unto whom we revealed from among the people of the towns . have then they not travelled about in the land that they might observe of what wise hath been the end of those before them ! and surely the abode of the , hereafter is best for those who fear ! reflect then ye not !
allah does not forbid you to be kind and to act justly to those who have neither made war on your religion nor expelled you from your homes . allah loves the just .
god asked ,  what made you disobey me ?  satan replied ,  i am better than adam , for you have created me out of fire and adam out of clay . 
say thou : whether ye believe it or believe it not , verily those who were vouchsafed knowledge before it , when it is recited unto them , fall down on their chins , prostrating .
in columns outstretched .
and whatever you have been given , is a usage in the life of this world and its adornment ; and that which is with allah is better and more lasting ; so do you not have sense ?
“ but as for him who believes and acts righteously , he will have the finest reward , and we will speak to him of our command with ease . ”
they said : verily we augur ill of you ; if ye desist not , we shall surely stone you , and there will befall you from us a torment afflictive .
say : 'in whose hand is the dominion of everything , protecting and himself unprotected , if you have knowledge ? '
he has certainly succeeded who purifies himself
but it has had no effect on them except to make them run away .
the number of the months , with allah , is twelve in the book of allah , the day when he created the heavens and the earth ; of these , four are sacred . that is the right religion . therefore , do not wrong yourselves in them and fight against the unbelievers all together as they themselves fight against you all together ; know that allah is with the cautious .
those against whom the sentence is justified will say :  o lord , these are those we had led astray as we had ourselves gone astray . we clear ourselves before you : they never worshipped us . 
those who offend god and his prophet will be damned in this world and the next . there is a shameful punishment ready for them .
under it they shall remain forever ; their punishment shall not be lightened , nor shall they be granted respite .
since the quraish have been united ,
it is we who relate to you , , their story in truth . indeed , they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
andthose who spend their wealth for the sake of ostentation , who do not believe in god or the last day . whoever has satan as his companion has an evil companion .
they will all publicly come in the presence of allah – then those who were weak will say to those who were the leaders , “ we were your followers – is it possible for you to avert some of allah ’ s punishment from us ? ” they will answer , “ if allah had guided us , we would have guided you ; it is the same for us , whether we panic or patiently endure – we have no place of refuge . ”
and rejected our signs as lies .
and fruits of their choice .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth : when he decrees a thing , he merely says ,  be ,  and there it is .
they said :  yea , we have come to thee to accomplish that of which they doubt .
do you not realize that god created seven heavens in layers ?
when they are told , ‘ come to what allah has sent down andto the apostle , ’ you see the hypocrites keep away from you aversely .
and obey not : thou any swearer ignominous .
o mankind ! remember the favour of allah toward you . is there any creator other than allah who provideth for you from the heaven and the earth ? there is no god but he . wither then are ye deviating ?
but if one fears from the bequeathererror or sin and corrects that which is between them , there is no sin upon him . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
said he , 'thou art granted , moses , thy petition .
verily we ! in this wise we deal with the culprits .
satan promises you poverty , and bids you unto indecency ; but god promises you his pardon and his bounty ; and god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
he is indeed the hearer , the aware .
that is how we make the wrongdoers one another ’ s friends because of what they used to earn .
have patience , then , as had the steadfast messengers before you ; and be in no haste about them . on the day when they see what they are threatened with , it will appear to them as though they had not tarried longer than an hour of a day.to deliver the message : and none but the disobedient shall be destroyed .
then he turned back striving .
whoso desireth powerall power belongeth to allah . unto him good words ascend , and the pious deed doth he exalt ; but those who plot iniquities , theirs will be an awful doom ; and the plotting of suchwill come to naught .
“ indeed allah knows whatever is said , and knows all what you conceal . ”
and , when your lord said to the angels ,  i will create a human being out of clay from an altered black mud .
indeed , they will never avail you against allah at all . and indeed , the wrongdoers are allies of one another ; but allah is the protector of the righteous .
and comforts they used to enjoy .
and you , , are free of restriction in this city -
and those foremostwill be foremost .
some of the bedouins who sought to be excused came , so that they may be granted leave ; while those who lied to allah and his apostle sat back . soon there shall visit the faithless among them a painful punishment .
those who deny and transgress will not be forgiven by god , nor be shown the way
but if they desist , then surely god is most forgiving and merciful .
fie on you and what you worship besides allah ! do you not exercise your reason ? ’
pharaoh said :  o haman ! build me a lofty palace , that i may attain the ways and means-
living there for ever , they shall neither find a guardian nor a helper .
safah and marwah are the waymarks of allah . whoever performs the pilgrimage to the house or the visit , there shall be no guilt on him to circumambulate between both of them . and whoever volunteers good , allah is thankful , the knower .
said he , “ rather , their chief may have done it ; so question them , if they can speak . ”
“ and has made me good to my mother and not made me forceful , ill-fated . ”
and the dwellers of the rock certainly rejected the apostles ;
have they not travelled through the earth that they may observe what was the end of their predecessors who were far mightier and tilled the land and built upon it more than these have ever built ? and allah 's messengers came to them with clear signs . it was not allah who wronged them , but it is they who wronged themselves .
that is because allah is the truth , and that what they call upon besides him -- that is the falsehood , and because allah is the high , the great .
‘ ad impugned the apostles ,
and so we narrate to you the stories of the past , and we have given you a remembrance from us .
go now , and enter the gate of hell , and abide in it for ever.  evil indeed is the abode of the arrogant .
till you reached the grave .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deedsfor them there is forgiveness and great reward .
when allah hath created you and what ye make ?
let harm be requited by an equal harm . but whoever pardons and amends will find his reward with god . he does not love the wrongdoers .
he ] said :  have you come to drive us out of our land with your magic , o musa ?
they will say : hallowed be thou ! thou art our protecting friend , not they ; aye ! they have been worshipping the jinn ; in them most of them were believers .
so open between me and them an opening , and save me and the believers who are with me '
it is here that zakaria prayed to his lord ; he said , “ my lord ! give me from yourself a righteous child ; indeed you only are the listener of prayer . ”
they replied : 'it is the same to us whether you admonish or whether you are not one of the admonishers .
those were they unto whom allah bestowed his grace from among the prophets , of the offspring of adam , and of those whom we carriedwith nuh , and of the offspring of ibrahimand israel and from among those whom we guided and chose . when the verses of the most beneficentwere recited unto them , they fell down prostrating and weeping .
and guard them against all ills . he whom you guard against ills on that day , to him you have surely been most merciful . that is the great triumph . ”
say , ‘ travel over the land and observe how was the fate of the guilty . ’
those shall dwell in gardens , honoured .
we guided him to the way , be he appreciative or unappreciative .
in its long columns of flames .
say ,  you who deny the truth ,
allah said : verily thou art of the respited .
but those who repent and mend their ways shall be excepted for indeed allah is forgiving , all-compassionate .
that is because of that which thy hands have sent forth , and verily allah is not a wronger of his bondmen .
this is the message to be conveyed to all mankind – and in order to warn them with it , and for them to know that he is the only one god , and for men of understanding to heed advice .
say :  can you expect for usother than one of two glorious things- ? but we can expect for you either that allah will send his punishment from himself , or by our hands . so wait ; we too will wait with you . 
without doubt , among men , the nearest of kin to abraham , are those who follow him , as are also this prophet and those who believe : and allah is the protector of those who have faith .
and we settled the children of israel in a position of honor , and provided them with good things . they did not differ until knowledge came to them . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection regarding their differences .
andwhen allah will say ,  o jesus , son of mary , did you say to the people , 'take me and my mother as deities besides allah ? '  he will say ,  exalted are you ! it was not for me to say that to which i have no right . if i had said it , you would have known it . you know what is within myself , and i do not know what is within yourself . indeed , it is you who is knower of the unseen .
so do not be impatient for them ; we are only completing their number . *
except what allah , may will , he knows what is apparent and what is hidden .
neither your blood-kindred nor your children shall profit you upon the day of resurrection ; he shall distinguish between you . and god sees the things you do .
and when kinsfolk and orphans and the needy are present at the division , bestow on them therefrom and speak kindly unto them .
, say ,  people , if you have doubt about my religion , know that i , certainly , do not worship the idols which you worship instead of god , but i worship god who causes you to die . i am commanded to believe ,
we created them not except for just ends : but most of them do not understand .
say ,  come ! i will tell you what your lord has really forbidden you ! do not associate anything with him ; be good to your parents ; and do not kill your children for fear of poverty , we shall provide sustenance for you as well as for them , refrain from committing indecent deeds , whether openly or in secret ; and do not kill the life which god has made sacred , save by right . that is what he has enjoined upon you , so that you may understand .
allah created everything that walks from water . some creep upon their bellies , others walk on two feet , and others walk on four . allah creates whatever he will . allah is powerful over everything .
and saved them and their people from great distress ,
they said , ‘ lot , if you do not desist , you will surely be banished . ’
it is he who begins and repeats .
when they both agreed and abraham had lain down his son on the side of his face ,
go , take this shirt , and do you cast it on my father 's face , and he shall recover his sight ; then bring me your family all together . '
but we saved him and his family , except for his wife ; she was of those who lagged behind .
reclining within them , they will call therein for abundant fruit and drink .
then perhaps you would kill yourself through grief over them , , if they do not believe in this message , out of sorrow .
 'he will send rain to you in abundance ;
 o sister of aaron ! thy father was not a man of evil , nor thy mother a woman unchaste ! 
and everything we have numbered in a book .
and he has cast into the earth firmly set mountains , lest it shift with you , andrivers and roads , that you may be guided ,
and that it is for him to grant the second life ,
but there would not come to them a prophet except that they used to ridicule him .
make ye no excuses : ye have rejected faith after ye had accepted it . if we pardon some of you , we will punish others amongst you , for that they are in sin .
on the day when they shall see the angels , there shall be no joy on that day for the guilty , and they shall say : it is a forbidden thing totally prohibited .
as for him who is not in want of any thing ,
no , the unbelievers only belie ,
they said ,  are you astonished at god 's command ? may the mercy of god and his blessings be upon you , o people of this house . surely , he is praiseworthy and glorious . 
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white unto the beholders .
and thereafter we said to the children of israel :  now dwell in the land , but when the promised time of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you all together . 
and we gave lut the kingdom and knowledge , and we rescued him from the township that committed vile deeds ; indeed those evil people were disobedient .
and they will not heed unless allah willeth . he is the fount of fear . he is the fount of mercy .
afterof the distress , he sent down calm on a band of you overcome with slumber , while another band was stirred to anxiety by their own feelings , moved by wrong suspicions of allah-suspicions due to ignorance . they said :  what affair is this of ours ?  say thou :  indeed , this affair is wholly allah 's .  they hide in their minds what they dare not reveal to thee . they say :  if we had had anything to do with this affair , we should not have been in the slaughter here .  say :  even if you had remained in your homes , those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death  ; butthat allah might test what is in your breasts and purge what is in your hearts . for allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts .
have you seen him who disbelieved in our ayatandsays :  i shall certainly be given wealth and children ] , 
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord and follow no masters other than him . little are you admonished .
who strictly guard their private parts
, tell them ,  my lord has only prohibited indecent acts committed in public or in secret , all sins , unjust rebellion , considering things equal to god without any heavenly authority , and speaking for god without having any knowledge . 
then we evacuated there from all the believers
after him we did not send down against his people a host from heaven , nor do we send down such hosts :
so who henceforth will give the lie to thee about the judgment ?
these are the ones whose good deeds we will accept , and overlook their shortfalls – among the people of paradise ; a true promise which is being given to them .
and certainly we sent before you apostles to their people , so they came to them with clear arguments , then we gave the punishment to those who were guilty ; and helping the believers is ever incumbent on us .
and you did not kill them , but it was allah who killed them . and you threw not , , when you threw , but it was allah who threw that he might test the believers with a good test . indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
every man 's fate we have fastened on his own neck : on the day of judgment we shall bring out for him a scroll , which he will see spread open .
and allah 's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , that he may recompense those who do evil for that which they worked and reward those who do good with good .
so , when they forgotwith which they had been reminded , we opened to them the gates of everything , until in the midst of their enjoyment in that which they were given , all of a sudden , we took them to punishment , and lo ! they were plunged into destruction with deep regrets and sorrows .
o children of israel ! remember my blessings which i bestowed upon you , and fulfill your pledge to me , and i will fulfill my pledge to you , and fear me .
he entered the city at a time when its people were not likely to take notice . he found there two men fighting , this one from among his followers , and that one from his enemies . the one who was from his followers sought his help against him who was from his enemies . so moses hit him with his fist , whereupon he expired . he said , ‘ this is of satan ’ s doing . indeed he is clearly a misguiding enemy . ’
it is surely a noble koran
may allah forgive you * ; why did you permit them * * until the truthful ones had been manifested to you and the liars been exposed ?
yet perchance , if they do not believe in this tiding , you will consume yourself with grief and follow after them .
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good tidings , they said ,  indeed , we will destroy the people of that lot 's city . indeed , its people have been wrongdoers . 
those who do not give false testimony , and when they come upon frivolity , pass by with dignity .
and the king said : lo ! i saw in a dream seven fat kine which seven lean were eating , and seven green ears of corn and otherdry . o notables ! expound for me my vision , if ye can interpret dreams .
and that ‘ ‘ maintain the prayer and be wary of him , and it is he toward whom you will be gathered . ’ ’ ’
and o my people , indeed i fear for you the day of calling -
except those who repent , and reform , and hold fast to god , and dedicate their religion to god alone . these are with the believers ; and god will give the believers a great reward .
o ye who believe ! when the call is heard for the prayer of the day of congregation , haste unto remembrance of allah and leave your trading . that is better for you if ye did but know .
and goblets ready placed !
allah bears witness that whatever he has revealed to you , he has revealed with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness to it too , though the witness of allah is sufficient .
say , ‘ my lord ! if you should show me what they are promised ,
and those who disbelieve in god 's signs and the encounter with him -- they despair of my mercy , and there awaits them a painful chastisement . )
it is god who sends down water from the sky for you to drink and produces plants as pasture for your cattle .
and if we please , we can drown them , then there shall be no succorer for them , nor shall they be rescued
do they have idols who have established a religion without the permission of god ? had not it been for your lord 's giving them respite for an appointed time , he would certainly have settled their differences once and for all . the unjust will certainly suffer a painful torment .
 and you will remember what i am telling you , and my affair i leave it to allah . verily , allah is the all-seer ofslaves . 
so let not their speech grieve thee . verily we ! we know whatsoever they keep secret and whatsoever they make known .
and those who hold fast to the book , and have kept the prayer established ; and we do not waste the wages of the righteous .
then he set them up as seven heavens in two days , and revealedin each heaven its ordinance . we have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps , and guarded them . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and the mountains will be like tufted wool .
reward for what they used to do .
go to pharaoh and say , 'we are the messengers of the lord of the worlds ,
and maidens of a single age .
and treasures and agreeable mansions .
the true believers are those who , when allah 's name is mentioned , their hearts quake , and when his verses are recited to them their faith grows , and who put their trust in their lord ;
then we created of the drop , a clotand we created the clot into bitesize tissue , then we created the bitesize tissue into bones , thenwe clothed the bones with flesh , and then produced it an other creation . blessed is allah , the best of creators !
had they followed the laws of the old and new testaments and what was revealed to them from their lord , they would have received our bounties from above and below in abundance . some of them are modest people , but many of them commit the worst sins .
eat of that over which god 's name has been mentioned , if you believe in his signs .
who are in a gulfneglectful ;
and olives and dates ,
and yields fruits in every season , by the permission of its lord ? god sets forth parables for people so that they may take heed .
and we distribute it among them in various ways that they may ponder and reflect ; yet most men disdain everything but denial and thanklessness .
and your lordmagnify !
it is the piercing star .
so when he came to it , he was called , ‘ o moses !
cups and decanters , beakers full of sparkling wine ,
surely thy lord outspreads and straitens his provision unto whom he will ; surely he is aware of and sees his servants .
lot was the one who believed in him and said ,  i shall migrate to another land for the sake of my lord . he is the mighty one , the wise one . 
and most surely your lord is mighty , the merciful .
the day when we shall roll up the heavens as the recording angel rolls up the register of deeds ; we shall make him similar to our making him the first time ; this is a promise upon us ; we certainly have to do it .
andwhen jesus , the son of mary , said ,  o children of israel , indeed i am the messenger of allah to you confirming what came before me of the torah and bringing good tidings of a messenger to come after me , whose name is ahmad .  but when he came to them with clear evidences , they said ,  this is obvious magic . 
then he attacked them , striking with his right hand .
gardens of eternity , those whichmost gracious has promised to his servants in the unseen : for his promise mustcome to pass .
it is one of the greatest trials ,
o ye who believe ! choose not for guardians such of those who received the scripture before you , and of the disbelievers , as make a jest and sport of your religion . but keep your duty to allah if ye are true believers .
therefore , behave with seemly patience .
“ he has no offspring , nor is he born from anything . ”
 there is a small group of people
when it is properly shaped and i have blown my spirit into it , you should then bow down in prostration  .
what is the matter with you ? how could you judge this to be so ?
and what prevented men from accepting faith when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness from their lord except that the tradition of the former nations come upon them or that they confront various kinds of punishments ?
so follow what is sent down to you by your lord , for homage is due to no one but god , and turn away from idolaters .
o messenger ! do not let those who are quick to disbelief grieve you—from among those who say with their mouths , “ we believe , ” but their hearts do not believe ; and from among the jews—listeners to lies , listeners to other people who did not come to you . they distort words from their places , and they say , “ if you are given this , accept it ; but if you are not given it , beware. ” whomever god has willed to divert , you have nothing for him from god . those are they whose hearts god does not intend to purify . for them is disgrace in this world , and for them is a great punishment in the hereafter .
and his people came rushing towards him—they were in the habit of committing sins . he said , “ o my people , these are my daughters ; they are purer for you . so fear god , and do not embarrass me before my guests . is there not one reasonable man among you ? ”
o people given the book ! believe in what we have sent down confirming the book which you possess , before we transform some faces so turning them towards their backs , or curse them like we had cursed the people of sabth ; andthe allah ’ s command is always carried out !
and the mountains move away withmovement ,
so we took revenge of them , then see what was the end of those who denied .
say ,  shall i inform you ofworse than that as penalty from allah ? those whom allah has cursed and with whom he became angry and made of them apes and pigs and slaves of taghut . those are worse in position and further astray from the sound way . 
we did aforetime grant to the children of israel the book the power of command , and prophethood ; we gave them , for sustenance , things good and pure ; and we favoured them above the nations .
reclining therein on the thrones ; experiencing therein neither sun , nor frost .
and those who say , ‘ ‘ our lord , avert from us the suffering of hell , for its suffering is continuous .
from whomsoever it is averted on that day , upon him indeed he has had mercy ; that is a supreme achievement .
and indeed we sent moosa with our revelations and a clear domination .
you do not worship what i worship .
and remember ye said :  o moses ! we shall never believe in thee until we see allah manifestly ,  but ye were dazed with thunder and lighting even as ye looked on .
and unto 'ad we sent their brothers hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , no god ye have but he ; fear ye not ?
whether we show you part of that we promise them , or we call you to us , it is only for you to deliver the message , and ours is the accounting .
how many populations that insolently opposed the command of their lord and of his messengers , did we not then call to account , - to severe account ? - and we imposed on them an exemplary punishment .
from a sperm-drop he created him and destined for him ;
and we caused to grow over him a tree , a gourd .
there is no denying its coming
nothing prevents that their expendings be accepted except that they disbelieve in allah and his messenger , and whenever they come to the prayer they do so lazily , and whenever they spend they do so grudgingly .
as for the faithless , there is for them the fire of hell : they will neither be done away with so that they may die , nor shall its punishment be lightened for them . thus do we requite every ingrate .
and remember , when moses asked for water for his people , we told him to strike the rock with his staff , and behold , twelve springs of gushing water gushed forth so that each of the tribes came to know its place of drinking . eat and drink , god 's gifts , and spread no discord in the land .
andthose who reject our communications , chastisement shall afflict them because they transgressed .
likewise , human beings , animals , and livestock come in various colors . from among his servants , the learned fear god . god is almighty , oft-forgiving .
and she said to his sister , “ go after him ” – she therefore observed him from far , and they were not aware .
labouring , weary , -
god will surely lead them to a place with which they will be gratified . verily god is all-knowing and forbearing .
so highis allah , the sovereign , the truth . and , , do not hasten withthe qur'an before its revelation is completed to you , and say ,  my lord , increase me in knowledge . 
and we granted to them of our mercy , and we lefta truthful mention of eminence for them .
or have we sent down to them an authority that speaks of that they associate with him ?
 grant me honourable mention on the tongue of truth among the latest ;
the day we shall gather the muttaqununto the most beneficent , like a delegate .
he will guide them , and dispose their minds aright ,
those who deny the day of reckoning .
and those who are keepers of their trusts and their covenant ,
she said , “ my lord ! how can i bear a child when no man has ever touched me ? ” he said , “ this is how allah creates whatever he wills ; when he wills a thing , he only says to it , ‘ be ’ – and it happens immediately . ”
but the chosen servants of god ;
it was said unto her : enter the palace . then when she saw it , , he deemed it a pool and bared her shanks . he said : verily it is a palace evenly floored with glass . she said : my lord ! verily i wronged my soul , and now submit myself together with sulaiman unto allah , the lord of the worlds .
but whoever endures patiently and forgives—that is a sign of real resolve .
then when they beheld it , they said : verily we have strayed .
had they gone forth with you , they would not have added to you aught save corruption , and they would certainly have hurried about among you seekingdissension among you , and among you there are those who hearken for their sake ; and allah knows the unjust .
those of the deniers of truth among the people of the book and the polytheists will dwell forever in hell-fire . they are the worst of creatures .
and between them will be a barrier screen and on al-a'rafwill be men , who would recognise all , by their marks , they will call out to the dwellers of paradise ,  salamun 'alaikum  , and at that time theywill not yet have entered it , but they will hope to enterwith certainty .
for them is a flooring of hell and a covering . that is how we requite the iniquitous .
hinderer o fgood , trespasser , doubter
when they came in unto him , and said : peace . he said : lo ! we are afraid of you .
are you to have the males , and he the females ?
if you demanded a judgment , the judgment has then indeed come to you ; and if you desist , it will be better for you ; and if you turn back , weshall turn back , and your forces shall avail you nothing , though they may be many , andthat allah is with the believers .
did they not see that we have created animals for them from our handiwork , so they are their owners ?
if we had mercy on them and removed the distress which is on them , they would obstinately persist in their transgression , wandering in distraction to and fro .
allah enjoins you concerning your children : the male shall have the equal of the portion of two females ; then if they are more than two females , they shall have two-thirds of what the deceased has left , and if there is one , she shall have the half ; and as for his parents , each of them shall have the sixth of what he has left if he has a child , but if he has no child andhis two parents inherit him , then his mother shall have the third ; but if he has brothers , then his mother shall have the sixth aftera bequest he may have bequeathed or a debt ; your parents and your children , you know not which of them is the nearer to you in usefulness ; this is an ordinance from allah : surely allah is knowing , wise .
and saying exalt not yourselves against allah ; verily i have come unto you with an authority manifest .
now let man but think from what he is created !
so god seized him with the chastisement of the last world and the first .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the way of allah ; and whoever fights in the way of allah , and then is slain , or he subdues , we shall soon give him a great reward .
moses said , 'our lord , thou hast given to pharaoh and his council adornment and possessions in this present life . our lord , let them go astray from thy way ; our lord , obliterate their possessions , and harden their hearts so that they do not believe , till they see the painful chastisement . '
the ones nearest to god will bring it to public .
o you who have faith ! when the call is made for prayer on friday , hurry toward the remembrance of allah , and leave all business . that is better for you , should you know .
on that day , they will all share the chastisement .
they and their wives will be in pleasant shade , reclining on thrones .
say :  he who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth has revealed it to me ; and he is surely forgiving and kind . 
that is how the word of your lord became due concerning the faithless , that they shall be inmates of the fire .
and has responded to its lord and was obligated-
in gardens , they seek answers ,
unto him the angels and the spirit ascend on a day the duration of which is fifty thousand years .
by the soul and him who propertioned it ,
in fact , they can have no honor ; their gods will renounce their worship of idols and will turn against them .
ye will not attain unto piety until ye spend of that which ye love . and whatsoever ye spend , allah is aware thereof .
 our lord ! and make them enter the 'adnparadisewhich you have promised them , and to the righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their offspring ! verily , you are the all-mighty , the all-wise .
lo ! it is wretched as abode and station ;
verily ye go in lustfully unto men instead of women ! aye ! ye are a people extravagant .
and never would your lord have destroyed the cities until he had sent to their mother a messenger reciting to them our verses . and we would not destroy the cities except while their people were wrongdoers .
believers , if you are traveling in the land and the affliction of death befalls you , at the bequeathing testimony shall be two just men from among you , or two others from other than you . you shall detain both after the prayer , and they shall swear by allah if you are doubtful : 'we will not sell it for a price , even though it were a near kinsmen , nor will we hide the testimony of allah , because then we would surely be among the sinful '
these are the ones who stayed away , saying about their brothers : 'had they followed us , they would not have been slain . ' say : 'if you speak the truth then avert death when it comes to you . '
will eat of the tree of zaqqum ,
they aresaying ,  will we indeed be returned toformer state ?
so that the followers of the bible will know that they can receive no reward from god . they should know that all favors are in the hands of god . he grants them to whomever he wants . the favors of god are great .
and created the jinn before him , from smokeless fire .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
he is the all-forgiving , the most loving one ,
they shall have whatever they want with their lord , that is the recompense of the gooddoers ,
fight them until there is no more persecution , and religion becomes exclusively for god . but if they desist—god is seeing of what they do .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , wherein is darkness , thunder , and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunderclap for fear of death . but allah ever encompasses the disbelievers .
lo ! with us are heavy fetters and a raging fire ,
then , when the sacred months are drawn away , slay the idolaters wherever you find them , and take them , and confine them , and lie in wait for them at every place of ambush . but if they repent , and perform the prayer , and pay the alms , then let them go their way ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
shall we treat those who believe and work deeds of righteousness , the same as those who do mischief on earth ? shall we treat those who guard against evil , the same as those who turn aside from the right ?
and the mountains are shattered into bits
when we decide to destroy a town , we command the affluent section of its people , but they transgress therein ; thus the wordis justified , then we destroy the town utterly .
and they ask you to hasten the punishment . but god never breaks his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your count .
yet god may turnafter this to whomsoever he please , for god is compassionate and kind .
allah said : o iblis ! what aileth thou that thou art not with the prostrates ?
not at all . on that day , they will be screened from their lord .
and when the hypocrites , and those in whose hearts is a disease , were saying : allah and his messenger promised us naught but delusion .
and if going forth were acceptable to them , they would have made preparations for it , but allah himself disliked their getting upso he filled them with laze and it was said “ continue sitting with those who remain seated . ”
shall have a rope of palmfiber around her neck !
so we saved him and his family , all ,
assembly will be defeated , and they will turn their backs .
he saith : ' i have wasted riches plenteous .
say ,  if allah had willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you , for i had remained among you a lifetime before it . then will you not reason ? 
do not say , asserting falsely with your tongues , ‘ this is lawful , and that is unlawful , ’ attributing lies to allah . indeed those who attribute lies to allah will not be felicitous .
lord , do not cause our hearts to swerve after you have guided us . grant us your mercy . you are the embracing giver .
but if they seek to betray you , know that they had already betrayed allah . therefore he made you prevail over them . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
as a favour from us , thus do we reward him who gives thanks .
then the twain journeyed until when they met a boy , and he killed him . musa said : hast thou slain a person innocent not in return for a person assuredly thou hast committed a thing formidable .
it bears glad tidings and a warning , yet most of them turn away and do not listen .
and if whatever trees there are on the earth were pens , and the sea were ink with seven more seas to help it , the words of allah could not be exhausted ; verily allah is mighty , wise .
and to us belong the hereafter and the worldly life .
undoubtedly allah made a covenant with the descendants of israel , and we appointed twelve chiefs among them ; and allah said , “ indeed i am with you ; surely , if you establish the prayer and pay the charity , and believe in my noble messengers and respect * them , and lend an excellent loan to allah , i will surely forgive your sins , and i will surely admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; then after this , if any of you disbelieves , he has certainly gone astray from the straight path . 
no fresh reminder comes to them from their lord , but they listen to it playfully .
verily , we took the covenant of the children of israel and sent them messengers . whenever there came to them a messenger with what they themselves desired not - a group of them they called liars , and others among them they killed .
thickly planted gardens ,
and when the trumpet shall sound a single blast .
she said : o wonder ! shall i bear a son when i am an extremely old woman and this my husband an extremely old man ? most surely this is a wonderful thing .
we have sent it down as a clear discourse that you may understand .
join my servants .
and in aad . we unleashed against them the devastating wind .
if he please , he can make you pass away , o people ! and bring others ; and allah has the power to do this .
wherefore , when ye heard it , did not the believing men and believing women imagine best of their own people and say : this is a calumny manifest !
it takes only a single command from usand that can be achieved within the twinkling of an eye .
nor wast thou at the side oftur when we called . yetas mercy from thy lord , to give warning to a people to whom no warner had come before thee : in order that they may receive admonition .
it almost explodes in rage . whenever a group is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them ,  did no one come to warn you ? 
they are the ones who bought error for guidance , so their trade did not profit them , nor were they guided .
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest in and the day to give them light ? there are certainly signs in that for people who believe .
how is it that you are not helping one another ?
and when our command came , we rescued shuaib and the muslims who were with him by our mercy ; and the terrible scream seized the unjust – so at morning they remained lying flattened in their homes .
those whom the angels cause to diegood . they say : peace be unto you ! enter the garden because of what ye used to do .
theydeceive allah and those who believe , while they only deceive themselves , and perceivenot !
let loose at you will be smokeless flames of fire so that you will not be able to defend yourselves .
would something have befallen them if they had believed in god and the last day , and spent of what has been given them by god ? god is fully aware of all they do .
guide us in the straight path ,
they followed the order of the pharaoh but pharaoh 's orders were evil .
let them eat and enjoy themselves and be diverted byhope , for they are going to know .
those who listen , be sure , will accept : as to the dead , allah will raise them up ; then will they be turned unto him .
they question you concerning the new moons . say , ‘ they are timekeeping signs for the people andhajj. ’ it is not piety that you enter houses from their rear ; rather , piety isone who is godwary , and enter houses from their doors and be wary of allah , so that you may be felicitous .
in the nearer land , and they , after their defeat will be victorious
indeed this qur'an explains to the children of israel much of what they are at variance .
and provide for him from where he does not reckon . god is sufficient for him who places his trust in him . certainly god fulfills his purpose . god has indeed fixed a measure of everything .
many were the prophets on whose side a large number of god-devoted men fought : they neither lost heart for all they had to suffer in the way of allah nor did they weaken nor did they abase themselves . allah loves such steadfast ones .
and that we used to sit in some of the sitting-places thereof to steal a hearing , but he who wouldlisten now would find a flame lying in wait for him :
o you who believe ! obey allah , and obey the messengerand render not vain your deeds .
the king said , ‘ what was your business , women , when you solicited joseph ? ’ they said , ‘ heaven be praised ! we know of no evil in him. ’ the prince ’ s wife said , ‘ now the truth has come to light ! it was i who solicited him , and he is indeed telling the truth . ’
when you asked help of your lord , and he answered you ,  indeed , i will reinforce you with a thousand from the angels , following one another . 
surely in this there is a sign , yet most of them would not believe :
god only did this to give you good news , and so that your hearts might be set at rest , for help comes from god alone . surely , god is mighty and wise .
how many a village has turned in its pride against the order of their lord and his messengers ! we made it a stern reckoning , and punished it with a horrible punishment .
yet there are some arabswho believe in allah and the last day , and regard what they spend as a means of bringing them close to allah and to the prayers of the messenger . indeed , they are an offering for them ; allah will admit them to his mercy . he is forgiving , merciful .
leaving your wives that your lord created for you ? nay , but you are a people of transgressors .
“ that do not worship anyone except allah ; indeed i am for you a herald of warning and glad tidings , from him . ”
your guardian can be only allah ; and his messenger and those who believe , who establish worship and pay the poordue , and bow down .
if you were to ask them : “ who sent down water from the sky and therewith revived the earth after its death ? ” they will certainly say : “ allah. ” say : “ to allah alone be praise and thanks. ” but most people do not understand .
the example of the two parties is like the blind and deaf , and the seeing and hearing . are they equal in comparison ? then , will you not remember ?
he said , 'these are my guests ; put me not to shame ,
but when he comes to us , he will say : “ would that there had been between me and you the distance as between the east and the west . how evil a companion you were ! ”
and when they had gone further , he said to his assisting youth ; 'bring us our breakfast ; we are worn out from our journey '
they invoked before will have vanished ; they will know that there is no escape .
verily ! it is we who have sent down the quran to youby stages .
and when they meet with the believers , they say , “ we believe ” ; and when they are alone with their devils , they say , “ we are undoubtedly with you , we were just mocking ! ”
verily the worst of creatures in the sight of god are those who deny , and will not believe .
only those believe in our ayat , who , when they are reminded of them fall down prostrate , and glorify the praises of their lord , and they are not proud .
and those who , before them , had homesand had adopted the faith , love those who emigrate to them , and have no jealousy in their breasts for that which they have been given , and give thempreference over themselves , even though they were in need of that . and whosoever is saved from his own covetousness , such are they who will be the successful .
verily , he it is who beginsand repeats .
and when we gave moosa the bookand the criterion to judge right from wrong , so that you may attain guidance .
it may well be that allah will implant love between you and those with whom you have had enmity . allah is most powerful ; and allah is most forgiving , most compassionate .
o our people ! respond to allah ’ s summoner and have faith in him . he will forgive you some of your sins and shelter you from a painful punishment . ’
say : “ he it is who has brought you into being , and has given you hearing and sight , and has given you hearts to think and understand . how seldom do you give thanks ! ”
children of adam ! take your adornment at every time of prayer ; and eat and drink without going to excesses . for allah does not like those who go to excess .
take your family in a watch of the night ; and follow in their rear , and none of you should turn round , and proceed as you are bidden . ’
in the creation of the heavens and the earth ; in the alternation of night and day ; in the ships that sail the ocean bearing cargoes beneficial to man ; in the water which god sends down from the sky and with which he revives the earth after its death , scattering over it all kinds of animals ; in the courses of the winds , and in the clouds pressed into service between earth and sky , there are indeed signs for people who use their reason .
then , when they had submitted , and he put his forehead down .
do not disgrace me on the day that they will be resurrected ,
other than the chosen creatures of god .
so let not their wealth or their children amaze you ; in reality allah 's plan is to punish them with these things in the life of the this world , and that their souls shall departwhile they are disbelievers .
say :  my way , and that of my followers , is to call you to god with full perception . all glory to god , i am not an idolater . 
we bore him on anwhich , made of planks and nails ,
they have established a kinship between allah and the angels ; and the angels know well that these people will be arraigned .
when allah showed them to you in your dream as few ; and if he had shown them to you as many you would certainly have become weak-hearted and you would have disputed about the matter , but allah saved ; surely he is the knower of what is in the breasts .
whoever brings a virtue will receive better than it—and they will be safe from the horrors of that day .
allah said : get ye down , one of you an enemy unto anot her ; and for you on the earth there shall be a habitation and provision for a season .
we have sent down the quran in arabic , so that you may understand .
fretful when evil befalleth him
in fact we have sent the truth to them , but they are liars .
and appoint me a tongue of truthfulness among the others .
then one of thecame to him walking bashfully , said :  my father invites you that he may repay you for having watered our flock .  so , whencame to him and told him his story , he said :  have no fear . you have escaped from the wicked people . 
he said ,  here are my daughters , if you must act in this way . 
then it was said , ‘ o earth , swallow your water ! o sky , leave off ! ’ the waters receded ; the edict was carried out , and it settled onjudi . then it was said , ‘ away with the wrongdoing lot ! ’
and cross the sea quickly ; they are an army to be drowned . ”
in the gardens of bliss .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs as lies . they were a wicked people indeed , so we drowned them one and all .
so those who desire more than this – it is they who are the transgressors .
and with them will be maidenswho restrain their wide glances
and put your trust in the all-mighty , the all-merciful ,
say , “ who forbade god ’ s finery which he has produced for his servants , and the delights of livelihood ? ” say , “ they are for those who believe , in this present world , but exclusively theirs on the day of resurrection. ” we thus detail the revelations for people who know .
lo ! those who believe , then disbelieve and thenbelieve , then disbelieve , and then increase in disbelief , allah will never pardon them , nor will he guide them unto a way .
god cautions you never to return to the like of it , if you are believers .
by the even , and the odd ,
this is the creation of god . show me what those whom you consider equal to god have created . in fact , the unjust ones are in plain error .
indeed it is we who give life and bring death and we are the inheritors .
we granted him power in the land and endowed him with all kinds of resources .
a caravan happened to pass , and sent the water-carrier to bring water from the well . he let down his bucket .  what luck ,  said the man ;  here is a boy ;  and they hid him as an item of merchandise ; but what they did was known to god .
can you see any remnant of them now ?
and by oath of mount sinai ,
turned aside therefromis he who is turned aside .
in fact we strike the truth against the false , which shatters it , and it disappears . woe to you for what you attribute !
it is we who will inherit the earth and all who dwell upon it : they shall all return to us .
they said , “ stop him and his brother , and send gatherers to the cities . ”
so will it be , because allah makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night , and because allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and gives the lie to al-husna ;
he said , “ stop it – peace be upon you ; i shall seek forgiveness for you from my lord ; indeed he is very kind to me . ”
and when the word falls on them , we will bring out from the earth a beast that shall speak to them : 'indeed the people were not certain of our verses . '
ruin seize him , how did he hatch a scheme ?
and most of them do not believe in allah without ascribing partners to him .
so he left , fearful and vigilant . he said , “ my lord , deliver me from the wrongdoing people . ”
but for the righteous there is triumph .
'slink you into it , ' he shall say , 'and do not speak to me .
one of them said ,  do not kill joseph , but if you must do something , cast him into the bottom of a well ; some of the travellers will pick him up . 
is it the judgment of pagandom then that they are seeking ? yet who is fairer in judgment than god , for a people having sure faith ?
then they started blaming one another ,
they ask you as to what they should spend . say , ‘ let whatever wealth you spend be for the parents , relatives , orphans , the needy , and the traveller. ’ allah indeed knows whatever good you do .
so the magicians were brought together on a particular day at a set time
those who cry lies to the book and that wherewith we sent our messengers -- soon they will know !
 and verily , thisis my straight path , so follow it , and follow notpaths , for they will separate you away from his path . this he has ordained for you that you may become al-muttaqun . 
that allah may absolve them of the worst of what they did , and pay them their reward by the best of what they used to do .
what ! shall we treat those who have submittedlike those who have acted as criminals ?
he sends down the angels with the spiritby his command to those of his worshipers whom he chooses , 'warn , there is no god except me , therefore fear me '
when you have finished the rites and ceremonies , remember god as you do your fathers , in fact with a greater devotion . there are some who say :  give us , o lord , in the world ;  but they will forego their share in the life to come .
god sends down water from the sky , with which he revives the earth after its death . in this is a sign for people who listen .
she said :  how shall i have a son , seeing that no man has touched me , and i am not unchaste ? 
they replied ,  glory be to you . you alone are free from defect . we possess only that much knowledge which you have given us . indeed you alone are all-knowing and all-wise . 
of what thing did he create him ?
so , if they turn away , say to them :  god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he ; i depend on him alone , the lord of the glorious throne . 
recitewhat has been revealed to you of the book , and perform as-salat . verily , as-salatprevents from al-fahsha'and al-munkarand the rememberingofallahis greater indeedallah in prayers , etc. ] . and allah knows what you do .
if you ask them , ‘ who created the heavens and the earth ? ’ they will surely say , ‘ allah. ’ say , ‘ have you considered what you invoke besides allah ? should allah desire some distress for me , can they remove the distress visited by him ? or should he desire some mercy for me , can they withhold his mercy ? ’ say , ‘ allah is sufficient for me . in him let all the trusting put their trust . ’
because there came to him the blind man .
this is nothing but a habit of the ancients :
say ,  i do not know if what you are promised is near or if my lord will grant for it aperiod . 
who spread turmoil on earth , and do not reform . ”
and if one seeks a religion other than islam , it will never be accepted from him ; and he is among the losers in the hereafter .
never doubt that the essence of truth comes from your lord
who speaks better than one who invites human beings to god , acts righteously and says ,  i am a muslim  .
in order that he read it to them , even then they would not have believed in it .
thus we reward the doers of good .
a brief enjoyment , then their abode is hell . what a miserable resort .
we have made it a reminder and provision for the travelers ,
if one avenges himself after he has been wronged , there is no way of blaming him .
now we have made it easy by thy tongue that thou mayest bear good tidings thereby to the godfearing , and warn a people stubborn .
he said : 'indeed i have loved the love of good things better than the remembrance of my lord until the sun has vanished behind a veil .
but they say , “ we found our parents on a course , and we are guided in their footsteps . ”
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and when they entered before joseph , he took his father and mother into his arms and said : 'welcome to egypt , safe , if allah wills '
have they not pondered the word ? or has there come to them what came not to their forefathers of old ?
and when the earth is spread out
and if your lord willed , all those who are in the earth – everyone of them – would have accepted faith ; so will youforce the people until they become muslims ?
unless they repent thereafter and mend ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and do not utter falsehoods by letting your tongues declare :  this is lawful  and  that is unlawful ,  thus fabricating lies against allah . surely those who fabricate lies against allah will never prosper .
and when the children among you attain puberty , then let them ask leave even as those before them asked leave . in this wise allah expoundeth unto you his commandments ; and allah is knowing , wise .
'we used , indeed , to sit there instations , toa hearing ; but any who listen now will find a flaming fire watching him in ambush .
to whom i madesmooth and comfortable !
say : o people ! i am only a plain warner to you .
who forgives sins , who accepts repentance , whose punishment is severe , and whose bounty is universal . he is the only lord and to him all things proceed .
pay homage to god , and make none his compeer , and be good to your parents and relatives , the orphans and the needy and the neighbours who are your relatives , and the neighbours who are strangers , and the friend by your side , the traveller and your servants and subordinates . god does not surely love those who are arrogant and boastful ,
they are the inheritors .
can someone to whom we have made a gracious promise and who will see it fulfilled , be compared to someone we have allowed to enjoy a worldly life , awhile , and who will be brought upfor his accounting on the day of resurrection ?
and who were the hypocrites . when the hypocrites were asked to fight for the cause of god or to defend the city , they replied ,  had we known before that you would fight , we would certainly not have followed you .  at that time they were closer to disbelief than to faith . they speak words that do not come from their hearts . god knows well whatever they try to hide .
you shall surely ride stage after stage .
glory belongs to god all the time , in the evening and in the morning .
'why , it is my staff , ' said moses . ' i lean upon it , and with it i beat down leaves to feed my sheep ; other uses also i find in it .
noah called out to his lord , and said , ‘ my lord ! my son is indeed from my family . your promise is indeed true , and you are the fairest of all judges . ’
perish the hands of abu lahab , and perish he !
indeed they bar them from the way , while they suppose that they areguided .
allah has purchased from the believers their selves and possessions , and for them is paradise . they fight in the way of allah , slay , and are slain . that is a binding promise upon him in the torah , the gospel and the koran ; and who is there that more truthfully fulfills his covenant than allah ? therefore , rejoice in the bargain you have bargained with him . that is the mighty winning .
, consider , when your lord declared to thehis decision to raise a people above them who would make them suffer the worst kinds of torments until the day of judgment . certainly your lord 's retribution is swift . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then , when we decreeddeath , nothing showed them his death except a little worm of the earth , which keptgnawing away at his staff : so when he fell down , the jinns saw plainly that if they had known the unseen , they would not have tarried in the humiliating penalty .
verily those who give alms -- be they men or women , -- and give allah a beautiful loan shall be repaid after increasing it many times ; and theirs shall be a generous reward .
so it shall only be a single cry , when lo ! they shall see .
and if you turn awaythen no payment have i asked of you . my reward is only from allah , and i have been commanded to be of the muslims . 
their eyes will be humbled as they come out from their graves as if they were scattered locusts ,
on that day they will all share the torment .
whoever is guided—is guided for his own good . and whoever goes astray—goes astray to his detriment . no burdened soul carries the burdens of another , nor do we ever punish until we have sent a messenger .
and it was said : o earth ! swallow up thy water , and cease , o heaven ! and the water abated ; and fulfilled was the decree . and it rested upon the judi ; and it was said : away with the wrong-doing people !
until when we seize their affluent ones with punishment , at once they are cryingfor help .
the tribes of thamud and 'ad denied that disaster would strike them :
he is the lord of the heavens and of the earth and of all that is between the two . so worship him alone and be steadfast in his worship . do you know of anyone equal to him in his attributes ?
and we kept a sign remaining in it , for those who fear the painful punishment .
and they who , when reminded of the communications of their lord , do not fall down thereat deaf and blind .
but they called their companion who took hold of her and hamstrung her .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he extends provision for whom he wills and restricts . indeed he is , of all things , knowing .
he said , “ give me respite , until the day they are resurrected . ”
the revelation of the book in which there is no doubt , - from the lord of the worlds .
and allah has created you , then he causes you to die , and of you is he who is brought back to the worst part of life , so that after having knowledge he does not know anything ; surely allah is knowing , powerful .
so watch for the day when the sky will come down with a pall of smoke ,
they make their faith a pretext so that they may turnfrom the way of allah . verily evil is that which they are wont to do ,
and that allah may succour thee with a mighty succour .
we gave the book to the israelites , the commandments , and prophethood , granted them pure sustenance , and gave them preference above all people .
they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their families .
fight in the way of allah , and know that allah is hearer , knower .
for the hypocrites and the unbelievers , god has prepared hell wherein they will live forever . hell is their proper punishment . god has condemned them and they will suffer a permanent torment
and for those of your women who have no hope of menstruation , if you doubt , the appointed period is three months – and also for those who have not yet had menstruation ; and the appointed period for the pregnant women is up to the time they deliver their burden ; and whoever fears allah – allah will create ease for him in his affairs .
so that you may properly mount their backs , and may remember your lord ’ s favour when you have mounted them , and say , “ purity is to him , who has given this ride in our control , and we did not have the strength for it . ”
and when he turned his face towards madyan , he said : maybe my lord will guide me in the right path .
and give full measure when you measure , and weigh with accurate scales . that is fair , and the best determination .
and on the day when he shall call them and say : where are those whom you deemed to be my associates ?
by those who direct the affairs :
and those they invoke other than allah create nothing , and theyare created .
verily the transposingis an addition to unbelief : the unbelievers are led to wrong thereby : for they make it lawful one year , and forbidden another year , in order to adjust the number of months forbidden by allah and make such forbidden ones lawful . the evil of their course seems pleasing to them . but allah guideth not those who reject faith .
he shows his signs . how many of god 's signs will you then deny ?
indeed i have faith in your lord , so listen to me . ’
their worship of such things , in which there is no hope for any benefit , can only harm them . how terrible is such a guardian and companion !
but satan whispered to him . he said , “ o adam , shall i show you the tree of immortality , and a kingdom that never decays ? ”
 ask for forgiveness of your lord ,  i said .  surely , he is the forgiver .
: he hath preferred daughters to sons .
will you still skilfully hew houses out of the mountains ?
obeyed , trustworthy there .
or is it that they have access tothe realm beyond sense-perception which they are writing down ?
thenceforth were your hearts hardened : they became like a rock and even worse in hardness . for among rocks there are some from which rivers gush forth ; others there are which when split asunder send forth water ; and others which sink for fear of allah . and allah is not unmindful of what ye do .
he said : i have been given it only on account of knowledge i possess . knew he not that allah had destroyed already of the generations before him men who were mightier than him in strength and greater in respect of following ? the guilty are not questioned of their sins .
save those who repent and amend and hold fast to allah and make their religion pure for allah . those are with the believers . and allah will bestow on the believers an immense reward .
so when you are free , nominate .
he said , “ i am not about to prostrate myself before a human being , whom you created from clay , from molded mud . ”
indeed , those whom the angels take away while they are wronging themselves , they ask , ‘ what state were you in ? ’ they reply , ‘ we were oppressed in the land. ’ they say , ‘ was not allah ’ s earth vast enough so that you might migrate in it ? ’ the refuge of such shall be hell , and it is an evil destination .
but if they are in the right , they will come to him submissively .
your god is one god . but the hearts of those who believe not in the life to come are filled with denial , and they are puffed up with pride .
o people who believe ! seek help from patience and prayer ; indeed allah is with those who patiently endure .
this day we seal up their mouths , and their hands speak out to us and their feet bear witness as to what they used to earn .
hath there come unto thee the story of moses ?
and do not invoke with god any other god . there is no god but he . all things perish , except his presence . his is the judgment , and to him you will be returned .
so ignore those who turn away from our revelation and seek nothing but the life of this world .
but god would not punish them while you are amongst them . and god would not punish them as long as they seek forgiveness .
and if they had kept up the taurat and the injeel and that which was revealed to them from their lord , they would certainly have eaten from above them and from beneath their feet there is a party of them keeping to the moderate course , andmost of them , evil is that which they do
' o soul at peace ,
the way of those whom you have favoured , who did not incur your wrath , who are not astray .
do not flyand come back to what you were made to lead easy lives in and to your dwellings , haply you will be questioned .
he would not believe in allah , the most great ;
if thou couldst see when they are stationed before the fire , and they say , 'would that we might be returned , and then not cry lies to the signs of our lord , but that we might be among the believers ! '
they will say , ‘ our lord ! whoever has prepared this for us , double his punishment in the fire ! ’
announce to my creatures that i am indeed forgiving and kind ,
have you thought that if he denies and turns away ,
“ shall i seek a judge other than god , when he is the one who revealed to you the book , explained in detail ? ” those to whom we gave the book know that it is the truth revealed from your lord . so do not be of those who doubt .
shesaid : ' o council , look , an honorable letter has been dropped to me .
there is certainly a good exemplar for you in abraham and those who were with him , when they said to their own people , ‘ indeed we repudiate you and whatever you worship besides allah . we disown you , and enmity and hate have appeared between you and us for ever , unless you come to have faith in allah alone , ’ apart from abraham ’ s saying to his father , ‘ i will surely plead forgiveness for you , though i can not avail you anything against allah. ’ ‘ our lord ! in you do we put our trust , and to you do we turn penitently , and toward you is the destination .
we have indeed tested them the way we had tested the owners of the garden when they swore that they would reap its harvest the next morning .
and when the two hosts came in view of each other , moses ' companions said : 'we have been reached '
these are verses of the clear book .
if god touches you with adversity , none can remove it except he . and if he touches you with good—he is capable of everything .
he said :  so . your lord says ; it is easy for me . certainly i have created you before , when you had been nothing ! 
the excessive gatheringoccupied you
we wronged them not , but they were the zalimun .
then we sent forth , after him , messengers to their people , and they brought them the clear signs ; but they were not men to believe in that they had cried lies to before . so we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
perfected are the words of your lord in truth and justice , none can change his words . he is the hearing , the knowing .
it is the day when no one shall have the power to do anything for another , and all command shall be allah 's .
 this was he that would not believe in allah most high .
“ and ask your lord for forgiveness , and repent to him . he will provide you with good sustenance until a stated term , and will bestow his grace on every possessor of virtue . but if you turn away , then i fear for you the punishment of a grievous day . ”
so bear with patienceall that they say , and glorify the praises of your lord , before the rising of the sun and beforesetting .
after this , he spread out the earth ,
this he will award that the people of the book may know that they control naught of the grace of allah , and that the grace is in allah 's hand ; he vouchsafeth it unto whomsoever he wilt , and allah is owner of mighty grace .
then we sent musa and his brother haroun , with our communications and a clear authority ,
indeed it is a reminder for you and your people , and soon you will be questioned .
and he enjoyed , indeed , a near approach to us , and a beautiful place ofreturn .
and those who do not give false testimony , and when they pass near some indecency , they pass by it saving their honour .
and who does more wrong than the one who invents a lie against allah , while he is being invited to islam ? and allah guides not the people who are zalimunfolk .
and he turned away from them , and said : o my grief for yusuf ! and his eyes whitened with grief , while he was filled with suppressed sorrow .
it is not for the polytheists to maintain the mosques of allahwitnessing against themselves with disbelief.those , their deeds have become worthless , and in the fire they will abide eternally .
dressed in silk and brocade , facing one another .
o men , remember god 's blessing upon you ; is there any creator , apart from god , who provides for you out of heaven and earth ? there is no god but he : how then are you perverted ?
they swear by allah to youto please you , but allah , with his messenger , hath more right that they should please him if they are believers .
do you not consider those who dispute concerning the signs of allah - how are they averted ?
in fact , those who disbelieve are in denial .
o you who believe ! be patient and excel in patience and remain steadfast , and be careful ofallah , that you may be successful .
o people ! a parable is presented , so listen to it : those you invoke besides god will never create a fly , even if they banded together for that purpose . and if the fly steals anything from them , they can not recover it from it . weak are the pursuer and the pursued .
o people who believe ! remember allah profusely .
in this wise allah sealeth the hearts of those who believe not .
stand up to pray for much of the night .
regarding them from their cushioned seats .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
to an orphan , having relationship ,
believers , submit yourselves to the will of god as a whole . do not follow the footsteps of satan ; he is your sworn enemy .
o people who believe ! do not follow the footsteps of the devil ; and whoever follows the footsteps of the devil – so he will only bid the indecent and the evil ; and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , none of you would ever become pure – but allah purifies whomever he wills ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
andapostles we have mentioned to you before and apostles we have not mentioned to you ; and to musa , allah addressed his word , speaking :
we made their fate an example to their own generation and to those who followed them and a lesson to those who fear god .
it is the same ; whether one of you conceals his speech , or declares it ; whether he goes into hiding by night , or goes out by day .
and the trumpet will be sounded , whereupon everyone in the heavens and the earth will be stunned , except whomever god wills . then it will be sounded another time , whereupon they will rise up , looking on .
for him only is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; he gives life and causes death ; and he is able to do all things .
'taste your trial ! this is that you were seeking to hasten . '
reclining on couches , reviewing .
some of them are descendants of the others , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and wherein is beauty for you , when ye bring them home , and when ye take them out to pasture .
that no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another-
saying : restore to me the bondmen of allah , verily i am unto you an apostle trusted .
woe to you !
on the day , youshall see the faithful , both men and women , with their light streaming out before them and on their right hands ,  glad tidings for you today ! you shall enter gardens with rivers flowing through them wherein you shall forever dwell . that is the supreme triumph . 
and in the morning it was as if picked .
does it not suffice them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? there is indeed in that a mercy and admonition for a people who have faith .
we also gave guidance to zacharias , john , jesus , and elias , who were all pious people ,
the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said :  if you follow shu'aib , be sure then you will be the losers ! 
and unto midian we sent shu'eyb , their brother . he said : o my people ! serve allah , and look forward to the last day , and do not evil , making mischief , in the earth .
and what have you understood , what the one that abases is !
closed around them
what ! do they not consider how allah originates the creation , then reproduces it ? surely that is easy to allah .
has taught the qur ’ an to his beloved prophet .
lut said :  these are my guests : disgrace me not :
had the unjust possessed double the amount of the wealth of the whole earth , they would certainly have liked to offer it on the day of resurrection as redemption from the torment of our scourge when god would make public what they had never expected .
but man would fain deny what is before him .
believers , be patient , and race in patience , be steadfast , fear allah , in order that you will be victorious .
you will not be blamedif you divorce women when you have not yet consummated the marriage or fixed a dower money upon them , but make fair provision for them , the affluent according to his means and the straitened according to his means ; this is binding on righteous men .
replied :  knowledge of that is with my lordin the book . my lord neither errs nor forgets . 
and that you worship me ? surely , that is the straight path .
and he himself is a witness to that ,
he hideth himself from the folk because of the evil of that whereof he hath had tidings , : shall he keep it in contempt , or bury it beneath the dust . verily evil is their judgment .
if you obey the majority of those who live on earth , they will lead you away from allah 's path . they only follow idle fancies , indulging in conjecture .
the only proper recompense for those who fight against god and his messenger and try to spread evil in the land is to be killed , crucified , or either to have one of their hands and feet cut from the opposite side or to be sent into exile . these are to disgrace them in this life and they will suffer a great torment in the life hereafter .
if any of you die and leave widows , make a bequest for them of a year 's maintenance without causing them to leave their homes ; but if they leave of their own accord , you will not be blamed for what they may reasonably choose to do with themselves . god is almighty and wise .
o ye mankind ! fear your lord ; who created you of a single soul and he created the reef the spouse thereof , and of the twain he spread abroad men manifold and women . and fear allah by whom ye importune one anot her , and the wombs . verily allah is ever over you a watcher .
 shall i takegods besides him ? ifmost gracious should intend some adversity for me , of no use whatever will be their intercession for me , nor can they deliver me .
o ye who believe ! let not a folk deride a folk who may be better than they , not let womenwomen who may be better than they are ; neither defame one another , nor insult one another by nicknames . bad is the name of lewdness after faith . and whoso turneth not in repentance , such are evil-doers .
nay , but ye will come to know !
then their return will be to the blaze .
the shade thereof is close upon them and the clustered fruits thereof bow down .
in boiling water ; then in the fire they will be filled .
except him who comes before allah with a pure heart ;
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she lies and he tells the truth . ’
andhouriswith wide , lovely eyes ,
do they not know that it is god who accepts the repentance of his servants and receives the welfare funds and that it is god who is all-forgiving and all-merciful ?
or are they planning a conspiracy ? the conspiracy will befall the disbelievers .
and the people of noah before that ; indeed they were more unjust and rebellious ;
wherein there will be neither headache nor will it cause them stupefaction ,
so when he had separated himself from them and from what they worshipped besides god , we bestowed on him isaac and jacob , and we made each of them a prophet .
but those among them who repent and become righteously striving believers will be admitted to the gardens without experiencing any injustice .
verily they are plotting a plot .
and marks and sign-posts ; and by the starsguide themselves .
and we did not wrong them , but it was they who were the wrongdoers .
that we might make it unto you an admonition , and thot it might be retained by the retaining ears .
by thewho tear outwith violence ;
thus they become ungrateful for what we have given them , so that they may enjoy ; but they shall soon know .
on the day , the shiverer shivers
he said , “ yes , and you will then become close to me . ”
behold ! ye are those who are called to expend in the way of allah , then there are of you some who are niggardly . and whosoever is niggardly is niggardly only to himself . and allah is self-sufficient , and ye are the needy . and if ye turn away , he will substitute for you another people , and then they will not be the likes of you .
many of the people of the book wish they might restore you as unbelievers , after you have believed , in the jealousy of their souls , after the truth has become clear to them ; yet do you pardon and be forgiving , till god brings his command ; truly god is powerful over everything .
but their belief when they saw our might did not profit them -- the wont of god , as in the past , touching his servants ; then the unbelievers shall be lost .
he disposeth every affair from the heaven unto the earth ; thereafter it shall ascend unto him in a day the measure whereof is one thousand years of that which ye compute .
satan makes promises to them and fills them with vain hopes , but whatever he promises them is merely delusion .
then they found one of our votaries , whom we had blessed and given knowledge from us .
do ye then feel secure that he will not cause you to be swallowed up beneath the earth when ye are on land , or that he will not send against you a violent tornadoso that ye shall find no one to carry out your affairs for you ?
whenever an assembly of his nation passed by him as he was building the ark , they mocked him . whereupon he said : 'if you mock us , we shall indeedmock you , just as you mock .
then did he turn to their gods and said ,  will ye not eat ? ...
that is how for every prophet we appointed as enemy the devils from among humans and jinn , who inspire each other with flashy words , deceptively . had your lord wished , they would not have done it . so leave them with what they fabricate ,
they say , ‘ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ’
and do not say , as to what your tongues falsely describe , 'this is lawful ; and this is forbidden , so that you may forge against god falsehood ; surely those who forge against god falsehood shall not prosper .
god said , “ i will send it down to you . but whoever among you disbelieves thereafter , i will punish him with a punishment the like of which i never punish any other being . ”
then whoever wills will remember it .
and he is oft-forgiving , full of love ,
give to your relatives their due , and also to the needy and the wayfarer . yet do not spend extravagantly ;
if you could see when they are gripped by terror without any escape , and are seized from close at hand
indeed , they are in doubt about the encounter with their lord ! indeed , he embraces all things !
so when they exceeded the limits of what they were prohibited , we said to them :  be you monkeys , despised and rejected .  .
pleased with their endeavour ,
and the fellows of the fire will cry unto the fellows of the garden : pour out on us water or aught wherewith allah hath provided you . they will say verily allah hath forbidden it unto infidels .
o prophet ! say unto the captives who are in your hands : if allah knoweth any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which hath been taken away from you , and shall forgive you ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea . consider the fate of the wrongdoers .
say : the death from which you flee , that will surely overtake you , then you shall be sent back to the knower of the unseen and the seen , and he will inform you of that which you did .
but as for the faithless , ‘ were not my signs recited to you ? but you were disdainful , and you were a guilty lot .
you are only a warner for those who are afraid it .
so he threw it—thereupon it became a moving serpent .
do you call on baal and abandon the best of creators ,
and the forerunners , the forerunners .
for we indeed tested those who went before them ? allah will most certainly ascertain those who spoke the truth and those who lied .
should i inform you on whom the devils descend ?
he said : ye shall sow seven years as is your went ; and that which ye reap leave in its ears , except a little whereof ye may eat .
and whenever they passed by them , used to wink one to another ;
and do not makeallah an excuse against being righteous and fearing allah and making peace among people . and allah is hearing and knowing .
his master 's wife then tried to seduce him . she locked the doors and said to him ,  come on .  he said ,  i seek refuge in god who has given me a good place of shelter . the unjust will certainly have no happiness . 
in the hands of envoys ,
that you may not be inordinate in respect of the measure .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and believers on the day when the account is cast .
yet they assign to some of his slaves a share with him . verily , man is indeed a manifest ingrate !
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give to drink thereof many of the cattle and men that we had created .
the sabbath was only appointed for those who differed over it . and indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that over which they used to differ .
and draw not near to the property of the orphan except in a goodly way till he attains his maturity and fulfill the promise ; surelypromise shall be questioned about .
see how they attribute their own lying inventions to god . this is in itself a flagrant sin !
immaculate is he , and greatly exalted above what they say ! ’
then split the earth in clefts
say to them :  act . god will see your conduct , and so will his apostle and the faithful ; for you will in the end go back to him , who knows the unknown and the known , who will tell you of what you were doing . 
therein descend the angels and the ruh ] by allah 's permission with all decrees ,
that , is for what your hands have forwarded . and allah is never unjust to his worshipers .
they will not hear even its faint sound and they will remainin what their souls desire .
say , ,  ask help from those whom you worship besides god . they do not possess an atom 's weight in the heavens and the earth , have no share therein , nor will any of their idols be able to support them . 
if anyone withdraws himself from remembrance ofmost gracious , we appoint for him an evil one , to be an intimate companion to him .
o , you , wrapped in your cloak ,
those who , were we to bestow authority on them in the land , will establish prayers , render zakah , enjoin good , and forbid evil . the end of all matters rests with allah .
god said ,  satan , what prevented you from prostrating yourself to what i created with my own hands ? were you overcome by arrogance , or are you of those who thinkof themselves as exalted ? 
verily it is we who give life and death ; and to us is the final goal-
they said , ‘ we will never prefer you to the clear proofs which have come to us , and to him who originated us . decide whatever you want to decide . you can only decide about the life of this world .
we only feed you for allah 's sake ; we desire from you neither reward nor thanks :
fie on you , and on what you worship instead of god . do you not understand ? ”
o prophet , when youdivorce women , divorce them fortheir waiting period and keep count of the waiting period , and fear allah , your lord . do not turn them out of theirhouses , nor should theyleaveunless they are committing a clear immorality . and those are the limitsallah . and whoever transgresses the limits of allah has certainly wronged himself . you know not ; perhaps allah will bring about after that amatter .
as though they were rubies and corals .
“ to throw upon them stones of baked clay . ”
and who say : our lord ! vouchsafe us comfort of our wives and of our offspring , and make us patterns forthose who ward off .
or , in a day of famine , the feeding of
so we returned him to his mother in order to soothe her eyes and not grieve , and to know that allah ’ s promise is true – but most people do not know .
and they say , 'none shall enter paradise except that they be jews or christians . ' such are their fancies . say : 'produce your proof , if you speak truly . '
and the morning when it brightens ,
except him who shall roast in hell .
and we sent saleh to the tribe of thamud , from their own community ; he said , “ o my people ! worship allah – you do not have any god except him ; indeed a clear proof has come to you from your lord ; this is allah ’ s she-camel – a sign for you – so leave her free to feed in allah ’ s earth , and do not touch her with evil intentions for a painful punishment will seize you . ”
“ and you dwelt in the houses of those who had wronged themselves and it became very clear to you how we had dealt with them , and we illustrated several examples for you . ”
he who has entrusted you with the responsibility of the quran , will surely lead you to a successful end . say ,  my lord knows best who is rightly guided and who is in gross error . 
the believers , both men and women , are friends to each other ; they enjoin what is good and forbid evil , they attend to their prayers and pay the alms and obey god and his messenger . on these god will have mercy , for god is almighty and wise .
is not allah sufficient for his slave ? and they threaten you with others beside him ! and whomever allah sends astray – there is no guide for him .
eventually the magicians were impelled to fall down prostrate and said :  we believe in the lord of moses and aaron . 
whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves . then will they make full submission : we used not to do any wrong . nay ! surely allah is knower of what ye used to do .
till , when they came to the valley of the ants , one of the ants said :  o ants ! enter your dwellings , lest sulaimanand his hosts crush you , while they perceive not . 
blessed is he in whose hand is the sovereignty , and who has power over everything .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening .
what ! do you then feel secure that he will not cause a tract of land to engulf you or send on you a tornado ? then you shall not find a protector for yourselves .
so fear allah and obey me .
your lord is all-forgiving , full of mercy . had he wished to take them to task for their doings , he would have hastened in sending his scourge upon them . but he has set for them a time-limit which they can not evade .
the righteous shall indeed be blissful ,
those who fear their lord shall have gardens through which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever : and a goodly welcome from their lord . god 's recompense is best for the virtuous .
and so that those to whom knowledge has been given will know that this is the truth from your lord and so believe in it and that their hearts will be humble to him . indeed , allah will surely guide those who believe to a straight path .
and he drove down those of the followers of the book who backed them from their fortresses and he cast awe into their hearts ; some you killed and you took captive another part .
who establish prayer and give zakah , and of the hereafter they are certain .
thereupon allah seized him for the chastisement of the world to come as well as of the present .
into the boiling water and then are thrown into the fire ,
the recompense of those who make war against allah and his messenger and spread corruption in the land is that they are to be killed or crucified , or have their hand and a foot cut off on opposite sides , or be expelled from the land . for them is shame in this world and a great punishment in the everlasting life ;
had this not been decreed by god in advance , you would have suffered a grievous punishment for what you took .
who fear their unseen lord and are anxious about the day of judgment .
it is he who created all living things in pairs and gave you ships to sail in and beasts to ride upon
he coineth for you a similitude of yourselves . have ye , from among those whom your right hands possess , partners in the wealth we have bestowed upon you , equal with you in respect thereof , so that ye fear them as ye fear each other ? thus we display the revelations for people who have sense .
and rise from sleep during the night as well- this is an additional prayer for you . possibly your lord will raise you to an honoured position .
god will certainly reward the righteously striving believers . these are the ones who will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance .
 o my father ! verily ! there has come to me of knowledge that which came not unto you . so follow me . i will guide you to a straight path .
we raisedgenerations and prolonged their lives . you did not live with the people of midian , nor recited to them our revelations ; but we kept on sending messengers .
and indeed , for you in livestock is a lesson . we give you drink from that which is in their bellies , and for you in them are numerous benefits , and from them you eat .
indeed guiding is upon us .
 but fear allah and obey me ;
and said , “ this is nothing but magic from the past .
most surely we will support our messengers and those who believe , in this life , and on the day the witnesses arise .
then will be raised up on the day of resurrection .
a group of his people who disbelieved him and had called the day of judgment a lie and whom we had made prosperous in this life , said ,  he is a mere mortal like you . he eats and drinks as you do .
he answered :  rather it was this supreme one who has done it . so ask them , if they can speak . 
in fact , it is him you will call upon ; and if he wills , he will remove what you called him for , and you will forget what you idolized .
do they not consider the qur'an ? had it been from other than allah , they would surely have found therein much discrepancy .
have younot observed the hypocrites who say to their friends among the people of the scripture who disbelieve :  if you are expelled , weindeed will go out with you , and we shall never obey any one against you , and if you are attacked , we shall indeed help you .  but allah is witness , that they verily , are liars .
and when they are admonished , they receive not admcnition .
verily upon us is the collecting thereof and the reciting thereof .
what will allah do with your torment , if ye return thanks and believe ? and allah is ever appreciative , knowing .
god has sent down the best of narrations : a scripture consistent and paired . the skins of those who reverence their lord shiver from it , then their skins and their hearts soften up to the remembrance of god . such is god ’ s guidance ; he guides with it whomever he wills . but whomever god leaves astray , for him there is no guide .
but the hereafter is better and more enduring .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his elite with our signs , but they acted arrogantly and they were a guilty lot .
taste the scalding water , pus , and other putrid things  .
and they said , “ why has no sign been sent down upon him from his lord ? ” say , “ indeed allah is able to send down a sign ” , but most of them are totally ignorant .
when there comes to them some matter touchingsafety or fear , they make it known , if only they had referred it to the messenger or to those charged with authority among them , the proper investigators would have understood it from them . had it not been for the grace and mercy of allah upon you , you would have followed shaitan , save a few of you .
or have we revealed unto them any warrant which speaketh of that which they associate with him ?
for those who defy their lord is the punishment of hell , and it is an evil destination .
that is god ’ s grace , which he grants to whomever he wills . god is possessor of limitless grace .
they are like their immediate predecessors , they tasted the evil result of their conduct , andfor them a painful torment ;
that is because allah is the truth , and falsehood is all that they call upon , other than him . allah is the most high , the most great .
so he abandoned themand said , ‘ o my people ! certainly , i communicated to you the messages of my lord , and i was your well-wisher . so how should i grieve for a faithless lot ? ’
truly it is the revelation of the lord of all being ,
they said , 'thou art merely one of those that are bewitched ;
therefore when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we saved those who had tried to prevent the doing of evil . and we meted out a severe punishment to the transgressors because they were rebellious .
there is no god but he : he gives life and causes death . he is your lord and the lord of your forefathers of yore .
this quran relates to the children of israel most of what they differ about .
his affair , when he intendeth a thing , is only that he saith unto it : be , and it becometh .
hearing of their sly talk the chief 's wife sent for those ladies , and arranged for them a banquet , and got ready couches , and gave each guest a knife . then , while they were cutting and eating the fruit , she signalled joseph :  come out to them .  when the ladies saw him they were so struck with admiration that they cut their hands , exclaiming :  allah preserve us . this is no mortal human . this is nothing but a noble angel ! 
those who , after this , persist in making up lies and attributing them to god are transgressors . 
and as for those of you who die and leave wives behind , they shall keep them selves in waiting for four months and ten days . then when they have attained their period , no blame there is on you for that which they do with them selves reputably . and of that which ye work allah is aware .
o you who believe , do not take my enemies and your enemies as friends . you show kindness to them , but they reject the true way that has come to you . they expelled the prophet and you , for you believe in god your lord . if you have come out to struggle in my cause having sought my acceptance , friendly with them in secret . i know what you hide and what you disclose . whoever of you does this will have gone astray from the right path .
but i too plan against them .
so remember the name of your lord , and devote yourself to him wholeheartedly .
both for the living and the dead ,
nay , but lo ! his lord is ever looking on him !
is one who is devoutly obedient during periods of the night , prostrating and standing , fearing the hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his lord , ? say ,  are those who know equal to those who do not know ?  only they will rememberpeople of understanding .
and indeed now we have conveyed the word , in order that they may remember .
then tell methe human semen that you emit .
so be patient , for god 's promise is true : whether we show you part of what we have promised them in this life , or cause you to die first , it is to us that they will be recalled .
andwhen we took your covenant and we raised above you the mount :  hold fast to that which we have given you , and remember that which is therein so that you may become al-muttaqun .
have they not travelled through the land to see how terrible was the end of the people who lived before them . the people who lived before them were stronger than them in might , in tilling , and in developing the earth . our messengers came to them with clear miracles . god did not do an injustice to them but they wronged themselves .
say , ‘ my lord has enjoined justice , ’ and ‘ set your heartat every occasion of prayer , and invoke him , putting your exclusive faith in him . even as he brought you forth in the beginning , so will you return . ’
your lord has said , ‘ call me , and i will hear you ! ’ indeed those who are disdainful of my worship will enter hell in utter humiliation .
and whether we show you some of what we promise them , , or we take you in death , to us is their return ; then , , allah is a witness concerning what they are doing
that they verily would be helped ,
the trumpet shall be blown and whoever is in heaven and whoever is on earth will fall down in a swoon , except those who shall be spared by god . then the trumpet will be blown again and they shall rise and gaze around them .
it was he who created you from a single soul , and from it made its mate so that he may find comfort in her . once he has covered her , she conceives and goes about with a light burden . when it grows heavy , they both call to god , their lord ,  if you bestow on us a healthy child , we will surely be grateful , 
andthose who believe and do good , we will most certainly do away with their evil deeds and we will most certainly reward them the best of what they did .
and by the night as it conceals it ;
we have thus caused denial of truth to enter into the hearts of the sinners :
and said : shall we forsake our gods for a mad poet ?
lo ! it throweth up sparks like the castles ,
for the disbelievers—not easy .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me . i will show you the way of right conduct .
we made the son of mary and his mother a sign and gave them shelter on a peaceful hillside watered by a fresh spring .
no ! they do not fear the hereafter --
you can not temptaway from him
god never leads men astray after guiding them , until he makes quite clear to them what they should avoid , for god indeed knows each and everything .
say :  o men , if you have doubt about my faith , theni do not worship those you worship apart from god , but i worship god who makes you die ; and i am commanded to be a believer ,
allah ! there is no god but he , the lord of the magnificent throne .
allowed unto you , on the night of fasts , is consorting with your women . they are a garment unto you , and ye are a garment unto them . allah knoweth that ye have been defrauding yourselves , so he hath relented toward you and pardoned you . wherefore now copulate with them , and seek that which allah hath prescribed for you , and eat and drink , until the white thread becometh manifest unto you from the black thread of the dawn ; thereafter complete the fast till night fall . and copulate not with them while ye are retreating in the mosques . these are the bounds of allah , wherefore approach them not . thus allah expoundeth all his signs unto mankind that haply they may fear him .
and whenever they see a sign , they mock at it .
he said : nay ! your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who brought them into existence , and i am of those who bear witness to this :
those who committed excesses in the lands .
do they not reflect within themselves ? god did not create the heavens and the earth , and what is between them , except with reason , and for a specific duration . but most people , regarding meeting their lord , are disbelievers .
do the disbelievers assume that they will be able to choose my bondmen as supporters other than me ? indeed we have prepared hell to welcome the disbelievers .
therefore , we have revealed the qur'an in your tongue and made it easy to understand that you may give glad tidings to the god-fearing and warn a contentious people .
or giving food in a day of hunger ,
and commemorate our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob , possessors of power and vision .
say , “ i stand on clear evidence from my lord , and you have rejected him . i do not possess what you seek me to hasten ; the decision belongs solely to god . he states the truth , and he is the best of judges . ”
when they came to you they said : 'we are believers ' indeed , they have entered with disbelief , and so they have departed with it ; allah knows best what they conceal .
according to the book of god , from the day he created the heavens and the earth , the number of months are twelve , four of which are sacred.of the religion . do not commit injustice against your souls during the sacred months but fight all the pagans just as they fight against all of you . know that god is with the pious ones .
and we spread out the earth , and placed mountains as anchors in it , and in it grew all things by a proper measure .
pharaoh said ,  let me kill moses , let him call upon his lord , i fear that he may cause you to change your religion , or that he may cause disorder in the land . 
thus he made them like stubble cropped by cattle ?
so eat of the sustenance which allah has provided for you , lawful and good ; and be grateful for the favours of allah , if it is he whom ye serve .
they could not stand up again , nor could they defend themselves .
and when moosa presented himself upon our promise , and his lord spoke to him , he said , “ my lord ! show me your self , so that i may see you ” ; he said , “ you will never be able to see me , but look towards the mountain – if it stays in its place , then you shall soon see me ” ; so when his lord directed his light on the mountain , he blew it into bits and moosa fell down unconscious ; then upon regaining consciousness he said , “ purity is to you ! i incline towards you , and i am the first muslim . ”
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book that is recited to them ? surely , in this there is a mercy and a reminder to a nation who believe .
ta . sin . mim .
when you ask them to follow what god has revealed , they say :  no . we shall follow what we found our ancestors following ,  even though the devil were calling them to the torment of hell !
reclining on furnishings lined with brocade , and the fruits of the two gardens are near at hand .
on such men are the blessings of god and his mercy , for they are indeed on the right path .
most surely there is a party amongst those who distort the book with their tongue that you may consider it to beof the book , and they say , it is from allah , while it is not from allah , and they tell a lie against allah whilst they know .
then pour over his head the chastisement of boiling water ! '
to pharaoh , haman , and korah . but they said : ' a sorcerer , a liar '
those who were left behind will say , when ye set forth to capture booty : let us go with you . they fain would change the verdict of allah . say : ye shall not go with us . thus hath allah said beforehand . then they will say : ye are envious of us . nay , but they understand not , save a little .
we only destroyed the inhabitants of certain towns when they had committed injustice and did not repent before our deadline .
the heavens and the earth , certainly , belong to god . he surely knows all about you in this life . on the day when you return to him , he will tell you all about whatever you have done . god has the knowledge of all things .
'this is our gift , give or withhold without reckoning '
who do not invoke any god but allah nor kill a soul , which allah has forbidden , unjustly , nor commit adultery . -he who does this shall be punished for his sin ,
say : 'people of the book , let us come to a common word between us and you that we will worship none except allah , that we will associate none with him , and that none of us take others for lords besides allah ' if they turn away , say : 'bear witness that we are muslims '
do those who do evil imagine that they will escape us ? how ill they judge !
thereupon zachariah supplicated to his lord , saying : 'lord , give me from you a good offspring . you hear all prayers '
indeed it is he who initiates and redoes .
his father said ,  my son , do not tell your dream to your brothers lest they plot against you ; satan is the sworn enemy of man .
those will have a share of what they have earned , and allah is swift in account .
you have no say in the matter if he pardon them or punish them , for they are unjust .
deem then those who disbelieve that they may take my bondmen , instead of me , as patrons ! verily we have gotten ready the hell for the infidels as an entertainment .
when he came close to it , a voice called out ,  moses ,
we narrate to you from the history of moses and pharaoh in all verity , for those who believe .
verily those who brought forward the calumny were a small band among deem it not an evil for you ; nay , it was good for you . unto every one of them shall be that which he hath earned of the sin , and he among them who undertook the bulk of it -- -for him shall be a torment mighty .
by the midmorning ,
said : if thou comest with a token , then produce it , if thou art of those who speak the truth .
, tell them ,  clear proofs have certainly come to you from your lord . whoever tries to understand it will gain much but those who ignore it will only harm themselves . i am notto watch over you  .
one that might be my heir and the heir of the house of jacob ; and make him , lord , one that will be pleasing to you .
and remember ye said :  o moses ! we can not endure one kind of food ; so beseech thy lord for us to produce for us of what the earth groweth , -its pot-herbs , and cucumbers , its garlic , lentils , and onions .  he said :  will ye exchange the better for the worse ? go ye down to any town , and ye shall find what ye want !  they were covered with humiliation and misery ; they drew on themselves the wrath of allah . this because they went on rejecting the signs of allah and slaying his messengers without just cause . this because they rebelled and went on transgressing .
those who leave the muslims to befriend the disbelievers ; do they seek honour from them ? thenundoubtedly all honour is for allah .
do they not know that allah knows what they keep secret and what they make known ?
or lest you say , 'our fathers were idolaters aforetime , and we were seed after them . what , wilt thou then destroy us for the deeds of the vain-doers ? '
—and to the three who were left behind . when the earth became narrow for them withits expanse , and their own souls weighed heavily on them , and they knew that there was no refuge from allah except in him , then he turned clemently toward them so that they might be penitent . indeed allah is the all-clement , the all-merciful .
and when you call to prayer , take it in mockery and as a sport ; that is because they are a people who have no understanding .
 is it true , we are not going to die
it is not for the polytheists to attend god ’ s places of worship while professing their disbelief . these—their works are in vain , and in the fire they will abide .
when the sky is unveiled ,
nor be like those who say ,  we hear ,  but listen not :
and make my mission easy .
and if they argue with you , say ;  allah knows best of what you do .
indeed your god is allah . there is no god except him . he embraces all things inknowledge . ’
in them are maidens restraining their glances , untouched before by any man or jinn .
and ibrahim said , “ you have chosen only idols instead of allah , with whom your friendship is only in the life of this world ; then on the day of resurrection you will deny and curse each other ; and the destination for all of you is hell , and you do not have supporters . ”
surely those who act in opposition to allah and his apostle shall be laid down prostrate as those before them were laid down prostrate ; and indeed we have revealed clear communications , and the unbelievers shall have an abasing chastisement .
every soul will know the taste of death . you will get your recompense in full on the day of resurrection ; and he who is spared the fire and finds his way to paradise will meet his desire . as for the life of this world , it is nothing but a merchandise of vanity .
do they indeed ascribe to him as partners things that can create nothing , but are themselves created ?
say ,  it is he who brought you into being , and made ears and eyes and hearts for you , yet you are seldom grateful . 
there is no blame on the weak , nor on the sick , nor on those who have nothing to give , provided they are true to god and his messenger . in no way can the righteous be blamed . god is forgiving and merciful .
that is because they believed and then disbelieved , so their hearts were sealed . hence , they do not understand .
we shall confront you with a sorcery like your own . so appoint a day when both of us might meet face to face in an open space ; an appointment which neither we nor you shall fail to keep . 
and there is not a thing but with us are its treasuries , and we do not send it down except in a known measure .
then they both ate of it , so their evil inclinations became manifest to them , and they both began to cover themselves with leaves of the garden , and adam disobeyed his lord , so his life became evil .
and when they see you , they do not take you for aught but a mockery : is this he whom allah has raised to be an apostle ?
norattach to those who came to you to be provided with mounts , and when you said ,  i can find no mounts for you ,  they went back , and tears welled up in their eyes with sadness , since they could not find any way to contribute .
o ye who believe ! when ye marry believing women and then divorce them before ye have touched them , then there is no waiting-period from you incumbent on them that ye should count . so make provision for them and release them with a seemly release .
then , as for those who believed and did good works , their lord will bring them in unto his mercy . that is the evident triumph .
their place will be on the right hand .
and our order is but one word like the flashing of an eye .
and when they see theethey treat thee only as a jest : is this he whom allah sendeth as a messenger ?
allah will indeed defend those who have faith . indeed allah does not like any ingrate traitor .
that is the good news god gives to his servants who believe and do good deeds . say , “ i ask of you no wage for it , except affection among the near of kin. ” whoever does a good deed , we will increase its goodness for him . god is forgiving and appreciative .
and the dawn when it is white ,
and it has already come down to you in the book that when you hear the verses of allah , they are deniedand ridiculed ; so do not sit with them until they enter into another conversation . indeed , you would then be like them . indeed allah will gather the hypocrites and disbelievers in hell all together -
but those who do ill-deeds and afterward repent and believe - lo ! for them , afterward , allah is forgiving , merciful .
only those are believers who believe in allah and his apostle , and when they are with him on a momentous affair they go not away until they have asked his permission ; surely they who ask your permission are they who believe in allah and his apostle ; so when they ask your permission for some affair of theirs , give permission to whom you please of them and ask forgiveness for them from allah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
except those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement , then they have not failed you in anything and have not backed up any one against you , so fulfill their agreement to the end of their term ; surely allah loves those who are careful .
if they disobey you , tell them ,  i condemn your disobedient deeds  .
from the evil of that which he created
but not those who themselves believe and work righteous works , and enjoin upon each other the truth , and enjoin upon each other endurance .
he searched their bags before his brother 's and then took out the goblet from his brother 's bag . as such we directed joseph . by the king 's law he had no right to seize his brother unless allah willed otherwise . we raise whom we will in rank ; over every knowledgeable person is one who knows .
he is allah—there is no god except him—the sovereign , the all-holy , the all-benign , the securer , the all-conserver , the all-mighty , the all-compeller , and the all-magnanimous . clear is allah of any partners that they may ascribe !
god has favored some of you over others in livelihood . those who are favored would not give their properties to their servants , to the extent of making them partners in it . will they then renounce god ’ s blessings ?
say : 'it is revealed unto me only that your god is one god ; do you then surrender ? '
and whosoever believeth not in allah and his apostle then verily we have gotten ready for the infidels a blaze .
thus has the word of your lord been justified against those who disbelieved , that they will be the dwellers of the fire .
is the time not come that the hearts of the believers should be humbled to allah 's remembrance and to the truth that he has revealed , and that they should not be like those who were vouchsafed the book and then a long time elapsed so that their hearts were hardened ? a great many of them are now evil-doers .
but they called him a liar , so the punishment of the day of covering overtook them ; surely it was the punishment of a grievous day .
behold , all who pledge their allegiance to you indeed pledge their allegiance to god : the hand of god is over their hands . hence , he who breaks his oath , breaks it only to his own loss . whereas he who remains true to what he has pledged to god , shall have a great reward bestowed upon him by god .
 verily , your lord is full of grace for mankind , yet most of them do not give thanks . 
and for those who accuse their wives , but have no witnesses except themselves , let the testimony of one of them be four testimoniesby allah that he is one of those who speak the truth .
and they demand of thee to hasten the chastisement ! but for a stated term the chastisement would have come upon them ; but it shall come upon them suddenly , when they are not aware .
abraham asked ,  are you giving me the glad news of a son in my old age ? what reason can you give for such glad news ? 
be patient unto your lord .
inscribed in writs honoured , 
said :  even though i have brought to you something convincing ? 
and whoever seeks a religion other than islam , it will never be accepted of him , and in the hereafter he will be one of the losers .
said : we shall see whether thou speakest truth or whether thou art of the liars .
and those who believeand do righteous good deeds , they are dwellers of paradise , they will dwell therein forever .
o believers , slay not the game while you are in pilgrim sanctity ; whosoever of you slays it wilfully , there shall be recompense -- the like of what he has slain , in flocks as shall be judged by two men of equity among you , an offering to reach the kaaba ; or expiation -- food for poor persons or the equivalent of that in fasting , so that he may taste the mischief of his action . god has pardoned what is past ; but whoever offends again , god will take vengeance on him , god is all-mighty , vengeful .
this , forasmuch as ye made the revelations of allah a jest , and the life of the world beguiled you . therefor this day they come not forth from thence , nor can they make amends .
‘ moses , what is that in your right hand ? ’
therefore called her from below her , “ do not grieve – your lord has made a river flow below you . ”
floating under our eyes , a reward for him who had been rejected !
said one who had knowledge of the book :  i will bring it to thee within the twinkling of an eye !  then whensaw it placed firmly before him , he said :  this is by the grace of my lord ! - to test me whether i am grateful or ungrateful ! and if any is grateful , truly his gratitude isfor his own soul ; but if any is ungrateful , truly my lord is free of all needs , supreme in honour ! 
and when we delivered you from firon 's people who subjected you to severe torment , killing your sons and sparing your women , and in this there was a great trial from your lord .
but he said ,  how can you worship things you carve with your own hands ,
thus thy lord will prefer thee and will teach thee the interpretation of events , and will perfect his grace upon thee and upon the family of jacob as he perfected it upon thy forefathers , abraham and isaac . lo ! thy lord is knower , wise .
if we defer their punishment till an appointed time , they ask ,  what is holding it back ?  on the day when it overtakes them , there will be nothing to avert it from them ; and what they used to mock at shall encompass them .
have they not regarded the birds , that are subjected in the air of heaven ? naught holds them but god ; surely in that are signs for ' a people who believe .
and prostrate yourself before him at night , and extol his glory during the long watches of the night .
there are those , even among the people of the scripture , who read the book as it should be read and believe in it sincerely ; as for those who reject it , they are indeed the losers .
say : travel in the land and see how he originated creation , then allah bringeth forth the later growth . lo ! allah is able to do all things .
when we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we be recompensed ? 
and yunus was most surely of the apostles .
and on the day he shall say , 'call on my associates whom you asserted ' ; and then they shall call on them , but they will not answer them , and we shall set a gulf between them .
covering the people ; this is a painful chastisement .
if allah had found in them any good . he would indeed have made them listen : , if he had made them listen , they would but have turned back and declined .
o my people , do not let your opposition to me bring upon you a fate similar to the peoples of noah or hud or salih ; nor is it long since the people of lot were punished !
my lord , save me and my family from their evil doings . 
call them bytheir fathers : that is juster in the sight of allah . but if ye know not their father'syour brothers in faith , or your maulas . but there is no blame on you if ye make a mistake therein : the intention of your hearts : and allah is oft-returning , most merciful .
so , when the envoys came to solomon he said :  do you wish to increase my wealth ? yet what god has given me is better than what he has given you . no . be gratified in your present .
and so that allah will examine those who believe and efface the unbelievers .
the life of the world is like the rain that waters the crops of the earth which are used as food by men and cattle . but when the earth is embellished and adorned with gold , and its tillers begin to feel thatare under control , our command descends suddenly at night or in the day , and we mow them down as though there was nothing there yesterday . this is how we distinctly explain our signs to those who think .
as if they were affrighted asses ,
in their stories is a lesson for those who possess intelligence . this is not a fabricated tale , but a confirmation of what came before it , and a detailed explanation of all things , and guidance , and mercy for people who believe .
by him who hath created the male and the female ,
make no excuses ; you rejected the faith after you accepted it .  if we pardon some of you , we will punish others amongst you , for they are guilty .
said ,  then what is your business , o messengers ? 
say : it is tremendous tidings
it has not been revealed to me except that i am a clear warner . 
moses replied ,  do you speak thus of the truth after it has been brought to you ? can this be sorcery ? sorcerers never prosper . 
he said , ‘ put me in charge of the country ’ s granaries . i am indeed fastidious well-informed . ’
that you will see no depression or elevation in it  .
then as to him who will be vouchsafed his book in his right hand , he shall say : here ! read my book !
: “ take in your hand a bundle of rushes and strike with it , and do not break your oath. ” indeed we found him steadfast . how excellent a servanthe was . indeed he constantly turned .
and so also shall our forefathers of yore be raised to life ? ”
they shall say : we were not of those who prayed ;
had allah willed , they would not have associated . we have not made you an overseer for them , nor are you their guardian .
say ,  lord , grant me an honourable entrance and an honourable exit , and sustain me with your power . 
they have said ,  the only life is this worldly life and here we shall live and die . it is only time which will destroy us  they have no knowledge about this . it is only their guesswork .
we now remove the punishment for some days – so you will again commit the same .
what ! has your lord then favoured you with sons and himself adopted females from among the angels ? what you say is monstrous .
and verily we sent moses with our revelations and a clear warrant
when the trumpet is blown , there will be no ties between them on that day , nor will they askeach other .
and you have not been hiding against yourselves , lest your ears , and your eyes , and your skins testify against you , but you thought that allah knew not much of what you were doing .
or , do you feel secure that he will not send you back into it a second time , and send against you a violent tempest and drown you because of disbelief ? then you shall find no prosecutoryou against us .
and turned them into pastured fields of corn ?
beholdest thou not that allah sendeth down water from the heaven , and causeth it to enter springs in the earth , and thereafter produceth thereby corn various coloured . thereafter it wirhereth , and thou beholdest it turn yellow ; then he maketh it chaff . verily herein is an admonition for men of understanding .
or some creation yet more monstrous in your minds ! ' then they will say , 'who will bring us back ? ' say : 'he who originated you the first time . ' then they will shake their heads at thee , and they will say , 'when will it be ? ' say : 'it is possible that it may be nigh ,
showing no gratitude for what we have given them . enjoy yourselves awhile ; but soon you will know !
this was a remembrance . an excellent retreat awaits the god-fearing
therefore , when thou art free , still labour hard ,
thereafter we cleave the earth in clefts ,
in this world we made a curse to follow them and on the day of judgment they will be among the loathed .
on the day the punishment shall cover them from above them and from beneath their feet , he shall say : 'taste now what you were doing '
he could take you away if he pleased and bring a new creation .
as for him who givesand keeps his duty to allah and fears him ,
god wishes to lighten your burdens , for , man has been created weak .
and they persisted in rejecting them wrongfully and arrogantly , while in their hearts they were convinced of their truth . observe , then , how evil was the fate of the evil-doers .
indeed today the inhabitants of paradise rejoice in their engagements
he gives them promises and excites vain desires in them ; and the shaitan does not promise them but to deceive .
a day whenmankind will stand before the lord of the worlds ?
do they think that we are helping them by giving them children and property ?
and out of sheer ignorance they have ascribed jinns as partners of allah , whereas it is he who created them , and they have invented sons and daughters for him ! purity and supremacy is to him , from all what they ascribe .
unto pharaoh and his chiefs : but they followed the command of pharaoh and the command of pharaoh was no right .
and that it is he who makes to die , and that makes to live ,
so fear allah and obey me '
he said : o my lord ! verily the bones of me have waxen feeble , and the head is glistening with hoariness , and have not yet been in my prayer to thee , my lord , unblest .
it will not be allowed to subside for them , and they , therein , are in despair .
verily we sent many apostles before you to their people , who brought clear signs with them . then we retributed those who were sinful . it is a duty incumbent on us to help the believers .
so he followed a course .
have they not seen how many generations have we destroyed before them who will not return again ?
then the man who was released , now at length remembered and said :  i will tell you its interpretation , so send me forth . 
also for their disbelief and their saying about mary a great calumny ,
only after a single blast of sound , they will all be brought into our presence .
certainly he saw him on the manifest horizon ,
glory to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne ! from the things they attribute !
the angels said , “ o lut ! we are the sent ones of your lord – they can not get to you , therefore during the night take your entire household with you – and not one of you may turn around and see – except your wife * ; she too will be afflicted with the same as they will be ; indeed their promise is at morn ; is not the morning imminent ? ”
pay heed ! they fold up their breasts in order to conceal from allah ; pay heed ! even when they fully cover themselves up with their clothes , allah knows all that what hide and all what they disclose ; indeed he knows what is in the hearts .
for the evils of their deeds will confront them , and they will beencircled by that which they used to mock at !
we have sent you as a benevolence to the creatures of the world .
butthose who were victimised and left their homes and then fought and endured patiently , your lord will surely be forgiving and kind .
but those who feared their lord will be driven to paradise in groups until , when they reach it while its gates have been opened and its keepers say ,  peace be upon you ; you have become pure ; so enter it to abide eternally therein ,  .
he replied : 'before long , by the morning , they shall be remorseful '
and thus will your lord choose you and teach you the interpretation of sayings and make his favor complete to you and to the children of yaqoub , as he made it complete before to your fathers , ibrahim and ishaq ; surely your lord is knowing , wise .
you will find them clinging to life more eagerly than any other people , even the polytheists . any of them would wish to be given a life of a thousand years , though even such a long life would not save them frompunishment ; and god sees all that they do .
nay ! i swear by this city
and from which they will find no escape .
they who defame those of the believers who give alms willingly , and deride those who have nothing besides what they earn by their labour , will be derided by god , and will suffer painful punishment .
the king said , 'bring him to me ! ' and when the messenger came to him , he said , 'return unto thy lord , and ask of him ,  what of the women who cut their hands ?  surely my lord has knowledge of their guile . '
lord , save me and my family from their deeds . 
the people of noah denied before them and thefactions after them , and every nation intendedfor their messenger to seize him , and they disputed byfalsehood toinvalidate thereby the truth . so i seized them , and howwas my penalty .
'you will not bear patiently with me ' he replied .
surely allah will make those who believe and do good deeds enter gardens beneath which rivers flow ; they shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold andpearls , and their garments therein shall be of silk .
and one leg will be joined with another :
i made them not present at the creation of the heavens and the earth nor at the creation of themselves ; nor was i one to take the seducers as supporters ;
if allah touches you an affliction none can remove it except he ; and if he wills any good for you , none can repel his bounty . he causes it to fall upon whosoever of his worshippers that he will . he is the forgiving , the most merciful . '
and all praise is due to allah , the lord of the worlds .
“ and are you surprised that an advice came to you from your lord through a man amongst you , so that he may warn you and that you may fear , and so that there be mercy upon you ? ”
: “ o serene soul !
and indeed we are able to show youthat with which we have threatened them .
god will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths ; but he will take you to task for such bonds as you have made by oaths , whereof the expiation is to feed ten poor persons with the average of the food you serve to your families , or to clothe them , or to set free a slave ; or if any finds not the means , let him fast for three days . that is the expiation of your oaths when you have sworn ; but keep your oaths . so god makes clear to you his signs ; haply you will be thankful .
the hypocrites fear lest a surah should be revealed concerning them , proclaiming what is in their hearts . say : scoff ! lo ! allah is disclosing what ye fear .
say : have ye thought : ifyour water were to disappear into the earth , who then could bring you gushing water ?
upon the day when the unbelievers are brought before the fire , : 'you squandered your good things in your earthly life and took your fill of enjoyment in them , therefore today you shall be recompensed with a humiliating punishment , because you were unrightfully proud in the earth and for that you were debauchers '
and let not those who disbelieve deem that we respite them for their good : we respite them only that they may increase in sin ; and theirs shall be a torment ignominious .
say :  to god belongs the consummate argument . had he willed he would surely have guided all of you aright . 
the day when god shall gather the messengers , and say , 'what answer were you given ? ' they shall say , 'we have no knowledge ; thou art the knower of the things unseen .
most surely in the heavens and the earth there are signs for the believers .
if he will , he could destroy you and bring about a new creation .
 as to these folk , - the cult they are in isa fragment of a ruin , and vain is thewhich they practise . 
does he think then that no one has power over him ?
concerning what they used to do .
he led me away from the message after it had come to me ; for satan has always been a betrayer of man . ”
and inspired itits wickedness and its righteousness ,
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger . and whosoever opposes allah , then verily , allah is severe in punishment .
moses told the pharaoh ,  i am a messengers from the lord of the universe .
if they are steadfast on the path , we shall provide them with abundant water ,
god is he that looses the winds , that stir up cloud , then we drive it to a dead land and therewith revive the earth , after it is dead . even so is the uprising .
here is a troop rushing headlong with you ! no welcome for them ! truly , they shall burn in the fire !
have you not regarded those who were forbidden from secret talks but again resumed what they had been forbidden from , and hold secret talkswith sin and transgression and disobedience to the apostle ? and when they come to you they greet you with words with which allah never greeted you , and they say to themselves , ‘ why does not allah punish us for what we say ? ! ’ let hell suffice them : they shall enter it , and it is an evil destination !
and other have confessed their sins ; they have mixed a righteous deed with another evil . it may be that god will turn towards them ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
have you seen the one who denies the recompense ?
say :  shall i take for my protector any other than allah , the maker of the heavens and the earth ? and he it is that feedeth but is not fed .  say :  nay ! but i am commanded to be the first of those who bow to allah , and be not thou of the company of those who join gods with allah . 
and most surely there is a lesson for you in the cattle : we make you to drink of what is in their bellies , and you have in them many advantages and of them you eat ,
they ask youwhat they should spend . say : whatever you spend of good must be for parents and kindred and orphans and al-masakinand the wayfarers , and whatever you do of good deeds , truly , allah knows it well .
and when he attained his full strength and wasmature , we bestowed upon him judgement and knowledge . and thus do we reward the doers of good .
so he said ,  you are granted respite
when they listen to that which was sent down to the messenger , you will see their eyes fill with tears as they recognize its truth . they say : 'lord , we believe . write us among the witnesses .
and your lord is the oft forgiver , the merciful ; if he seized them for their deeds , he would soon send the punishment upon them ; but for them is an appointed time from which they will not find any refuge .
then when he saw the moon shining , he said , “ this is my lord ? ” ; then when it set , he said , “ if my lord had not guided me * , i too would be one of these astray people. ” .
despite this , the human being still tends to rebel
on the day when the wrong-doer shall gnaw his hands saying : would that had taken with the apostle a way !
they question you about the spirit . say ,  the spirit is at my lord 's command , and you have been granted but little knowledge . 
no just estimate have they made of allah , such as is due to him : on the day of judgment the whole of the earth will be but his handful , and the heavens will be rolled up in his right hand : glory to him ! high is he above the partners they attribute to him !
o you who believe ! take care of your souls ; he who errs can not hurt you when you are on the right way ; to allah is your return , of all , so he will inform you of what you did .
and ad and samood and the dwellers of the rass and many generations between them .
and the 'ad were destroyed by the furious cold blast of roaring wind
surely allah is the knower of what is unseen in the heavens and the earth ; surely he is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
or have you clear evidence ?
but it will be only a single blow ,
and if you are in doubt as to that which we have revealed to our servant , then produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses besides allah if you are truthful .
o people who believe ! fear for your own souls ; he who has strayed can not harm you in the least if you are on guidance ; towards allah only you will all return – he will then inform you of what you used to do .
but when he brought them our signs , lo , they laughed at them .
upon the inhabitants will be green garments of fine silk and brocade . and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver , and their lord will give them a purifying drink .
and we had already sent among them warners .
thesending down of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and as for those who emigrated for the cause of allah , after suffering oppression , we will certainly give them goodly residence in this world , but indeed the reward of the hereafter will be greater , if they but knew !
until , when we grasp those of them who lead a luxurious life with punishment , behold ! they make humble invocation with a loud voice .
those who say : our lord ! surely we believe , therefore forgive us our faults and save us from the chastisement of the fire .
when your lord called upon moses :  go to the wicked people ,
and assuredly we have honoured the children of adam : and we have borne them on the land and the sea , and we have provided them with clean things , and we have preferred them over many of them whom we have created with a preferment .
we shall make you recite and then you will not forget ,
the fate of both of them will be hell fire wherein they will live forever . thus will be the recompense for the unjust .
the month postponed is an increase of unbelief whereby the unbelievers go astray ; one year they make it profane , and hallow it another , to agree with the number that god has hallowed , and so profane what god has hallowed . decked out fair to them are their evil deeds ; and god guides not the people of the unbelievers .
indeed the only true religion in the sight of allah is islam ; those who had received the books differed only after the knowledge came to them , due to their hearts ’ envy ; and whoever disbelieves in the signs of allah , then allah is swift at taking account .
except the mercy of your lord ; indeed his munificence upon youis extremely great .
to give sight and as a reminder to every servant who turns frequently .
so we let loose on them a violent wind for several days of distress to make them taste a most disgraceful punishment here in this world , and far more shameful will be the punishment in the hereafter , and there will be no succour for them .
and there is not a townbut we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe torment . that is written in the book
itsto be picked hanging near .
when they meet the faithful , they say , ‘ we believe , ’ and when they are alone with one another , they say , ‘ do you recount to them what allah has revealed to you , so that they may argue with you therewith before your lord ? do you not exercise your reason ? ’
surely , you shall have no power over my true servants , except those misguided ones who choose to follow you .
we did not wrong them ; they wronged themselves ; the deities they called on besides god availed them nothing : when god 's command came upon them , they only added to their ruin .
and who guard their private parts ,
we are warning all of you about them . 
we raised among every people a messenger who enjoined ,  worship god alone and shun the evil one .  then among them were some whom god guided and among them were others who became deserving of ruin . so travel across the earth and observe what was the end of those who rejected the messengers .
that this is the speech of an honourable messenger ,
so leave them in their bewilderment for a while .
he hath revealed unto thee the book with truth confirming that which went before it ; and he sent down the taurat and injil .
say , ‘ obey allah , and obey the apostle. ’ but if you turn your backs , he is only responsible for his burden and you are responsible for your own burden , and if you obey him , you will be guided , and the apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
and then cometh that which they were promised ,
many of the people of the scripture wish they could turn you back to disbelief after you have believed , out of envy from themselvesafter the truth has become clear to them . so pardon and overlook until allah delivers his command . indeed , allah is over all things competent .
and whosoever of you shall be obedient unto allah and his apostle and shall work righteously , her hire we shall give her twice over , and we have gotten ready for her a generous provision .
in the gardens of delight
those they call upon , apart from him , have no power of intercession , save such as have testified to the truth , and that knowingly .
like those before you . they were more powerful than you , and had more wealth and children . they enjoyed their share , and you enjoyed your share , as those before you enjoyed their share . and you indulged , as they indulged . it is they whose works will fail in this world and in the hereafter . it is they who are the losers .
and they bid thee hasten on the evil rather than the good , when exemplary punishments have indeed occurred before them . but lo ! thy lord is rich in pardon for mankind despite their wrong , and lo ! thy lord is strong in punishment .
out of them both come out pearl and coral .
you shall certainly be tried respecting your wealth and your souls , and you shall certainly hear from those who have been given the book before you and from those who are polytheists much annoying talk ; and if you are patient and guard , surely this is one of the affairsdetermined upon .
'my lord ' , ' i have killed a living soul among them , and fear that they will slay me .
who willburn in the greatest fire ,
you had asked for a judgement , so the judgement has come to you . so , if you desist it will be better for you . if you come back to it , we shall do the same , and your forces , however large , will not be of the least avail , for god is with those who believe .
woe to each sinful dealer in falsehoods :
had we but an admonition as had the ancients .
excepting those who thereafter shall repent and make amends . verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
have you not considered those who went forth from their homes , for fear of death , and they were thousands , then allah said to them , die ; again he gave them life ; most surely allah is gracious to people , but most people are not grateful .
he will certainly help those who , if given power in the land , will worship god through prayer , pay the religious tax , enjoin others do good , and prevent them from committing evil . the consequence of all things is in the hands of god .
so allah sent a crow scratching the ground , to show him how to hide his brother ’ s corpse ; he said , “ woe to me ! i was not even capable enough to be like this crow , so i would hide my brother ’ s corpse ” ; and he turned remorseful .
and no burdened soul will carry another soul ’ s burden ; and if a burdened soul calls another to share the burden , no one will carry any part of it , even if he is a close relative ; o dear prophet , your warning only benefits those who fear their lord without seeing and who keep the prayer established ; and whoever cleansed himself , has cleansed for his own benefit ; and towards allah only is the return .
o you who have believed , take not those who have taken your religion in ridicule and amusement among the ones who were given the scripture before you nor the disbelievers as allies . and fear allah , if you shouldbe believers .
and the angels called to him , standing in the sanctuary at worship , 'lo , god gives thee good tidings of john , who shall confirm a word of god , a chief , and chaste , a prophet , righteous . '
believers , if you march with arms for the cause of god , make sure that you know whom to fight . do not accuse anyone who claims himself to be a muslim of disbelief just for worldly gains . there is abundant bounty with god . before , you were also like them , but god bestowed his favors upon you . thus , make sure that you know whom to fight . god is well aware of what you do .
verily , those who annoy allah and his messengerallah has cursed them in this world , and in the hereafter , and has prepared for them a humiliating torment .
is he who created the heavens and the earth unable to create their like ? yes , indeed , he is the creator , the knower .
say : 'obey god , and obey the messenger ; then , if you turn away , only upon him rests what is laid on him , and upon you rests what is laid on you . if you obey him , you will be guided . it is only for the messenger to deliver the manifest message . '
nay ! we are made to suffer privation .
believers , do not ask about things that if they appeared to you , would only upset you ; but if you ask about them when the koran is being sent down , they shall be made plain to you . allah will pardon it ; allah is forgiving , clement .
said the eminent ones who disbelieved among his people ,  if you should follow shu'ayb , indeed , you would then be losers . 
indeed , surely the human is very insolent
allah wants to make all this clear to you , and to guide you to the ways which the righteous have followed in the past . he will turn graciously towards you . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
they said : we worship idols , so we shall be their votaries .
we would have invented lies about allah if we returned to your creed from which allah has saved us , it is not for us that we return into it again except if allah , our lord wills . for our lord has embraced everything with knowledge , and in allah we have put our trust . our lord , open between us and our nation with truth , you are the best of openers '
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and allah is ever all-sufficient as a disposer of affairs .
and most surely he had a nearness to us and an excellent resort .
those who are in heedlessness neglectful .
said :  get ye down . with enmity between yourselves . on earth will be your dwelling-place and your means of livelihood , - for a time . 
said the elite of his people , who were faithless and who denied the encounter of the hereafter and whom we had given affluence in the life of the world : ‘ this is just a human being like yourselves : he eats what you eat , and drinks what you drink .
it is thus indeed that we reward those who do good :
and leave behind a cloud of dust
then , when they entered unto yusuf , he betook his parents to himself and said :  enter egypt , if allah wills , in security . 
andwhen your lord said to the angels , “ i am about to place my caliph in the earth ” ; they said , “ will you placeone who will spread turmoil in it and shed blood ? whereas we glorify you with praise and proclaim your sanctity ” ; he said , “ i know what you do not . ”
and the jews will not be pleased with you , nor the christians until you follow their religion . say : surely allah 's guidance , that is theguidance . and if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you , you shall have no guardian from allah , nor any helper .
if you lend god a good loan , he will multiply it for you , and will forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
whoever makes a noble intercession will have a share of it , and whoever makes an evil intercession will have a share of it ; and allah is able to do all things .
and they worship besides allah that for which he has not sent down authority and that of which they have no knowledge . and there will not be for the wrongdoers any helper .
on whom cometh a torment humiliating him , and on whom alighteth a torment lasting .
so they turned to themselves and said ,  surely ye are the ones in the wrong ! 
and whosoever of you is obedient to allah and his messenger saw , and does righteous good deeds , we shall give her , her reward twice over , and we have prepared for her rizqan karima .
have you not seen those who have changed allah 's favor for ungratefulness and made their people to alight into the abode of perdition
the sending down of the scripture is from god , the honorable , the wise .
except those who believe and do the right , for whom there is reward undiminished .
ta , seen . these are the signs of the quran and a manifest book ,
they said , “ by god , you know we did not come to cause trouble in the land , and we are not thieves . ”
but they turned away , so we sent upon them the flood of the dam , and we replaced their twogardens with gardens of bitter fruit , tamarisks and something of sparse lote trees .
they ask you about the sacred month - about fighting therein . say ,  fighting therein is great , but avertingfrom the way of allah and disbelief in him andal-masjid al-haram and the expulsion of its people therefrom are greaterin the sight of allah . and fitnah is greater than killing .  and they will continue to fight you until they turn you back from your religion if they are able . and whoever of you reverts from his religionand dies while he is a disbeliever - for those , their deeds have become worthless in this world and the hereafter , and those are the companions of the fire , they will abide therein eternally .
so leave them alone till they face the day on which they will be struck dumb ,
o o ye who believe ! if ye obey those who disbelieve , they will send you back on your heels , and ye will turn back losers .
and whenever the punishment came upon them they said , “ o moosa ! pray to your lord for us , by means of his covenant which you have ; indeed if you lift the punishment from us we will surely accept faith in you and let the descendants of israel go with you . ”
there is no fault in the blind , and there is no fault in the lame , and there is no fault in the sick , neither in yourselves , that you eat of your houses , or your fathers ' houses , or your mothers ' houses , or your brothers ' houses , or your sisters ' houses , or the houses of your uncles or your aunts paternal , or the houses of your uncles or your aunts maternal , or that whereof you own the keys , or of your friend ; there is no fault in you that you eat all together , or in groups separately . but when you enter houses , greet one another with a greeting from god , blessed and good . so god makes clear to you the signs ; haply you will understand .
god chose adam , and noah , and the family of abraham , and the family of imran , over all mankind .
o you who believe ! call to mind the favor of allah to you when there came down upon you hosts , so we sent against them a strong wind and hosts , that you saw not , and allah is seeing what you do .
and allah invites to the abode of peace and guides whom he pleases into the right path .
andqaroon , firaun and haman ; and indeed moosa came to them with clear signs , so they were arrogant in the land , and they could never escape from our control .
and recite that which hath been revealed unto thee of the scripture of thy lord . there is none who can change his words , and thou wilt find no refuge beside him .
the jews have said ,  god 's hands are bound .  may they themselves be handcuffed and condemned for what they have said ! god 's hands are free and he distributes his favors to his creatures however he wants . the rebellion and disbelief of many of them will be intensified against you because of what has been revealed to you from your lord . we have induced hostility and hatred among them which will remain with them up until the day of judgment . whenever they kindle the fire of war , god extinguishes it . they try to destroy the land but god does not love the evil-doers .
we do not send the apostles except as bearers of good news and warners . as for those who are faithful and righteous , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
and grieve not over them or be in distress from what they conspire .
and a sign for them is the dead land , that we quickened and brought forth from it grain , whereof they eat ;
let him know that if he does not desist , we shall certainly drag him by his forelocks ,
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is allah 's ; and whether you manifest what is in your minds or hide it , allah will call you to account according to it ; then he will forgive whom he pleases and chastise whom he pleases , and allah has power over all things .
and peace on the messengers !
he said : my lord ! lo ! my own folk deny me .
indecent woman are for indecent men and indecent men are for indecent woman . decent women are for decent men and decent men are for decent women . the decent people are innocent of what people allege . they will receive mercy and honorable sustenance .
allah said : ' i shall indeed send it down to you ; then , i shall afflict whoever among you who disbelieves with a chastisement wherewith i will afflict none in the worlds . '
then pour unto their heads the boiling water to torment them  .
your only deity is god , there is no deity but him . his knowledge encompasses all things . 
surely , he shall be satisfied .
as for him who gives and is godwary
as for those whose fate is disbelief , whether you warn them or do not warn them – it is all one for them ; they will not believe . .
indeed assembling the qur ’ an and reading it are upon us .
he ] said :  truly , it saddens me that you should take him away . i fear lest a wolf should devour him , while you are careless of him . 
so i swear by the lord ofrisings and settings that indeed we are able
o you who believe ! bow down , and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord and do good that you may be successful .
we know well that their statement grieves you – so they do not deny youbut in fact the unjust deny the signs of allah .
but his wife came forwardaloud : she smote her forehead and said :  a barren old woman ! 
or have they a share in the dominion ? then in that case they would not give mankind even a naqira .
enquire of them about the town situated by the sea where , when they did not keep the sabbath , the fish came up to the surface of the water for them ; but on days other than the sabbath the fish did not come . we tried them in this way , for they were disobedient .
and the day when the unjust one shall bite his hands saying : o ! would that i had taken a way with the apostle
then when the fear had gone away fromibrahim , and the glad tidings had reached him , he began to plead with usfor the people of lout .
say : 'god delivers you from them and from every distress ; then you assign him associates . '
he knoweth all that is before them and all that is behind them , and unto allah all things are returned . $ $ a
the arabs of the desert say :  we believe .  tell them :  you do not believe . better say : 'we submit ' ; for belief has not yet penetrated your hearts .  if you begin to obey god and his apostle , he will not withhold the leastof your labour . verily god is forgiving and kind . 
they mocked the messengers who lived before you , but those who received warnings of punishment and mocked the warnings , all suffered their torments accordingly .
and for their saying , 'we slew the messiah , jesus son of mary , the messenger of god ' -- yet they did not slay him , neither crucified him , only a likeness of that was shown to them . those who are at variance concerning him surely are in doubt regarding him ; they have no knowledge of him , except the following of surmise ; and they slew him not of a certainty -- no indeed ;
then do we abase himthe lowest of the low , -
indeed in that is a reminder for whoever has a heart or who listens while he is present .
those who believe , and do good deeds , and pray regularly , and give charity—they will have their reward with their lord ; they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
but some faces will be covered with dust
therefor we seized him and his hosts , and abandoned them unto the sea . behold the nature of the consequence for evil-doers !
and when he matured to his full strength , we bestowed him wisdom and knowledge ; and this is how we reward the virtuous .
indeed , gehennahas become an ambush ,
and when joseph reached maturity , we gave him judgment and knowledge . and thus we reward the doers of good .
believers , fear god and seek ways to come closer to him and strive for his cause , so that you may prosper .
as a favour from us . thus we recompense him who giveth thanks .
the hour will certainly come : therein is no doubt : yet most men believe not .
and he it is who has made you successors in the land and raised some of you above others bygrades , that he might try you by what he has given you ; surely your lord is quick to requite , and he is most surely the forgiving , the merciful .
what remainsfrom allah is best for you , if you would be believers . but i am not a guardian over you . 
the people of noah denied before them , and'aad and pharaoh , the owner of stakes ,
and one of his signs is that he created mates for you from yourselves that you may find rest in them , and he put between you love and compassion ; most surely there are signs in this for a people who reflect .
one would think themawake while , in fact , they were sleeping . we turned their bodies from right to left and their dog stretched its front legs on the ground . had one looked them over , he would have run away from them in terror .
we have told him ,  ignore them and say to them 'farewell ' . they will soon know the consequences of their deeds
thereforepatiently bear upon what they say , and praising your lord say his purity before the sun rises and before the sun sets .
have they taken deities from the earth who can bring the dead to life ?
a book whose revelations are well expounded , an arabic quran for people who possess knowledge ,
in which , will be two fountains running .
it is but a reminder to the worlds .
they will excuse themselves to you , when you return to them . say : 'do not excuse yourselves ; we will not believe you . god has already told us tidings of you . god will surely see your work , and his messenger , then you will be returned to him who knows the unseen and the visible , and he will tell you what you were doing . '
and the mountains shall be made to crumble withcrumbling ,
or seek they to ensnare ? but those who disbelieve , they are the ensnared !
so they acknowledge their sins ; but far removedare the dwellers in the flames .
in extended columns .
 so i have called to them aloud ;
that he may bring the believing men and the believing women into gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide , and may remit from them their evil deeds - that , in the sight of allah , is the supreme triumph -
before this we wrote in the psalms , after the message : my servants the righteous , shall inherit the earth . 
and say : my lord ! cause me to come in with a firm incoming and to go out with a firm outgoing . and give me from thy presence a sustaining power .
truly ! ours it isguidance ,
our messengers came to abraham with glad tidings . they said : 'peace ' he replied 'peace ' and in a while brought them a roasted calf .
in sport being their hearts . and those who do wrong keep secret their private discourse this is but a human being like unto yourselves ; will ye then betake yourselves to magic while ye know ?
“ and used to dwell on evil matters with those who think evilly . ”
we have sent down the book that you may explain to them the truth concerning what they are disputing and that the book may serve as a guidance and mercy for those who believe in it .
tell those of my creatures who believe :  observe your devotional obligations and give of what we have given you in charity , secretly or openly , before the day arrives when there will be no buying or selling or befriending . 
and when the caravan had departed , their father said : surely feel the smell of yusuf , if ye think not that i am doting .
they said : we found our fathers worshipping them .
 behold !  he said to his father and to his people ,  what are these that you worship ?
those against whom the word is realized shall say : 'our lord , those whom we led astray , we led them astray even as we ourselves were astray . we are quit of them to you ; it was not us that they worshipped '
we will recount to you the best of narratives in what we have revealed to you of this quran , and indeed prior to it you were among those who are unaware .
and say :  what ! shall we give up our gods for the sake of a poet possessed ? 
and ye dwell in the dwellings of those who had wronged themselves and it had become manifest unto you in what wise we had dealt with them , and we had propounded for you similitudes .
true , there is for thee by day prolonged occupation with ordinary duties :
and tilled fields and heavy-sheathed palm-trees ,
inform the hypocrites that there is a painful punishment for them
when you divorce women , and they have reached their term , do not debar them from marrying their husbands , when they have agreed together honourably . that is an admonition for whoso of you believes in god and the last day ; that is cleaner and purer for you ; god knows , and you know not .
they believe not in it , though the wont of the ancients is already gone .
there are seven gates in it , and to each gate a portion of them has been allotted .
therefore knowthat there is none worthy of worship except allah , and seek the forgiveness of sins of your close ones and for the common believing men and women ; and allah knows your movements during the day and your resting during the night .
but as for those in whose heart is a sickness , it only adds defilement to their defilement , and they die while they are faithless .
and they will live for ever therein .
and allah knoweth that which ye keep secret and that which ye publish .
or do they have a god besides allah ? purity is to allah from their ascribing of partners to him .
and behold , they are awakened .
so is this the matter regarding which you laze ?
nor are the darkness and the light ;
and when lokman said to his son , admonishing him , ' o my son , do not associate others with god ; to associate others with god is a mighty wrong .
the inevitable is imminent .
do not follow the example of those who became divided and differed with one another after clear proofs had come to them . for those , there is a great punishment .
and there is life for you in retaliation , o men of understanding , that ye may ward off .
so allah will save them from the evil of that day and has secured for them radiance and joyfulness ,
do they not observe the birds above them , spreading their wings and folding them ? none , except the merciful holds them . surely , he sees all things .
and i have been commanded to be the firstof the muslims . 
announcing happy news and warnings . and yet most of them are averse and do not listen ,
and we sent down water from the sky in proper measure , then stored it in the earth ; and indeed we are able to take it away !
hasten for the forgiveness of your lord and paradise whose expanse is as wide as that of the heavens and the earth , which has been prepared for those who believe in god and his apostles . this is the bounty of god which he bestows on whosoever he please ; and the bounty of god is infinite .
he is omnipotent over his servants , and he is the all-wise , the all-aware . say : 'what thing is greatest in testimony ? '
believers , recall god 's favor to you when the army attacked you . we sent a wind and the armies , which you did not see , to support you . god sees all that you do .
but when he tests him by straitening his sustenance , he says : “ my lord has humiliated me . ”
and say to my servants , that they say words that are kindlier . for surely satan provokes strife between them , and satan is ever a manifest foe to man .
he who is god in the heavens is also god in the earth ; he is the wise , the knower .
—those who rebelledin their cities
see how they lie against their own souls , and that which they forged has passed away from them .
exaltations to him who created pairs of all the things the earth produces and of themselves , and that of which they have no knowledge .
he will say , ‘ my lord ! why have you raised me blind , though i used to see ? ’
for them is good news in the life of the world and in the life to come . there is no changing the words of god . that will be the great triumph .
have you thought about the fire that you kindle .
and a guidance and grace for those who do good ,
and when o dear prophet , your lord was inspiring the angels that , “ i am with you – so make the believers stand firm ; i will soon instil fear into the hearts of the disbelievers , so strike above the disbelievers ’ necks and hit their each and every bone joint . ”
“ o my people , the life of this world is nothing but fleeting enjoyment , but the hereafter is the home of permanence .
hath aided you with cattle and sons .
who would expel you from your land . now what do ye advise ?
although the hereafter is better and more lasting .
then they were made to hang down their heads : certainly you know that they do not speak .
is itwe took them in ridicule , or hasvision turned away from them ? 
so he completed them as seven firmaments in two days , and he assigned to each heaven its duty and command . and we adorned the lower heaven with lights , andwith guard . such is the decree ofthe exalted in might , full of knowledge .
we have sent you to a nation before whom there lived many nations so that you would read to them what we have revealed to you . they still deny the existence of the beneficent god . say ,  he is my lord besides whom there is no other god . i trust him and turn to him in repentance . 
and moses chose from his people seventy men for our appointment . and when the earthquake seized them , he said ,  my lord , if you had willed , you could have destroyed them before and me . would you destroy us for what the foolish among us have done ? this is not but your trial by which you send astray whom you will and guide whom you will . you are our protector , so forgive us and have mercy upon us ; and you are the best of forgivers .
our lord ! and raise up in them an apostle from among them who shall recite to them thy communications and teach them the book and the wisdom , and purify them ; surely thou art the mighty , the wise .
for this reason , call them ; and remain firm , as you are commanded to ; and do not follow their desires ; and say , “ i accept faith in whichever book allah has sent down ; and i am commanded to judge fairly between you ; allah is the lord of all – ours and yours ; for us are our deeds and for you are your misdeeds ; there is no debate between us and you ; allah will gather all of us together ; and towards him is the return . ”
and when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he thought they were pretending and inwardly started fearing them ; they said , “ do not be afraid – we are sent to the people of lut . ”
those who are mindful of their lord will be rewarded with gardens of bliss .
but the messenger and those who believed with him struggled with their wealth and their selves for them awaits goodness and those are the winners .
, ask them ,  who has made it unlawful to maintain beauty and to eat the pure foods which god has created for his servants ? they are made for the believers in this world and are exclusively for them in the life hereafter .  thus do we explain our revelations to the people who have knowledge .
that god may repay each soul according to what it has earned . god is quick in reckoning .
that was a nation that has passed : for it there will be what it has earned , and for you there will be what you have earned , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
there is no blame on you if ye make an offer of betrothal or hold it in your hearts . allah knows that ye cherish them in your hearts : but do not make a secret contract with them except in terms honourable , nor resolve on the tie of marriage till the term prescribed is fulfilled . and know that allah knoweth what is in your hearts , and take heed of him ; and know that allah is oft-forgiving , most forbearing .
hesaid : therein shall you live , and therein shall you die , and from it shall you be raised .
if a woman fears hatred or aversion from her husband there is no fault in them if the couple set things right between them , for reconciliation is better . avarice attends the souls , but if you do what is good and are cautious , surely , allah is aware of what you do .
when allah has created you and whatever you make ? ’
but he is allah , my lord ; and with my lord associate not anyone .
before them rejected : the people of nuh and the dwellers of ar-rass and samood ,
thus the sentence of your lord became realized against those who disbelieve , that they are to be inmates of the fire .
and sons to be by his side ,
oryou have a garden of palm tress and grapes and make rivers gush forth within them in force
it guides to the right course , and we have believed in it . and we will never associate with our lord anyone .
god shall chastise him with the greatest chastisement .
until when they came to the valley of the ants , a she ant exclaimed , “ o ants , enter your houses – may not sulaiman and his armies crush you , unknowingly . ”
moses said , 'and thou , samaritan , what was thy business ? '
say thou : mankind ! i am unto you only a warner manifest .
have we sent down any sanction which provides support to their associating others with allah in his divinity ?
and when it is said to them , 'follow what god has sent down , ' they say , 'no ; but we will follow such things as we found our fathers doing . ' what ? and if their fathers had no understanding of anything , and if they were not guided ?
and they both hastened to the door , and she rent his shirt from behind and they met her husband at the door . she said : what is the punishment of him who intends evil to your wife except imprisonment or a painful chastisement ?
then wait you for the day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke .
it is those who believeand confuse not their belief with zulm , for themthere is security and they are the guided .
if we will we can make it bitter , so why do you not give thanks ?
 so leave with your family late in the night , yourself remaining in the rear , and let none turn back to look , and go where you will be commanded . 
and it launched a global competition to crowdsource innovative apps using this data .
everybody knows that we can do better with a visual thing that can be interactive with the patient , where they see the video and they 're being videoed and they press , do you understand this ? no , i do n't . well , then let 's go to a simpler explanation . then there 's a simpler one and , oh yes , i understand that . well , press the button and you 're on record , you understand . and that is one of the ideas . now , also a video is done of the patient or spouse and medical presenter , with the patient agreeing that he understands the procedure to be done , including all the possible failure modes .
anagnorisis is the greek word for discovery . literally , the transition from ignorance to knowledge is anagnorisis . it 's what our network does ; it 's what  dirty jobs  is . and i 'm up to my neck in anagnorises every single day . great . the other word , peripeteia , that 's the moment in the great tragedies , you know -- euripides and sophocles -- the moment where oedipus has his moment , where he suddenly realizes that hot chick he 's been sleeping with and having babies with is his mother . ok. that 's peripety or peripeteia . and this metaphor in my head -- i got anagnorisis and peripetia on my chin .
right , like cutting lawns is brutal . but because i had to cut lawns all summer for all of our neighbors and get paid to do that , i realized that recurring revenue from one client is amazing .
being enslaved by this family . and i was really appalled , and i could n't figure out what to do . and the more i tried talking to him , the less friendly he was getting . so i finally decided , i said  look ,  -- this is all through the translator , because , this is all , you know , i do n't speak a word of korean -- and i said ,  look , i 'm really glad that hyun-sook has a family to live with . i was very worried about her . i made a promise to her grandmother , your mother , that i would find a family , and now i 'm so happy that you 're going to take care of her . 
that i was going to be feeling this way . and i called my sister whom i 'm very close to -- and had three children -- and i asked her ,  why did n't you tell me i was going to be feeling this way , that i was going to have these -- feeling incredibly isolated ?  and she said -- i 'll never forget --
as you can see , it 's impossible to read . you need to get halfway down to even find out which address they 're talking about , and then farther down , in tiny 10-point font , to find out how to actually get involved .
that is that younger people today may not typically experience these improvements as they grow older .
so the image that i like to think of , instead of glass ceiling , is the high bridge . it 's definitely terrifying to stand at the foot of a high bridge , but it 's also pretty exhilarating , because it 's beautiful up there , and you 're looking out on a beautiful view . and the great thing is there 's no trick like with the glass ceiling . there 's no man or woman standing in the middle about to cut the cables . there 's no hole in the middle that you 're going to fall through . and the great thing is that you can take anyone along with you . you can bring your husband along .
every time any westerners came to the village , she hid the girl . and of course , i was immediately intrigued . i saw photographs of her , and i thought i wanted to go . and the guy just told me ,  there 's no way . this grandmother wo n't even -- you know , there 's no way she 's ever going to let you meet this girl that 's she 's raising .  i took a translator with me , and went to this village , found the grandmother , sat down with her . and to my astonishment , she agreed to let me photograph her granddaughter . and i was paying for this myself , so i asked the translator
but we seem to be doing it the other way about . so i came to this conclusion that et should reach the underprivileged first , not the other way about . and finally came the question of , how do you tackle teacher perception ? whenever you go to a teacher and show them some technology , the teacher 's first reaction is , you can not replace a teacher with a machine -- it 's impossible . i do n't know why it 's impossible , but , even for a moment , if you did assume that it 's impossible -- i have a quotation from sir arthur c. clarke , the science fiction writer whom i met in colombo ,
second , the development institutions that channeled these transfers were opaque , with little transparency of what they financed or what results they achieved .
 i 'll never leave a fallen comrade to fall into the hands of the enemy .  and it 's not a mindless mantra , and it 's not a poem . it 's a promise . every ranger promises every other ranger ,  no matter what happens , no matter what it costs me , if you need me , i 'm coming .  and every ranger gets that same promise from every other ranger . think about it . it 's extraordinarily powerful . it 's probably more powerful than marriage vows . and they 've lived up to it , which gives it special power . and so the organizational relationship that bonds them is just amazing . and i learned personal relationships
or you can , i do n't know what , you know , eat a sandwich . so , what i did when i was painting was i started singing , because i really adore singing , and i think that music is the highest form of all art . so , i commissioned a wonderful composer , nico muhly , who wrote nine songs using the text , and we performed this fantastic evening of -- he wrote music for both amateurs and professionals . i played the clattering teacup and the slinky in the main reading room of the new york public library , where you 're supposed to be very , very quiet , and it was a phenomenally wonderful event ,
♫ the sound of the final boom ♫ ♫ rumbles fiercely across the land . ♫ ♫ fear , you 're the enemy . ♫ ♫ obliterating all but thee . ♫ ♫ you see what you want to see . ♫ ♫ before i 'm blinded , i will toast ♫ ♫ the shade of power that i love most , ♫ ♫ the power of creation . ♫ ♫ tembererana , hey , tembererana ... ♫ ♫ da , da , da , da ♫ ♫ da , da , da , da , da , da , da ♫ ♫ as a child , alone and afraid , ♫ ♫ escaping the impressions every feeling made , ♫ ♫ i would run , run away ♫
my name is adam garone , and that 's my story .
these are pictures the girls themselves never saw , but they gave to us this is the stuff those reviewers do n't know about and are n't listening to and this is the kind of research i recommend to those who want to do humanistic work . girl 1 : yeah , my character is usually a tomboy .
we 're discovering in nature that simplicity often lies on the other side of complexity .
we had to grow them in vermi manure , which is sterile , or hydroponics , and take them outdoors every three to four months . the second plant is mother-in-law 's tongue , which is again a very common plant , and we call it a bedroom plant , because it converts co2 into oxygen at night . and we need six to eight waist-high plants per person . the third plant is money plant , and this is again a very common plant ; preferably grows in hydroponics . and this particular plant removes formaldehydes and other volatile chemicals . with these three plants , you can grow all the fresh air you need .
just like we study any other complex neurologic process . and i think there 's some sub-questions there that i put there . is it truly possible to study creativity scientifically ? and i think that 's a good question . and i 'll tell you that most scientific studies of music , they 're very dense , and when you actually go through them , it 's very hard to recognize the music in it . in fact , they seem to be very unmusical entirely and to miss the whole point of the music . and so it brings the second question : why should scientists study creativity ? maybe we 're not the right people to do it .
thank you . back in 1992 , i started working for a company called interval research , which was just then being founded by david lidell and paul allen as a for-profit research enterprise in silicon valley . i met with david to talk about what i might do in his company . i was just coming out of a failed virtual reality business and supporting myself by being on the speaking circuit and writing books -- after twenty years or so in the computer game industry having ideas that people did n't think they could sell . and david and i discovered
so i 'm not going to go through the whole details of the study because actually you can read about it , but the next step is observation . so here are some of the students doing the observations . they 're recording the data of where the bees fly . dave strudwick : so what we 're going to do —student : 5c . dave strudwick : is she still going up here ? student : yeah . dave strudwick : so you keep track of each.student : henry , can you help me here ? bl :  can you help me , henry ?  what good scientist says that , right ? student : there 's two up there . and three in here . bl : right ? so we 've got our observations . we 've got our data .
for service for the veterans coming home . recent surveys show that 92 percent of veterans want to continue their service when they take off their uniform . and we can use veterans to improve disaster response . now on the surface , this makes a lot of sense , and in 2010 , we responded to the tsunami in chile , the floods in pakistan , we sent training teams to the thai-burma border . but it was earlier this year , when one of our original members caused us to shift focus in the organization . this is clay hunt . clay was a marine with me . we served together in iraq and afghanistan .
take your science , subtract your bullet points and your jargon , divide by relevance , meaning share what 's relevant to the audience , and multiply it by the passion that you have for this incredible work that you 're doing , and that is going to equal incredible interactions that are full of understanding . and so , scientists and engineers , when you 've solved this equation , by all means , talk nerdy to me . thank you . this is a world-changing invention . the smoke alarm has saved perhaps hundreds of thousands of lives , worldwide . but smoke alarms do n't prevent fires . every year in the usa , over 20,000 are killed or injured
so you relate people that you would n't relate , and you can actually also create concerts by looking at the audience faces . so i connect the eye , and then i play the audience 's faces . the good thing about this is , if the concert does n't sound good , it 's their fault . it 's not my fault , because — and so another thing that happens is that i started having this secondary effect that normal sounds started to become color .
and learn how to find scammers when they get email offers come in . they can come into your account or a sub account or whatever . but teach them how to fix the price , guess the price , pull up the photos . teach them how to do that kind of stuff and make money . then the money they get , 50 percent goes in their house account , 50 percent goes in their toy account . my kids love this stuff .
but what they did , of course , since it was so complicated and expensive , they only used it on the zero-year-olds and the one-year-olds .
falling in love , everything begins with perception . now if perception is grounded in our history , it means we 're only ever responding according to what we 've done before . but actually , it 's a tremendous problem , because how can we ever see differently ? now , i want to tell you a story about seeing differently , and all new perceptions begin in the same way . they begin with a question . the problem with questions is they create uncertainty . now , uncertainty is a very bad thing . it 's evolutionarily a bad thing . if you 're not sure that 's a predator , it 's too late . okay ? even seasickness is a consequence of uncertainty .
so instead of being antisocial with your money , what if you were a little more prosocial with your money ? and we thought , let 's make people do it and see what happens . so let 's have some people do what they usually do and spend money on themselves , and let 's make some people give money away , and measure their happiness and see if , in fact , they get happier . so the first way that we did this . on one vancouver morning , we went out on the campus at university of british columbia and we approached people and said ,  do you want to be in an experiment ? 
the unique design of the eiffel tower . and the trick here is to use a single , readable sentence that the audience can key into if they get a bit lost , and then provide visuals which appeal to our other senses and create a deeper sense of understanding of what 's being described . so i think these are just a few keys that can help the rest of us to open that door and see the wonderland that is science and engineering . and because the engineers that i 've worked with have taught me to become really in touch with my inner nerd , i want to summarize with an equation .
this is a book written by a consummate player by the name of kevin carroll . kevin carroll came from extremely deprived circumstances : alcoholic mother , absent father , inner-city philadelphia , black , had to take care of a younger brother . found that when he looked at a playground out of a window into which he had been confined , he felt something different . and so he followed up on it . and his life -- the transformation of his life from deprivation and what one would expect -- potentially prison or death -- he become a linguist , a trainer for the 76ers and now is a motivational speaker .
flowers are always gray ,
the rain in burkina comes very fast , and after that , you have floods everywhere in the country . but for us , the rain is good . it brings sand and gravel to the river we need to use to build . we just wait for the rain to go .
ok ? stop . all right , now . yes , lot ’ s of laughter . yeah , exactly . lots of laughter , quite a bit of embarrassment . am i hearing a few  sorry ’ s  ? i think i ’ m hearing a few sorry ’ s . yup , yup , i think i probably am . and that ’ s exactly what happens every time , every time you do this with adults . mckim found this every time he did it with his students . he got exactly the same response : lots and lots of sorry ’ s . and he would point this out as evidence that we fear the judgment of our peers , and that we ’ re embarrassed about showing our ideas
there is a fixed kind of predatory gaze that you know you 're in trouble . but on the other side of that predatory gaze is a female husky in a play bow , wagging her tail . and something very unusual happens . that fixed behavior -- which is rigid and stereotyped and ends up with a meal -- changes . and this polar bear stands over the husky , no claws extended , no fangs taking a look . and they begin an incredible ballet . a play ballet . this is in nature : it overrides a carnivorous nature and what otherwise would have been a short fight to the death .
so depending on how i display it , i can hear and i can compose music with food . so imagine a restaurant where we can have , like , lady gaga salads as starters . i mean , this would get teenagers to eat their vegetables , probably . and also , some rachmaninov piano concertos as main dishes , and some bjork or madonna desserts , that would be a very exciting restaurant where you can actually eat songs . also , the way i perceive beauty has changed , because when i look at someone , i hear their face , so someone might look very beautiful but sound terrible . and it might happen the opposite ,
in other words , mind-wandering very likely seems to be an actual cause , and not merely a consequence , of unhappiness . a few minutes ago , i likened mind-wandering to a slot machine you 'd never want to play . well , how often do people 's minds wander ? turns out , they wander a lot . in fact , really a lot . forty-seven percent of the time , people are thinking about something other than what they 're currently doing . how does that depend on what people are doing ? this shows the rate of mind-wandering across 22 activities ranging from a high of 65 percent — — when people are taking a shower , brushing their teeth ,
through plants and algae , and their waste is our breath , and vice versa . this earth is alive , and it 's made its own membrane . we call it  atmosphere .  this is the icon of our journey . and you all here today can imagine and will shape where we go next . thank you . thank you . i 'm going to discuss with you three of my inventions that can have an effect on 10 to a 100 million people , which we will hope to see happen . we discussed , in the prior film , some of the old things that we did , like stents and insulin pumps for the diabetic .
my older sister was busy torturing my parents , and they were busy torturing her . i was lucky enough to be completely ignored , which is a fabulous thing , actually , i want to tell you . so , i was able to completely daydream my way through my life . and i finally daydreamed my way into nyu , at a very good time , in 1967 , where i met a man who was trying to blow up the math building of nyu . and i was writing terrible poetry and knitting sweaters for him . and feminists hated us , and the whole thing was wretched from beginning to end .
because we have all the ethnic diversities , all the -- you know , the genetic diversity , all the racial diversities , and also all the socio-economic diversities . so , i could actually choose samples to cover a cross section that would cover practically the whole world . so i did this for almost five years , and this experiment really took us all the way across the length and breadth of india . this is the himalayas . up in the north , very cold . i also had to check or invent an engineering design which would survive outdoors , and i was using regular , normal pcs , so i needed different climates , for which india is also great ,
we need to accelerate these shifts .
what we see again though is that the specific way that you spend on other people
do n't read them bedtime stories every night . maybe four nights out of the week read them bedtime stories and three nights of the week have them tell stories .
put at the right places to keep the machines running . i want to just cut this short . we did this over and over again . this sequence is also nice . this is a small child , a six-year-old , telling his eldest sister what to do . and this happens very often with these computers , that the younger children are found teaching the older ones . what did we find ? we found that six- to 13-year-olds can self-instruct in a connected environment , irrespective of anything that we could measure . so if they have access to the computer , they will teach themselves , including intelligence . i could n't find a single correlation with anything , but it had to be in groups .
and asked the people in your office , can you show me how to do it , and then somebody taught him . so i took the experiment out of delhi and repeated it , this time in a city called shivpuri in the center of india , where i was assured that nobody had ever taught anybody anything . so it was a warm day , and the hole in the wall was on that decrepit old building . this is the first kid who came there ; he later on turned out to be a 13-year-old school dropout . he came there and he started to fiddle around with the touchpad .
its mother . it even makes its cries sound like the mother 's language , which may further endear the baby to the mother , and which may give the baby a head start in the critical task of learning how to understand and speak its native language . but it 's not just sounds that fetuses are learning about in utero . it 's also tastes and smells . by seven months of gestation , the fetus ' taste buds are fully developed , and its olfactory receptors , which allow it to smell , are functioning . the flavors of the food a pregnant woman eats find their way into the amniotic fluid , which is continuously swallowed
and an idea of liberty . it reflects an idea of dignity , the dignity of the individual , the idea that each individual should have an equal vote , an equal say , in the formation of their government . but if we 're really to make democracy vigorous again , if we 're ready to revivify it , we need to get involved in a new project of the citizens and the politicians . democracy is not simply a question of structures . it is a state of mind . it is an activity . and part of that activity is honesty . after i speak to you today , i 'm going on a radio program
so we certainly need more of that . but because so many of the issues in education are n't just in school , they 're in family and community , what you also need , definitely , is more on the right hand side . you need efforts to supplement schools . the most famous of these is reggio emilia in italy , the family-based learning system to support and encourage people in schools .
and we could tell these viruses were not from these countries . they had come from thousands of miles away . and in one case , it originated on another continent . and not only that , but when they came into these countries , then they got on commercial jetliners probably and they traveled even farther to other places like russia , where , for the first time in over a decade last year , children were crippled and paralyzed by a disease that they had not seen for years . now all of these outbreaks that i just showed you , these are under control now , and it looks like they 'll probably stop very , very quickly .
we 've seen a 99 percent reduction in polio in 20 years . so if you look back to 1988 , there are about 350,000 cases of polio on the planet that year . in 2009 , we 're down to 1,600 cases . well how did that happen ? let 's look at a country like india . they have over a billion people in this country , but they have 35,000 local doctors who report paralysis , and clinicians , a huge reporting system in chemists . they have two and a half million vaccinators . but let me make the story a little bit more concrete for you . let me tell you the story of shriram ,
we 've show that four year-olds are actually better at finding out an unlikely hypothesis than adults are when we give them exactly the same task . so in these circumstances , the children are using statistics to find out about the world , but after all , scientists also do experiments , and we wanted to see if children are doing experiments . when children do experiments we call it  getting into everything  or else  playing .  and there 's been a bunch of interesting studies recently that have shown this playing around is really a kind of experimental research program . here 's one from cristine legare 's lab . what cristine did was use our blicket detectors .
the first step was to ask a question . now , i should say that we did n't get funding for this study because the scientists said small children could n't make a useful contribution to science , and the teachers said kids could n't do it . so we did it anyway . right ? of course . so , here are some of the questions . i put them in small print so you would n't bother reading it . point is that five of the questions that the kids came up with were actually the basis of science publication the last five to 15 years . right ? so they were asking questions that were significant
we know the temples they built , where people could come to experience a different reality . we know about the circuses , the arenas , the theaters . these are the remains of civilizations and they are the places that people went to experience life in a more concentrated , more ordered form . now , this man does n't need to go to a place like this , which is also -- this place , this arena , which is built like a greek amphitheatre , is a place for ecstasy also .
i 'm at a business school , so that 's what we do .
they visit an average of one and a half times a day , spend an average of 35 minutes a visit , and look at 50 pages a visit . so we feel that we 've formed a successful online community with girls . we launched two titles in october --  rockett 's new school  -- the first of a series of products -- is about a character called rockett beginning her first day of school in eighth grade at a brand new place , with a blank slate , which allows girls to play with the question of ,  what will i be like when i 'm older ?   what 's it going to be like to be in high school or junior high school ?
but that same shift in perspective leads us to have less tolerance than ever for injustice .
perfectly nice thing to do .
they said ,  please , do n't bring anyone with a degree and qualification into your college . 
and because fertility rates fell across that very same period that life expectancy was going up , that pyramid that has always represented the distribution of age in the population , with many young ones at the bottom winnowed to a tiny peak of older people who make it and survive to old age is being reshaped into a rectangle . and now , if you 're the kind of person who can get chills from population statistics , these are the ones that should do it .
get some . so , this is really where design is able to create a conversation . i was in these venues , and people were , you know , really into getting them . they were excited . it was breaking the ice , it was getting over a stigma , and i think that 's also what design can do . so , i was going to throw some condoms in the room and whatnot , but i 'm not sure it 's the etiquette here . yeah ? all right , all right . i have only a few . so , i have more , you can always ask me for some more later . and if anybody asks why you 're carrying a condom ,
ca : and so , that would be your response to the bjorn lomborg argument , that basically if you spend all this energy trying to solve the co2 problem , it 's going to take away all your other goals of trying to rid the world of poverty and malaria and so forth , it 's a stupid waste of the earth 's resources to put money towards that when there are better things we can do . bg : well , the actual spending on the r & amp ; d piece -- say the u.s. should spend 10 billion a year more than it is right now -- it 's not that dramatic .
it 's like trying to run into a brick wall . now i 'm not trying to be negative by throwing all these obstacles out and explaining what 's in our way . quite the opposite : i actually think people are amazing and smart and that they do care . but that , as i said , we live in this environment where all these obstacles are being put in our way . as long as we believe that people , our own neighbors , are selfish , stupid or lazy , then there 's no hope .
it 's about each person coming to this platform , embracing it in their own way , and being significant in their own life .
she said ,  oh gayle , this is actually my third business . my first business was a dressmaking business i started under the taliban . and that was actually an excellent business , because we provided jobs for women all around our neighborhood . and that 's really how i became an entrepreneur .  think about this : here were girls who braved danger to become breadwinners during years in which they could n't even be on their streets . and at a time of economic collapse when people sold baby dolls and shoe laces and windows and doors just to survive , these girls made the difference
i want to write about a tornado that comes into our house and blows all the windows out and ruins all the furniture and kills everybody .   all right . okay .  you tell a teacher that , and they 'll ask you , in all seriousness ,  should we send this child to the psychologist ?  and the answer is no , he 's just a boy . he 's just a little boy . it 's not okay to write these kinds of things in classrooms today . so that 's the first reason : zero tolerance policies and the way they 're lived out . the next reason that boys ' cultures are out of sync with school cultures :
can actually get those things onto the stage . so the way they work is , you know , you just put your finger in the thing , pull them back , and off you go . so , don ’ t look backwards . that ’ s my only recommendation here . i want to see how many of you can get these things on the stage . so come on ! there we go , there we go . thank you . thank you . oh . i have another idea . i wanted to -- there we go . there we go . thank you , thank you , thank you . not bad , not bad . no serious injuries so far .
i just asked my mother one day ,  why do all these women love me so much ?  she just answered ,  they are contributing to pay for your education hoping that you will be successful and one day come back and help improve the quality of life of the community . 
so we actually tried to commission some crash tests .
every day -- this morning , i wake up and go , my life is about a mustache . essentially , i 'm a mustache farmer . and my season is november . so in 2005 , the campaign got more momentum , was more successful in australia and then new zealand , and then in 2006 we came to a pivotal point .
appreciate what it is , you have to look a little bit closer . so that 's just the eye of the bee with a microscope , and now all of a sudden you can see that the bee has thousands of individual eyes called ommatidia , and they actually have sensory hairs in their eyes so they know when they 're right up close to something , because they ca n't see in stereo . as we go smaller , here is a human hair . a human hair is about the smallest thing that the eye can see . it 's about a tenth of a millimeter . and as we go smaller again ,
and , although there 's many directions people are seeking , i really only see five that can achieve the big numbers . i 've left out tide , geothermal , fusion , biofuels . those may make some contribution , and if they can do better than i expect , so much the better , but my key point here is that we 're going to have to work on each of these five , and we ca n't give up any of them because they look daunting , because they all have significant challenges . let 's look first at the burning fossil fuels , either burning coal or burning natural gas . what you need to do there , seems like it might be simple , but it 's not ,
let 's start with city hall . you ever see one of these before ? this is a newspaper ad . it 's a notice of a zoning application change for a new office building so the neighborhood knows what 's happening .
once upon a time , there was a dread disease that afflicted children .
those three women have trained 27 more women and solar-electrified 100 villages in afghanistan . we went to africa , and we did the same thing . all these women sitting at one table from eight , nine countries , all chatting to each other , not understanding a word , because they 're all speaking a different language . but their body language is great . they 're speaking to each other and actually becoming solar engineers . i went to sierra leone , and there was this minister driving down in the dead of night -- comes across this village . comes back , goes into the village , says ,  well what 's the story ?  they said ,  these two grandmothers ... 
so i just wanted you to look at this .
and the problem with this cure was it was very expensive , and it was very complicated to use .
thank you . people are living longer and societies are getting grayer .
is that there 's a much better solution out there , that 's gotten nobody excited because everyone is so delighted with the way car seats are presumably working . and if you think from a design perspective , about going back to square one , and say ,  i just want to protect kids in the back seat .  i do n't there 's anyone in this room who 'd say ,  well , the right way to start would be , let 's make a great seat belt for adults . and then , let 's make this really big contraption that you have to rig up to it in this daisy chain .  i mean , why not start -- who 's sitting in the back seat anyway except for kids ?
i 'll just wind up by saying that i think you do n't have to look for solutions outside . look for solutions within .
and that 's because there 's all of this chemistry going on , these molecules that say who each of these groups of cells is , and what their tasks should be . again , we think that bacteria invented that , and you 've just evolved a few more bells and whistles , but all of the ideas are in these simple systems that we can study . the final thing is , again just to reiterate that there 's this practical part , and so we 've made these anti-quorum sensing molecules that are being developed as new kinds of therapeutics . but then , to finish with a plug for all the good and miraculous bacteria
and it describes the same effortless , spontaneous feeling that you get when you enter into this ecstatic state .
and remember , it 's frozen . and so you can see here , old-fashioned technology of the paintbrush being applied . we take a microscope slide . then we very carefully melt onto the slide . this will then go onto a robot that 's going to apply one of those stains to it . and our anatomists are going to go in and take a deeper look at this . so again this is what they can see under the microscope . you can see collections and configurations of large and small cells in clusters and various places . and from there it 's routine . they understand where to make these assignments .
if it would be ok if i stayed for the week . i had a sleeping bag . the family had a small shed on the side of the house , so i said ,  could i sleep in my sleeping bag in the evenings ?  and i just told the little girl , whose name was hyun-sook lee , that if i ever did anything to embarrass her -- she did n't speak a word of english , although she looked very american -- she could just put up her hand and say ,  stop ,  and i would stop taking pictures . and then , my translator left . so there i was , i could n't speak a word of korean ,
and second , and probably the more reflective one , is just about how much each of us can hold problems in opposition when they 're really not that way .
we take the sand , we mix it with clay , and we keep building . that is it . the gando project was always connected to training the people , because i just wanted , one day when i fall down and die , that at least one person from gando keeps doing this work . but you will be surprised . i 'm still alive .
to run , during the manufacturing process , 20 colors for the x and the o , which is the name of the computer , and by mixing them on the manufacturing floor , you get 20 times 20 : you get 400 different options there . so , the lessons from seeing the kids using them in the developing world are incredible . but this is my nephew , anthony , in switzerland , and he had the laptop for an afternoon , and i had to take it back . it was hard . and it was a prototype . and a month and a half later , i come back to switzerland , and there he is playing with his own version .
you say it . you ca n't catch me . children : you ca n't catch me . teacher : i 'm the gingerbread man . children : i 'm the gingerbread man . teacher : well done . very good ... sm : back at gateshead , a 10-year-old girl gets into the heart of hinduism in 15 minutes . you know , stuff which i do n't know anything about . two children watch a tedtalk . they wanted to be footballers before . after watching eight tedtalks , he wants to become leonardo da vinci . it 's pretty simple stuff . this is what i 'm building now -- they 're called soles : self organized learning environments . the furniture is designed so that children can sit in front of big , powerful screens ,
all the toys that they 've outgrown two years ago and said ,  why do n't we start selling some of this on craigslist and kijiji ?  and they can actually sell it
and kylie -- i mean , it was almost like kylie was her own child . she 's being baptized . now , a lot of parents , when they adopt , actually want to erase their children 's history . and gail and gene did the complete opposite . they were studying korean ; they bought korean clothes . gene even did a little tile work in the kitchen , which was that ,  once upon a time , there was a beautiful girl that came from hills of korea to live happily ever after in atlanta .  she hates this picture -- it was her first job . she bought a bright red karmann ghia with the money she made working at burger king .
recently , the world bank opened its vault of data for public use , releasing 8,000 economic and social indicators for 200 countries over 50 years ,
so in the philippines today , parents and students can give real-time feedback on a website , checkmyschool.org , or using sms , whether teachers and textbooks are showing up in school ,
so i may have forgotten to mention that my son is an only child . so it 's going to be really important that he be able to drive me around some day . so how do we guarantee the safety of our kids ? how can we 100 percent guarantee the safety of our kids ? let me tell you what i 've come up with . if only . my little boy 's right there , and he 's like ,  she 's not kidding . she 's totally not kidding .  so in all seriousness , should my kid play football ? should your kid play football ? i do n't know . but i do know there are three things you can do .
then you get to their political articles . here 's a great article about an important election race that 's happening . it talks about the candidates -- written very well -- but no information , no follow-up , no websites for the campaigns , no information about when the debates are , where the campaign offices are . here 's another good article about a new campaign opposing privatization of transit without any contact information for the campaign .
you could get paid . they used to pay you two cents per coat hanger . so i was just like , well there 's all kinds of coat hangers . and so i 'll just go get them . and i knew she would n't want me to go get them , so i just did it anyway . and i learned that you could actually negotiate with people . this one person offered me three cents and i got him up to three and a half . i even knew at a seven-year-old age that i could actually get a fractional percent of a cent , and people would pay that because it multiplied up .
and he 'd say ,  come back in a week , if you still feel lousy .  ok , and most of them would not come back , but some of them would come back . and when they came back , he , still convinced they were not sick , had another jar of pills . in this jar were huge horse pills . they were almost impossible to swallow . and these , to me , are the analogy for the car seats . people would look at these and say ,  man , this thing is so big and so hard to swallow . if this does n't make me feel better , you know , what possibly could ?  and it turned out that most people would n't come back ,
on where to go . but we only looked at a handful of individuals at this point . we 're certainly going to be looking at more . i 'll just close by saying that the tools are there , and this is truly an unexplored , undiscovered continent . this is the new frontier , if you will . and so for those who are undaunted , but humbled by the complexity of the brain , the future awaits . thanks . each of you possesses the most powerful , dangerous and subversive trait that natural selection has ever devised . it 's a piece of neural audio technology for rewiring other people 's minds . i 'm talking about your language , of course ,
there are many ways to be a mammal . a 'roo hops in oz ; a horse runs in asia ; and a wolf evolves stilt legs in brazil . primates emerge from jungles , as tarsiers first , becoming lemurs not much later . learning became reinforced . bands of apes ventured into the open . and forests dried out once more . going upright became a lifestyle . so who are we ? brothers of masculine chimps , sisters of feminine bonobos ? we are all of them , and more . we 're molded by the same life force . the blood veins in our hands echoed a course of water traces on the earth . and our brains -- our celebrated brains --
it looks like the world car park could grow to on the order of 1.1 billion vehicles . now , if you parked those end to end and wrapped them around the earth , that would stretch around the earth 125 times . now , we 've made great progress with automobile technology over the last 100 years . cars are dramatically cleaner , dramatically safer , more efficient and radically more affordable than they were 100 years ago . but the fact remains : the fundamental dna of the automobile has stayed pretty much the same . if we are going to reinvent the automobile today , rather than 100 years ago , knowing what we know about the issues associated with our product
women own nearly half a million firms . china , women run 20 percent of all small businesses . and in the developing world overall , that figure is 40 to 50 percent . nearly everywhere i go , i meet incredibly interesting entrepreneurs who are seeking access to finance , access to markets and established business networks . they are often ignored because they 're harder to help . it is much riskier to give a 50,000 dollar loan than it is to give a 500 dollar loan . and as the world bank recently noted , women are stuck in a productivity trap . those in small businesses ca n't get the capital they need to expand
but there were problems .
get kids to stand up in front of groups and talk , even if it 's just stand up in front of their friends and do plays and have speeches . those are entrepreneurial traits that you want to be nurturing .
first of all , they learn the sound of their mothers ' voices . because sounds from the outside world have to travel through the mother 's abdominal tissue and through the amniotic fluid that surrounds the fetus , the voices fetuses hear , starting around the fourth month of gestation , are muted and muffled . one researcher says that they probably sound a lot like the the voice of charlie brown 's teacher in the old  peanuts  cartoon . but the pregnant woman 's own voice reverberates through her body , reaching the fetus much more readily . and because the fetus is with her all the time , it hears her voice a lot .
of the best machine learning programs that we have now . and some 10 years ago , i suggested that babies might be doing the same thing . so if you want to know what 's going on underneath those beautiful brown eyes , i think it actually looks something like this . this is reverend bayes 's notebook . so i think those babies are actually making complicated calculations with conditional probabilities that they 're revising to figure out how the world works . all right , now that might seem like an even taller order to actually demonstrate . because after all , if you ask even grownups about statistics , they look extremely stupid .
has enriched his life . more than 50 people have come to stay in the 18th-century watchhouse he lives in with his cat , squeak . now , i mention squeak because sebastian 's first guest happened to see a rather large mouse run across the kitchen , and she promised that she would refrain from leaving a bad review on one condition : he got a cat . and so sebastian bought squeak to protect his reputation . now , as many of you know , airbnb is a peer-to-peer marketplace that matches people who have space to rent with people who are looking for a place to stay
the dramatic moments of the birth of our first son , declan . obviously a really profound moment , and it changed our lives in many ways . it also changed our lives in many unexpected ways , and those unexpected ways we later reflected on , that eventually spawned a business idea between the two of us , and a year later , we launched babble , a website for parents . rufus griscom : now i think of our story as starting a few years earlier . av : that 's true . rg : you may remember , we fell head over heels in love . av : we did . rg : we were at the time running a very different kind of website .
this is the control condition . this is what they memorized . computer : ♫ memory , thump . ♫ cl : ♫ thump of the beat in a known repeat ♫ ♫ rhythm and rhyme , they make me complete ♫ ♫ spittin ' rhymes that hit you like a lightning strike ♫ ♫ i search for the truth in this eternal quest ♫ ♫ psychopathic words in my head appear ♫ ♫ whisper these lyrics only i can hear ♫ ♫ the art of discovering and that which is hovering ♫ ♫ inside the mind of those unconfined ♫ ♫ all of these words keep pouring out like rain ♫
and this is a word that appears throughout early mathematics , such as this 10th century derivation of proofs .
and that selects for resistant mutants . and so now of course we have this global problem in infectious diseases . we thought , well what if we could sort of do behavior modifications , just make these bacteria so they ca n't talk , they ca n't count , and they do n't know to launch virulence . and so that 's exactly what we 've done , and we 've sort of taken two strategies . the first one is we 've targeted the intraspecies communication system . so we made molecules that look kind of like the real molecules -- which you saw -- but they 're a little bit different . and so they lock into those receptors ,
and that 's what i want to talk to you a little bit about today . these are some of my kids with a salad bar . i put salad bars in all of our schools when i got there . everyone says it could n't be done . little kids could n't eat off the salad bar , big kids would spit in it -- neither happened . when i took over this , i tried to really figure out , like , what my vision would be . how do we really change children 's relationship to food ? and i 'll tell you why we need to change it , but we absolutely have to change it .
because having a meadow or living by a meadow is transformational . that it is amazing that connection we can have with what 's there . these milkweed plants have grown up in my meadow over the last four years . add to watch the different plants , or insects , that come to these flowers , to watch that -- and we 've heard about , you know , this relationship you can have with wine , this companion you can have as it matures and as it has these different fragrances . and this is a companion , and this is a relationship that never dries up . you never run out of that companion as you drink this wine , too .
but what happened when we looked inside the pig 's heart , to the electrogram ? there was the baseline -- first of all , a much bigger and more reliable signal . second of all , i 'll bet even you people who are untrained can see the difference , and we see here an st segment elevation right after this sharp line . look at the difference there . it does n't take much -- every layperson could see that difference , and computers can be programmed to easily detect it . then , look at that after three minutes . we see that the signal that 's actually in the heart , we can use it to tell people that they 're having a heart attack
and we could not find 25 girls in high school .
on cooperation to maintain and enhance our levels of prosperity , his actions suggest to us it might be inevitable that we have to confront the idea that our destiny is to be one world with one language . thank you . matt ridley : mark , one question . svante found that the foxp2 gene , which seems to be associated with language , was also shared in the same form in neanderthals as us . do we have any idea how we could have defeated neanderthals if they also had language ? mark pagel : this is a very good question . so many of you will be familiar with the idea that there 's this gene called foxp2
are under canada , and that south carolina is on top of north carolina , this is the home that i grew up in , ok ? so , it 's a miracle that i 'm here today . but actually , it 's not . it 's actually a wonderful thing . but then she says tel aviv and lenin , which is the town they came from , and ,  sorry , the rest unknown , thank you .  but in her lexicon ,  sorry , the rest unknown , thank you  is  sorry , the rest unknown , go to hell ,  because she could n't care less .  the impossibility of february  is that february 's a really wretched month in new york
so the red levels are where a gene is turned on to a great degree . green is the sort of cool areas where it 's not turned on . and each gene gives us a fingerprint . and remember that we 've assayed all the 25,000 genes in the genome and have all of that data available . so what can scientists learn about this data ? we 're just starting to look at this data ourselves . there 's some basic things that you would want to understand . two great examples are drugs , prozac and wellbutrin . these are commonly prescribed antidepressants . now remember , we 're assaying genes . genes send the instructions to make proteins .
so the yellow bar represents car seats , the orange bar lap-and-shoulder , and the red bar lap-only seatbelts .
♫ i need a mad scientist to check my brain ♫ i guarantee you that will never happen again . so now , what 's great about these free-stylers , they will get cued different words . they do n't know what 's coming , but they 'll hear something off the cuff . go ahead and hit that right sound icon . they are going to be cued these three square words :  like ,   not  and  head .  he does n't know what 's coming . free-styler : ♫ i 'm like some kind of [ unclear ] ♫ ♫ [ unclear ] extraterrestrial , celestial scene ♫ ♫ with two microphones hovering over my head ♫ ♫ see what you grinning ♫
you know , developing countries today will not simply accept solutions that are handed down to them by the u.s. , europe or the world bank .
doing things for which many of them did n't expect either fame or fortune , but which made their life meaningful and worth doing .
thank you . i have the answer to a question that we 've all asked .
through school not really reading more than the minimum , and still to this day ca n't read silently much faster than i can read aloud , but there were a lot of benefits to being dyslexic for me because when i finally did reconcile myself to how slow i was going to have to do it , then i think i came very slowly into an appreciation of all of those qualities of language and of sentences that are not just the cognitive aspects of language : the syncopations , the sounds of words , what words look like , where paragraphs break , where lines break . i mean , i was n't so badly dyslexic that
her best friend that she used to play with after school every day . and myung sung , under some pressure from me and the translator , gave us an address on the outside of seoul . and i went to that address and knocked on the door , and a man answered the door . it was not a very nice area of seoul , as there were mud streets outside of it . and i knocked on the door , and hyun-sook answered the door , and her eyes were bloodshot , and she seemed to be in shock . she did n't recognize me -- there was no recognition whatsoever . and this man came to the door and kind of barked something in korean .
in the case of artwork , the history is special indeed . the philosopher denis dutton in his wonderful book  the art instinct  makes the case that ,  the value of an artwork is rooted in assumptions about the human performance underlying its creation .  and that could explain the difference between an original and a forgery . they may look alike , but they have a different history . the original is typically the product of a creative act , the forgery is n't . i think this approach can explain differences in people 's taste in art . this is a work by jackson pollock . who here likes the work of jackson pollock ?
and ex-probation officers . the man who ran it was an ex-army officer . every time i had a visit by a person who i did not know who would feed me grapes , once every three months , i was strip-searched . that home was full of young boys who were on remand for things like murder . and this was the preparation that i was being given after 17 years as a child of the state . i have to tell this story . i have to tell it , because there was no one to put two and two together . i slowly became aware that i knew nobody
now these are multifunctional areas of the brain . as i like to say , these are not the  jazz areas  of the brain . they do a whole host of things that have to do with self-reflection , introspection , working memory and so forth . really , consciousness is seated in the frontal lobe . but we have this combination of an area that 's thought to be involved in self-monitoring , turning off , and this area that 's thought to be autobiographical , or self-expressive , turning on . and we think , at least in this preliminary -- it 's one study ; it 's probably wrong , but it 's one study -- we think that at least a reasonable hypothesis
but this is quite extraordinary : more has been learned about the underpinnings of disease in the last two and a half years than in the history of man . and when you put that together with , for example , now an app for the iphone with your genotype to guide drug therapy ... but , the future -- we can now tell who 's going to get type ii diabetes from all the common variants , and that 's going to get filled in more with low-frequency variants in the future . we can tell who 's going to get breast cancer from the various genes . we can also know who 's likely to get atrial fibrillation .
become a cyborg , tries to encourage people to extend their senses by using technology as part of the body . we should all think that knowledge comes from our senses , so if we extend our senses , we will consequently extend our knowledge . i think life will be much more exciting when we stop creating applications for mobile phones and we start creating applications for our own body . i think this will be a big , big change that we will see during this century . so i do encourage you all to think about which senses you 'd like to extend .
culture will .
were more important than ever . we were in a difficult operation in afghanistan in 2007 , and an old friend of mine , that i had spent many years at various points of my career with -- godfather to one of their kids -- he sent me a note , just in an envelope , that had a quote from sherman to grant that said ,  i knew if i ever got in a tight spot , that you would come , if alive .  and having that kind of relationship , for me , turned out to be critical at many points in my career . and i learned that you have to give that
to a scrap metal recycler where i got paid . and i thought that was kind of cool . strangely enough , 30 years later , we 're building 1-800-got-junk ? and making money off that too . i built these little pincushions when i was 11 years old in cubs , and we made these pin cushions for our moms for mother 's day . and you made these pincushions out of wooden clothespins -- when we used to hang clothes on clotheslines outside . and you 'd make these chairs . and i had these little pillows that i would sew up . and you could stuff pins in them .
you were separated from your family by the state . you were separated from your family and placed into mother and baby homes . you were appointed a social worker . the adoptive parents were lined up . it was the primary purpose of the social worker , the aim , to get the woman at her most vulnerable time in her entire life , to sign the adoption papers . so the adoption papers were signed . the mother and baby 's homes were often run by nuns . the adoption papers were signed , the child was given to the adoptive parents , and the mother shipped back to her community to say that she 'd been on a little break .
girl 3 : this is my pretend [ unclear ] one . girl 4 : we make a school newspaper on the computer .
was carried out in dijon , france where researchers found that mothers who consumed food and drink flavored with licorice-flavored anise during pregnancy showed a preference for anise on their first day of life , and again , when they were tested later , on their fourth day of life . babies whose mothers did not eat anise during pregnancy showed a reaction that translated roughly as  yuck .  what this means is that fetuses are effectively being taught by their mothers about what is safe and good to eat . fetuses are also being taught about the particular culture that they 'll be joining through one of culture 's most powerful expressions ,
it 's changed my life .
it 's basically a large data set of information that 's all freely available to any scientist around the world . they do n't even have to log in to come use this tool , mine this data , find interesting things out with this . so here 's the modalities that we put together . you 'll start to recognize these things from what we 've collected before . here 's the mr. it provides the framework . there 's an operator side on the right that allows you to turn , it allows you to zoom in , it allows you to highlight individual structures . but most importantly , we 're now mapping into this anatomic framework , which is a common framework for people to understand where genes are turned on .
to downgrade our super , hyper-mobile phones into the essence of their function .
that they hold within themselves . let 's journey together . let 's journey together . thank you . chris anderson : thank you so much . right now in liberia , what do you see as the main issue that troubles you ? lg : i 've been asked to lead the liberian reconciliation initiative . as part of my work , i 'm doing these tours in different villages and towns --
and -- at least they told me it was her house , i guess it was at one time , she had a party there or something . but anyway , this was the house , and they all lived there . now this is 24/7 living , half-a-dozen people who 'd left their -- some had left their wives behind and families behind , and they literally lived in this house for the entire six months the project was in america , but the first three months were the most intensive .
currently , there are about seven or 8,000 different languages spoken on earth . now you might say , well , this is just natural . as we diverge , our languages are naturally going to diverge . but the real puzzle and irony is that the greatest density of different languages on earth is found where people are most tightly packed together . if we go to the island of papua new guinea , we can find about 800 to 1,000 distinct human languages , different human languages , spoken on that island alone . there are places on that island where you can encounter a new language every two or three miles .
this one is more than 400 years old . each one was pinched or carved out of a ball of clay , and it was the imperfections that people cherished . everyday pots like this cup take eight to 10 hours to fire . i just took this out of the kiln last week , and the kiln itself takes another day or two to cool down , but raku is really fast . you do it outside , and you take the kiln up to temperature . in 15 minutes , it goes to 1,500 degrees , and as soon as you see that the glaze has melted inside , you can see that faint sheen , you turn the kiln off ,
that you could build on , and perhaps help me do my work . the first piece of the puzzle is remoteness and the quality of education . now , by remoteness , i mean two or three different kinds of things . of course , remoteness in its normal sense , which means that as you go further and further away from an urban center , you get to remoter areas . what happens to education ? the second , or a different kind of remoteness is that within the large metropolitan areas all over the world , you have pockets , like slums , or shantytowns , or poorer areas , which are socially and economically remote
now i 'm not advocating for bullies . i 'm not suggesting that we need to be allowing guns and knives into school . but when we say that an eagle scout in a high school classroom who has a locked parked car in the parking lot and a penknife in it has to be suspended from school , i think we may have gone a little too far with zero tolerance . another way that zero tolerance lives itself out is in the writing of boys . in a lot of classrooms today you 're not allowed to write about anything that 's violent . you 're not allowed to write about anything
but we had a little bit over an hour where we could 've saved this pig 's life . well , because of the fda , we did n't save the pig 's life , because we need to do this type of animal research for humans . but when it comes to the sake of a human , we can save their life . we can save the lives of people who are at high risk for a heart attack . what is the response to acute myocardial infarction , a heart attack , today ? well , you feel some chest pain or indigestion . it 's not all that bad ; you decide not to do anything .
he stepped back and he watched where everybody was going and he went the other way . and i hear that story over and over . matt froind , a dairy farmer in new canaan , connecticut , who woke up one day and realized the crap from his cows was worth more than their milk , if he could use it to make these biodegradable flower pots . now , he 's selling them to walmart . follow his passion ? the guy 's -- come on . so i started to look at passion , i started to look at efficiency versus effectiveness -- as tim talked about earlier , that 's a huge distinction .
during those time periods that it 's not available . so , we 've got big cost challenges here , we have transmission challenges : for example , say this energy source is outside your country ; you not only need the technology , but you have to deal with the risk of the energy coming from elsewhere . and , finally , this storage problem . and , to dimensionalize this , i went through and looked at all the types of batteries that get made -- for cars , for computers , for phones , for flashlights , for everything -- and compared that to the amount of electrical energy the world uses , and what i found is that all the batteries we make now
so the next day i go out . and i 'm given a horse and we go get the lambs and we take them to a pen that we built , and we go about the business of animal husbandry . melanie is the wife of albert . albert is the shepherd in question . melanie picks up the lamb -- two hands -- one hand on both legs on the right , likewise on the left . lamb goes on the post , she opens it up . alright . great . albert goes in , i follow albert , the crew is around . i always watch the process done the first time before i try it .
compare that to this woman from uganda .
we are not equipped for the 21st century . evolution did not prepare us for this . we just do n't have the bandwidth , and for people who say , oh , they 're having a nice day , they 're perfectly fine , they 're more insane than the rest of us . because i 'll show you where there might be a few glitches in evolution . okay , let me just explain this to you . when we were ancient man — — millions of years ago , and we suddenly felt threatened by a predator , okay ? — — we would — thank you . i drew these myself . thank you very much . thank you . thank you .
it should n't take away from other things . the thing you get into big money on , and this , reasonable people can disagree , is when you have something that 's non-economic and you 're trying to fund that --
here 's one of the culprits .
but we know it was n't good for you and me . and that is what the usda allows in our food supply . and that has to change , you know . the usda can not be seen as the be-all and end-all of what we feed our kids and what 's allowed . we can not believe that they have our best interests at heart . the antithesis of this whole thing is sustainable food . that 's what i really try and get people to understand . i really try and teach it to kids . i think it 's the most important . it 's consuming food in a way in which we 'll still have a planet ,
because it allows you to implant a thought from your mind directly into someone else 's mind , and they can attempt to do the same to you , without either of you having to perform surgery . instead , when you speak , you 're actually using a form of telemetry not so different from the remote control device for your television . it 's just that , whereas that device relies on pulses of infrared light , your language relies on pulses , discrete pulses , of sound . and just as you use the remote control device to alter the internal settings of your television to suit your mood , you use your language
and go ,  mmmmm , broccoli . i tasted the broccoli . mmmmm .  and then she would take a little bit of the crackers , and she 'd go ,  eww , yuck , crackers . i tasted the crackers . eww , yuck .  so she 'd act as if what she wanted was just the opposite of what the babies wanted . we did this with 15 and 18 month-old babies . and then she would simply put her hand out and say ,  can you give me some ?  so the question is : what would the baby give her , what they liked or what she liked ? and the remarkable thing was that 18 month-old babies , just barely walking and talking ,
and what it does is , it changes shape . so , it goes from a circle , to a round , to a square , to a figure eight . and just by drawing on a little computer tablet , the entire light fixture adjusts to what shape you want . and then finally , the leaf lamp for herman miller . this is a pretty involved process ; it took us about four and a half years . but i really was looking for creating a unique experience of light , a new experience of light . so , we had to design both the light and the light bulb . and that 's a unique opportunity , i would say , in design .
with the same success that we had last night when we did the practice . so matt keenan , just any time you 're -- all right -- ready to let her go . but first , we 're going to make sure that it 's appearing on the screen , so you see what it sees . you can imagine yourself being a mouse or fly inside of it , looking out of its camera . matt keenan : it 's switched on . pm : but now we 're trying to get the video . there we go . mk : can you bring up the house lights ? pm : yeah , the house lights and we 'll see you all better
so we have an ironic problem -- good teachers do n't want to go to just those places where they 're needed the most . i started in 1999 to try and address this problem with an experiment , which was a very simple experiment in new delhi . i basically embedded a computer into a wall of a slum in new delhi . the children barely went to school , they did n't know any english -- they 'd never seen a computer before , and they did n't know what the internet was . i connected high speed internet to it -- it 's about three feet off the ground -- turned it on and left it there .
how did this happen ? well we 're no genetically hardier than our ancestors were 10,000 years ago . this increase in life expectancy is the remarkable product of culture -- the crucible that holds science and technology and wide-scale changes in behavior that improve health and well-being .
for our lifestyle . and with all the wonderful technology we have we can do things that are much more efficient : conserve , recycle , etc . let me just rush very quickly through things that we 've done . human-powered airplane -- gossamer condor sort of started me in this direction in 1976 and 77 , winning the kremer prize in aviation history , followed by the albatross . and we began making various odd planes and creatures . here 's a giant flying replica of a pterosaur that has no tail . trying to have it fly straight is like trying to shoot an arrow
the clinical trials of transcranial magnetic stimulators -- that 's what tms means , device to treat migraine headaches -- appears to be quite successful . well , that 's the good news . the present portable device is far from optimally designed , both as to human factors as appearance . i think she said it looks like a gun . a lot of people do n't like guns . engage a company having prior successes for human factors engineering and industrial design to optimize the design of the first portable tms device that will be sold to the patients who have migraine headaches . and that is the second wish .
sometimes they send you pictures of them using the microscope .
working at the very top of their craft -- except one . this photograph was taken by dr. euan mason in new zealand last year , and it was submitted and published in national geographic . last year , we added a section to our website called  your shot ,  where anyone can submit photographs for possible publication . and it has become a wild success , tapping into the enthusiast photography community . the quality of these amateur photographs can , at times , be amazing . and seeing this reinforces , for me , that every one of us has at least one or two great photographs in them . but to be a great photojournalist ,
so , what we did was : instead of having a staff of artists that are just your wrist , we decided to free up a team of creative designers and engineers to find out what 's the successor to the suv phenomenon in america . this is 1996 we did this project . and so we sent them off with this team name , deep blue . now many people know deep blue from ibm -- we actually stole it from them because we figured
so their scores had gone up from zero to 30 percent , which is an educational impossibility under the circumstances . but 30 percent is not a pass . so i found that they had a friend , a local accountant , a young girl , and they played football with her . i asked that girl ,  would you teach them enough biotechnology to pass ?  and she said ,  how would i do that ? i do n't know the subject .  i said ,  no , use the method of the grandmother .  she said ,  what 's that ?  i said ,  well , what you 've got to do is stand behind them and admire them all the time .
i did comic book arbitrage . when i was about 10 years old , i sold comic books out of our cottage on georgian bay . and i would go biking up to the end of the beach and buy all the comics from the poor kids . and then i would go back to the other end of the beach and sell them to the rich kids . but it was obvious to me , right ? buy low , sell high . you 've got this demand over here that has money . do n't try to sell to the poor kids ; they do n't have cash . the rich people do . go get some .
which would presumably save a lot of lives ? and i think the answer , perhaps , lies in a story . the answer both to why has a car seat been so successful , and why this may someday be adopted or not , lies in a story that my dad told me , relating to when he was a doctor in the u.s. air force in england . and this is a long time ago : you were allowed to do things then you ca n't do today . so , my father would have patients come in who he thought were not really sick . and he had a big jar full of placebo pills that he would give them ,
i promise you , parusharam will speak in the ted conference a few years from now . thank you . i 'm going to try to give you a view of the world as i see it , the problems and the opportunities that we face , and then ask the question if we should be optimistic or pessimistic . and then i 'll let you in on a secret , which is why i am an incurable optimist . let me start off showing you an al gore movie that you may have seen before . now , you 've all seen  inconvenient truth .  this is a little more inconvenient . : man : ... extremely dangerous questions .
the party line is that every single aspect of my life has just gotten dramatically better ever since i participated in the miracle that is childbirth and family . i 'll never forget , i remember vividly to this day , our first son , declan , was nine months old , and i was sitting there on the couch , and i was reading daniel gilbert 's wonderful book ,  stumbling on happiness .  and i got about two-thirds of the way through , and there was a chart on the right-hand side -- on the right-hand page -- that we 've labeled here  the most terrifying chart imaginable for a new parent . 
and painting squares out of randomness , and i was n't getting anywhere . so i went back and dumped all my paintings in the arno , and i thought , i 'm going to just start playing around . jb : richard serra says that so nonchalantly , you might have missed it . he went and saw this painting by a guy who 'd been dead for 300 years , and realized ,  i ca n't do that ,  and so richard serra went back to his studio in florence , picked up all of his work up to that point , and threw it in a river . richard serra let go of painting at that moment ,
being an apprentice , you know , you do that . albert reaches in his pocket to pull out , you know , this black rubber band but what comes out instead is a knife . and i 'm like that 's not rubber at all , you know . and he kind of flicked it open in a way that caught the sun that was just coming over the rockies , it was very -- it was , it was impressive . in the space of about two seconds , albert had the knife between the cartilage of the tail , right next to the butt of the lamb , and very quickly the tail was gone and in the bucket that i was holding .
i said ,  no , i want to take this woman .  they said ,  why ? she does n't know the language . you do n't know her . 
and we were saying ,  but who 's going to volunteer for this procedure ?  but it turns out the men do , because they 're hearing from their girlfriends that they prefer it , and the men also believe it improves their sex life . so if we can start to understand what people really want in health and development , we can change communities and we can change whole nations . well , why is all of this so important ? so let 's talk about what happens when this all comes together , when you tie the three things together . and polio , i think , is one of the most powerful examples .
which then trigger high-quality piano samples like this . cl : okay , so it works . and so through this piano keyboard , we now have the means to take a musical process and study it . so what do you do now that you have this cool piano keyboard ? you ca n't just sort of --  it 's great we 've got this keyboard .  we actually have to come up with a scientific experiment . and so the experiment really rests on the following : what happens in the brain during something that 's memorized and over-learned , and what happens in the brain during something that is spontaneously generated , or improvised ,
and we suspect that this may help to explain why older people are better than younger people at solving hotly-charged emotional conflicts and debates .
that 's one of the reasons so much of what we 've come to think of as western science and mathematics and engineering was really worked out in the first few centuries of the common era by the persians and the arabs and the turks .
we savor life .
this is what the map of tandale looked like
vocational skill program for the older siblings so the younger ones are not stopped from coming to school . there is also this myth that children from the slums can not integrate with mainstream . take a look at this little girl who was one of the 28 children from all privileged schools , best schools in the country that was selected for the duke university talent identification program and was sent to iim ahmedabad . video : girl : duke iima camp . whenever we see that iima , it was such a pride for us to go to that camp . everybody was very friendly , especially i got a lot of friends .
everyone pitches in and gives 20 hives to help him replace those lost colonies . and so , it 's a very dynamic , and i think , historic and exciting community to be involved with . of course , the real importance for bees is not the honey . and although i highly encourage you , all use honey . i mean , it 's the most ethical sweetener , and you know , it 's a dynamic and fun sweetener . but we estimate that about one in three bites of food we eat is directly or indirectly pollinated by honeybees . now , i want to just illustrate that in the fact that if we look at the breakfast i had yesterday morning --
we think this is a powerful , world-changing invention . and i 'd like to thank chris for this opportunity to unveil our technology with you , and soon the world . thank you . what is going on in this baby 's mind ? if you 'd asked people this 30 years ago , most people , including psychologists , would have said that this baby was irrational , illogical , egocentric -- that he could n't take the perspective of another person or understand cause and effect . in the last 20 years , developmental science has completely overturned that picture . so in some ways , we think that this baby 's thinking is like the thinking of the most brilliant scientists .
we are participating in a reality that is different from that of the everyday life that we 're used to .
an 18 month boy in bihar , a northern state in india . this year on august 8th , he felt paralysis and on the 13th , his parents took him to the doctor . on august 14th and 15th , they took a stool sample , and by the 25th of august , it was confirmed he had type 1 polio . by august 30th , a genetic test was done , and we knew what strain of polio shriram had . now it could have come from one of two places . it could have come from nepal , just to the north , across the border , or from jharkhand , a state just to the south .
we need more reinvention .
among the first to leave the sea . they still do what they 've done for ages , their enemies long gone . scorpions follow prey out of the sea . slugs became snails . fish tried amphibian life . frogs adapted to deserts . lichens arose as a co-op . fungi married algae ... clinging to rock , and eating it too ... transforming barren land . true land plants arose , leafless at first . once they learn how to stay upright , they grew in size and shape . the fundamental forms of ferns followed , to bear spores that foreshadowed seeds . life flourished in swamps . on land , life turned a corner . jaws formed first ; teeth came later .
they want to know how china lifted 500 million people out of poverty in 30 years , how mexico 's oportunidades program improved schooling and nutrition for millions of children .
and there , it was reviewed by five independent referees , and it was published . okay ? it took four months to do the science , two years to get it published . typical science , actually , right ? so this makes amy and her friends the youngest published scientists in the world . what was the feedback like ? well , it was published two days before christmas , downloaded 30,000 times in the first day , right ? it was the editors ' choice in science , which is a top science magazine . it 's forever freely accessible by biology letters . it 's the only paper that will ever be freely accessible by this journal .
and that sounds like a kind of a romantic exaggeration . but actually , our nervous system is incapable of processing more than about 110 bits of information per second . and in order to hear me and understand what i 'm saying , you need to process about 60 bits per second . that 's why you ca n't hear more than two people . you ca n't understand more than two people talking to you . well , when you are really involved in this completely engaging process of creating something new , as this man is , he does n't have enough attention left over to monitor how his body feels , or his problems at home .
i took my skis and i took a board and i put a mast foot in there , and some foot straps , and some metal fins , and here i was , going really fast on frozen lakes . it was really a death trap . i mean , it was incredible , it worked incredibly well , but it was really dangerous . and i realized then i had to go to design school . i mean , look at those graphics there . so , i went to design school , and it was the early '90s when i finished . and i saw something extraordinary happening in silicon valley , so i wanted to be there ,
this is waterproofing the roof .  it is a bit of jaggery , a bit of urens and a bit of other things i do n't know . but it actually does n't leak . since 1986 , it has n't leaked . this technology , the women will not share with the men . it 's the only college which is fully solar-electrified . all the power comes from the sun . 45 kilowatts of panels on the roof . and everything works off the sun for the next 25 years . so long as the sun shines , we 'll have no problem with power . but the beauty is that is was installed by a priest , a hindu priest ,
because what that means is that for the first time in the history of the species , the majority of babies born in the developed world are having the opportunity to grow old .
in a way that 's matched motorically and in terms of lower-level sensory motor features ? and so , i have here what we call the  paradigms .  there 's a scale paradigm , which is just playing a scale up and down , memorized . and then there 's improvising on a scale -- quarter notes , metronome , right hand -- scientifically very safe , but musically really boring . and then there 's the bottom one , which is called the jazz paradigm . and so what we did was we brought professional jazz players to the nih , and we had them memorize this piece of music on the left , the lower-left -- which is what you heard me playing --
they ’ re following a script that they ’ ve agreed to . and it ’ s this code negotiation that leads to productive play . so , remember the sketching task we did at the beginning ? the kind of little face , the portrait you did ? well , imagine if you did the same task with friends while you were drinking in a pub . but everybody agreed to play a game where the worst sketch artist bought the next round of drinks . that framework of rules would have turned an embarrassing , difficult situation into a fun game . as a result , we ’ d all feel perfectly secure and have a good time --
so three very tough problems that might be solvable , and so , should be worked on .
this is the best you can get in hyderabad in indian education . the reason they went on studying was this .
how the spread of the virus was in 1983 in the world , or how we estimate that it was . what we are showing here is -- on this axis here , i 'm showing percent of infected adults . and on this axis , i 'm showing dollars per person in income . and the size of these bubbles , the size of the bubbles here , that shows how many are infected in each country , and the color is the continent . now , you can see united states , in 1983 , had a very low percentage infected , but due to the big population , still a sizable bubble . there were quite many people infected in the united states .
they spend 500 dollars for every one dollar -- 500 dollars marketing foods that kids should n't eat for every one dollar marketing healthy , nutritious food . the result of which is kids think they 're going to die if they do n't have chicken nuggets . you know that everybody thinks they should be eating more , and more , and more . this is the usda portion size , that little , tiny thing . and the one over there , that 's bigger than my head , is what mcdonald 's and burger king and those big companies think we should eat . and why can they serve that much ? why can we have 29-cent big gulps
causes genetic disease , we 've understood nothing else .  it took me three years to publish that . it 's just been published in the british journal of educational technology . one of the referees who refereed the paper said ,  it 's too good to be true ,  which was not very nice . well , one of the girls had taught herself to become the teacher . and then that 's her over there . remember , they do n't study english . i edited out the last bit when i asked ,  where is the neuron ?  and she says ,  the neuron ? the neuron ,  and then she looked and did this . whatever the expression , it was not very nice .
and here i was , outwardly very successful , but inwardly very depressed . but i 'm a guy ; i knew how to fix it . i bought a fast car . it did n't help . i was faster but just as depressed . so i went to my doctor . i said ,  doc , i can buy anything i want . but i 'm not happy . i 'm depressed . it 's true what they say , and i did n't believe it until it happened to me . but money ca n't buy happiness .  he said ,  no . but it can buy prozac .  and he put me on anti-depressants . and yeah , the black cloud faded a little bit , but so did all the work ,
this equation has four factors , a little bit of multiplication : so , you 've got a thing on the left , co2 , that you want to get to zero , and that 's going to be based on the number of people , the services each person 's using on average , the energy on average for each service , and the co2 being put out per unit of energy . so , let 's look at each one of these and see how we can get this down to zero . probably , one of these numbers is going to have to get pretty near to zero . now that 's back from high school algebra ,
it 's in a little willy wonka land . it 's like a little disneyland for them . it 's not like what we see . these are little bits of individual grain of pollen there and there , and here is a -- what you see as one little yellow dot of pollen , when you look in a microscope , it 's actually made of thousands of little grains of pollen . so this , for example , when you see bees flying around these little plants , and they 're collecting pollen , those pollen grains that they 're collecting , they pack into their legs and they take it back to the hive , and that 's what makes the beehive ,
so for instance , today , in ghana , courageous reformers from civil society , parliament and government , have forged a coalition for transparent contracts in the oil sector , and , galvanized by this ,
so , who got more than five circles figured out ? hopefully everybody ? more than 10 ? keep your hands up if you did 10 . 15 ? 20 ? anybody get all 30 ? no ? oh ! somebody did . fantastic . did anybody to a variation on a theme ? like a smiley face ? happy face ? sad face ? sleepy face ? anybody do that ? anybody use my examples ? the sun and the football ? great . cool . so i was really interested in quantity . i wasn ’ t actually very interested in whether they were all different . i just wanted you to fill in as many circles as possible . and one of the things we tend to do as adults , again , is we edit things .
is on a really deep gut level , i was feeling a lot of shame and embarrassed , frankly , that , in some respects , i had failed at delivering what i 'm genetically engineered to do . and of course , it made me question , if i was n't able to have another child , what would that mean for my marriage , and just me as a woman . so it was a very difficult time . as i started working through it more , i started climbing out of that hole and talking with other people . i was really amazed by all the stories that started flooding in . people i interacted with daily ,
audience : brilliant . now , open your eyes . we 'll do it one more time . everyone over there shout . where 's the sound coming from ? thank you very much . what 's the point ? the point is what science does for us . right ? we normally walk through life responding , but if we ever want to do anything different , we have to step into uncertainty . when he opened his eyes , he was able to see the world in a new way . that 's what science offers us . it offers the possibility to step on uncertainty through the process of play , right ?
i was raised with traditional stories of leadership : robert e. lee , john buford at gettysburg . and i also was raised with personal examples of leadership . this was my father in vietnam . and i was raised to believe that soldiers were strong and wise and brave and faithful ; they did n't lie , cheat , steal or abandon their comrades . and i still believe real leaders are like that . but in my first 25 years of career , i had a bunch of different experiences . one of my first battalion commanders , i worked in his battalion for 18 months and the only conversation he ever had with lt. mcchrystal
but designers are really the glue that brings these things together . so jawbone is a project that you 're familiar with , and it has a humanistic technology . it feels your skin . it rests on your skin , and it knows when it is you 're talking . and by knowing when it is you 're talking , it gets rid of the other noises that it knows about , which is the environmental noises . but the other thing that is humanistic about jawbone is that we really decided to take out all the techie stuff , and all the nerdy stuff out of it , and try to make it as beautiful as we can .
a bunch of pacifists . confused , aspiring pacifists . i understand . i 've been wrong a lot lately . like a lot . so i could n't figure out what to read today . i mean , i 've been saying i 've been prepping . what that means is prepping my outfit , prepping options , trying to figure out what i 'm coming behind and going in front of . poetry does that . it preps you . it aims you . so i am going to read a poem that was chosen just now . but i 'm going to need you to just sit for like 10 minutes and hold a woman who is not here .
and i thought i 'd start a barefoot college -- college only for the poor .
and that being bad , but we 've done that for thousands of years . the ancient egyptians used to move bees up and down the nile on rafts , so this idea of a movable bee force is not new at all . and one of our real worries with colony collapse disorder is the fact that it costs so much money to replace those dead-out colonies . and you can do that one year in a row , you may be able to do it two years in a row . but if you 're losing 50 percent to 80 percent of your colonies , you ca n't survive three years in a row . and we 're really worried
and the standard error bands are relatively small around these estimates as well . and it 's not just overall . it 's very robust to anything you want to look at .
when some -- probably one of you in this room -- jumped into the breach and created an organization like physicians for social responsibility , which fought against the nuclear threat , medicins sans frontieres , that renewed our commitment to disaster relief , mohamed elbaradei , and the tremendous hope and optimism that he brought all of us , and our own muhammad yunus . we 've seen the eradication of smallpox . we may see the eradication of polio this year . last year , there were only 2,000 cases in the world . we may see the eradication of guinea worm next year -- there are only 35,000 cases left in the world .
and avignon was born and hundreds of others would follow in their wake . the work they did was very , very high art , and stars came along like laurie anderson and merce cunningham and robert lepage who made work for this circuit , and you had these seminal shows like  the mahabharata  and the monumental  einstein on the beach .  but as the decades passed , these festivals , they really became the establishment , and as the culture and capital accelerated , the internet brought us all together , high and low kind of disappeared , a new kind of festival emerged . the old festivals , they continued to thrive , but
you have to have more than just one or two great photographs in you . you 've got to be able to make them all the time . but even more importantly , you need to know how to create a visual narrative . you need to know how to tell a story . so i 'm going to share with you some coverages that i feel demonstrate the storytelling power of photography . photographer nick nichols went to document a very small and relatively unknown wildlife sanctuary in chad , called zakouma . the original intent was to travel there and bring back a classic story of diverse species , of an exotic locale .