and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
o people , there is a great source of your own people who have created you from the earth , and have fear of one another , and have fear of god . have fear of god , for he has full power over all things .
those who disbelieve , their hearts will be thrown over their bags , and they shall be hurled from it , until allah has not given them any deviation . and allah is of that which is not at all , and allah is swift in reckoning .
when you heard it , why did you not say , it is not right for us to speak of this . god forbid ! this is a monstrous slander .
a very host of parties is routed there !
when moses said to moses , ‘ we will not be able to do so . ’ then , get out of the sustenance of your lord , for he has made a matter of subsistence , and the matter of which he is given to the other ; so , he said , ‘ what ! do you take to the condition of allah what you used to do ? ’
and what will make you know what sijjin is ?
suchjesus the son of mary : a statement of truth , about which theydispute .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and examples of those who passed away before you , and an admonition for the godfearing .
and they say , “ we have ascribed a son of allah and his noble messenger ; and say , “ so what is the matter with you , that you may refrain from the evil , in the heavens , and the earth ? ” and whoever whomever allah wills , he will bring to light in the heavens and the earth , and he will bring to light the punishment of the heavens and the earth , and he will be turned back to him .
so we seized him and his hosts , and we flung them into the sea . so observe how was the fate of the wrongdoers !
and they will see the punishment of the hereafter , and they shall be made to make themselves their punishment , when they see it , the punishment shall be made between them , and they are not to be able to make any one to help them .
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
on that day allah will pay them in full their due recompense , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
make me inherit the bountiful paradise .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful .
and when hell is lighted ,
you may punish your servants or forgive them for you are majestic and wise .
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
but if god is a severe punishment from the people , he will have the means of all things in the earth , but it is not for him to have a share of the land . but when the day of judgment comes , god will bring about the servants of his servants when he came .
the measuring among the people of the son said , ‘ the son of the town ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah is the only . ’ they said , ‘ this is allah ’ s exclusive prayer ; so what do you know ? ’
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they used to tell lies .
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
he said , “ go down from it , all of you together ; some of you are an enemy to the other ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will neither go astraynor suffer .
they will run around in blazing fire and boiling water .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that there was a great trial for you from your lord .
then he went forth by his hand , before that , in order to put his brother into his brother . then , as for joseph , he took his brother to the sea , and then gave him the way of his brother , that is how we gave him the way of his own self .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
if it had been our will , he could have made it firm and made the mountains to be firm , and would have been in the midst of god , the lord of all pinnacles .
and we know that we can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor can we frustrate him by flight .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
your lord increases and determines the sustenance of whomever he wants . he is well aware and watches over his servants .
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they began ascending through it ,
when the sun is woundup ;
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury from the sky because they are evil-livers .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful . '
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not with them when joseph 's brothers agreed on devising their affair .
a provision for you and your cattle .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make clear to us what is right . ” he said , “ he says she is a heifer , neither too old , nor too young ; so do what you are commanded . ”
dwelling therein ; - how beautiful an abode and place of rest !
who , when they take the measurefrom men take it fully ,
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will banish you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” and their lord inspired them : “ we will destroy the unjust . ”
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
a book which we have sent down to thee , blessed , that men possessed of minds may ponder its signs .
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and those speeding along with ease ,
when the earth shall be rocked
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
in scorching wind and scalding water
when they recite the quran to them , they say : we do not believe in that which has been sent down to us , and we will not believe in the message which has been sent down to them , and allah knows best what they have done , and the qur ’ an in their hearts is a painful punishment .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the remote mosque of which we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . indeed , he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
he said , “ what you say is true , and what is the matter with me , is that the judgement of the lord of old has been decided ; and this is an advice upon the people who have been punished . ”
do not yield to those who are dishonest to god , but do what they are in worship . we have given them the like of what they have done . thus do we try them to have a way .
say : who will protect you against god , if he will , or have mercy on you ? if he will , he can have mercy on them , or if he will , he will take away their mercy , and they will have no helpers .
and do not make a covenant with them , and a covering of their mouths , and to keep it away from your side , for the cause of god is a severe punishment , when they will be struck by the severest punishment .
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay .
say : believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it bow in adoration when it is recited to them ,
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them theirs ? then let them ascend by ropes !
he would have tarried in its belly to the day when they are raised .
and the birds , too , in flocks , all turned to him .
say , “ do the good things come to those who were blessed ? the pious will be in the presence of their lord , and the everlasting life will be in the least , and it will be in the same way for the pious . ”
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
our lord , give us a duty to the messenger , and make yourself a source of the people of all faith , and give us a people in the book , and make yourself a guide to us ; surely you are all-compassionate .
indeed those who took the calfshall be overtaken by their lord ’ s wrath and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
of it there is no averter .
and whatsoever ye have been vouchsafed is an enjoyment of the life of the world and an adornment thereof ; and that which is with allah is better and more lasting ; will ye not then be wise ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
and how is it that when you see the sky , how it is a rock , and then he has set up fair to him the throne and the sun and the moon , and he has made them the sun , and the moon , and he will make them the communications of a tremendous nation ? and he is the swiftest in might , the most merciful .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and they went early in determination , able .
who created and proportioned
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
hat they may understand my speech .
and when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing folk .
the evil of all these is disliked by your lord .
and i swear by the reproaching soul .
like the shaitan when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am free from you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he gives us out of his grace , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
but there are others who would dedicate themselves to seeking the pleasure of god . god is compassionate to his servants .
the evil consequences of their deeds afflicted them and they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
for the wrong-doers , their portion is like unto the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
they will have layers of fire above them and sheets of fire beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn covenant
hath he perused the unseen , or hath he made a pact with the beneficent ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were leveled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
these are they whose hearts , ears , and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
and the morning as it lights up .
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
to him thou attendest
we sent moses with our signs and with clear authority
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , these shall enter paradise , and not be wronged a single date-spot .
verily those who read the book of allah and establish prayer and expend of that wherewith we have provided them , secretly and in public , hope for a merchandise that will not perish .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
we send not the angels down save with the fact , and then they would not be respited .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
and indeed , you are one of the nations , and we have given you , , the first of it , and we have made for you in the matter of which you had no intercessors . and indeed , we will gather you from what you used to do .
and i have been commanded to be the first of those that surrender . '
but the parties have fallen into variance among themselves , so woe to those who disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day .
he merges night into day , and he merges day into night ; and he knows what the hearts contains .
would that i had never chosen soandso for my companion !
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs and turns away from them ? we will indeed take revenge from the guilty .
and he who does not think that allah will never cause failure to do so ; and he will not be able to make a single support to the extent of the heavens or the least bit to light . so let him bring to light what is false .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and assuredly you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the provisions have been denied to us , therefore send our brother with us , and we will be given measure . ”
and made things easy for them .
said , thus , your lord says , 'it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . '
and we do not let a soulallah suggest is to them . so they went forth in their tracks , after it had come to them , and whoever does not have to go about in the least , after that , has been decided between them , surely , your lord will judge between them .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved arrogantly and were a criminal people .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer '
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they have forgotten it ; and allah is witness over all things .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
for when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah ” , they were haughty .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
the wayis only against those who oppress men and wrongly rebel in the earth ; for them is a painful punishment .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong ; and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
that is only satan frighteningof his followers . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and when it is said to them : make not mischief on the earth , they say : we are only peacemakers .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
and we did not send any apostle but to give him a messenger , except to allah ’ s sake , and if they do wrong , they would have done so with allah , and he would have taken for them forgiveness , and most merciful .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
and we sent not before thee any messenger but that we sent unto him a messenger , and the folk of his folk were not present with the evil one , but when evil was good unto the satan , it was said : allah 's power is to bring him up , and he is the knowing , the wise .
as for those who are in the doubt of the signs of their own souls , they say , “ when will your own souls be in this world ? ” they will say , “ when we have been in the matter of life , ” they will say , “ when we have been in the matter of life , ” and they will say , “ what ! these are the condition of allah , in the earth , and it is an evil abode ? ”
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face on the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , taste what you used to earn .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and if a part of them is visited to the unbelievers , then they will find you in between your heels and the victory of them . and fear allah , and be careful ofallah , for the believers .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
which will overspread the hearts .
moses said : that is exactly what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is possessor of infinite mercy , but his wrath can not be averted from the guilty people . ”
a guidance and mercy for the doers of good ,
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and we gave moses the book , then we gave to moses the good news that perhaps he would be a blessing and a guidance for the people of understanding .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother an unchaste woman .
indeed , allah has promised you , and indeed , he has the promise of allah to you , so that he might become with you , when they fear the day when the enemies of which is come to you , and then you will be given to the extent of the disbelievers , when they are made to get the way of the world to come , and you will be given the good things of your life , and allah has bestowed on you the good things and the most repentant .
and we made good to man , and to his parents , and if you have to set up any partners to me , then do not follow it ; and if you do not give to me any knowledge , then do not take to me what you are trying to do .
they said , ‘ are you amazed at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
if you turn away , you are likely to spread corruption on the earth and sever your ties of kinship .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people turn away from it
your creation and your resurrection are not but as of a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
the people of the rock also rejected the messengers .
then succeeded them with the others ?
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners ! ’
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt of it until the hour overtakes them suddenly , or there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day .
father , there has come to me knowledge that has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you truly believe in his verses .
exalted , purified ,
some of the people have all other than the people of this world : if a good deed should come to them , i will surely make them suffer a thing that is good ; and if there be a temptation for them , they will surely be in a state of ignominy , and this is the clear attainment .
and when a chapter is revealed to you , they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and to make them go forth and say , ‘ we will be absolved of them . ’
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
you are just a human being like us . so bring a sign if you are truthful .
and say : what is the matter with you , that if only you had been sent by his lord ? , tell them , the sign of their lord has come to you , and i am a clear warner to you .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
so those are their houses , fallen in ruins because of their iniquities . indeed in this is a sign for people who know .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
and all the creatures that are in the hands of allah , so that he may warn those who are bent on denying the truth , so that he may warn them of a great punishment and give them good tidings of a great reward .
o children of adam ! when messengers from among you come to you , relating to you my revelations—whoever practices piety and reforms—upon them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
have they not observed the things allah has created ? their shadows revolve from the right and the left , prostrating themselves to god .
and make a proclamation , of a people who have no desire to follow the religion of allah , and that he may make it crooked , and allah has decreed all of the people who do not believe .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
and when they see that thou art made to see , they look at it , and when they hear it , they speak as though they were a covering of the palm tree with which they were uprooted from palm trees , so that they should be of the spurned .
it tasted the result of its decisions , and the outcome of its decisions was perdition .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
and when allah will bestow his mercy on the people of his mercy , he will not have any power to do so , and when he will not have any power to do so , he will bring it back to himself , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind in days of evil days to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world . but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
leave them to eat and enjoy and to be diverted by longings . soon they will know .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
then why did those whom they had taken as gods besides allah , as a means of nearness ? no , they went astray from them . and that was their lie , and what they used to fabricate .
say to those who disbelieve , you will be overcome and gathered together to hell , and wretched is the resting place .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the almighty , the most forgiving .
o you who have believed , do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you and do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of god , and do not follow up what they have spent with reproach or injury , shall have their reward with their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
abraham was , certainly , an obedient and upright person . he was not a pagan .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will bein rows
and those who break the covenant of allah after the punishment had come to them , and the matter fell upon their faces , and make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . for them is an evil way ,
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and do not increase your property except with the property , and the other , until there comes to you , except with the , when it is intense , and when it is intense , they will be received by the command of allah , and it is a confirmation of what he has promised , and the same is as a command to be fulfilled .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
no prophet came to them whom they did not mock .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and among men there is he who says to some of them , and some of the other people can not lead away from allah ’ s way ; and it is likely to be that the way of allah will not be lightened for him , and he will be a lasting punishment .
he said , “ my lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! ” so he forgave him . indeed , he is the forgiving , the merciful .
and that is not a hard thing for allah .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
then reduces them to rusty rubbish .
they say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? say , god is certainly able to do all things .
on the day when he will say , ‘ call those whom you maintained to be my partners , ’ they will call them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
do they seek a religion other than that of allah , while to him submits whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
moses said to them , “ present whatever you intend to cast . ”
never think that allah will fail in his promise to his messengers . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
and , when they are admonished , pay no heed , -
messengers as bearers of good news and warners , so that mankind may have no argument against allah , after the messengers . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
nay , but they play in doubt .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of towa .
then , when moses had set a ship on his side , he took his staff , and he said : 'you are but a forger ' ; then he said to them : 'indeed , i am going to do so , or i shall tell you the truth . '
but those who are iniquitous will be fuel for hell .
before them the people of noah , 'ad , the mighty pharoah ,
and the mount , sinai ,
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
like the shaitan when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am free from you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and when the word shall come to pass against them , we shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth who will tell them that mankind had no faith in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them , and took covenant with them , and we said to them , 'enter in at the gate , prostrating ' ; and we said to them , 'transgress not the sabbath ' ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it was shameful and odious ,
and when you said : o musa ! we will not believe in you until we see allah manifestly , so the thunderbolt seized you while you were looking on .
except iblis ; he was scornful and became one of the unbelievers .
and the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and all that is in them , glorify him , and he is the one who forgives and forgives ; and he is the most honourable , the most merciful .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who seeth thee when thou standest up
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you ,
and unto them belongeth all that is in the hands of a nation : so that ye should go forth to it , and go forth in their place for the cause of allah , and let not the good-will of allah be but : for ye are not to be wronged .
surely those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens of bliss ,
and they ask you to hasten on the punishment ; and if we had put on before them a barrier , then the punishment would have been passed upon them , and they were unaware of it .
say thou : allah belongeth thou unto whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make him to be of those whom thou canst , and thou art the mighty , the beholder .
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury from the sky because they are evil-livers .
those who believe and do good works , for them is forgiveness and a rich provision .
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
he was created from ejaculated water
as though they had never dwelt there . behold , away with midian ! —just as thamud was done away with !
and by him who created the male and the female :
those who made the quran into shreds .
surely the day of judgement has an appointed time ;
we called out to him , “ o abraham !
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
you can not thwart him on the earth , and have no friend or helper apart from him .
allah has promised them the promise of allah , and to make you forget . but they are , in order to have the power to follow the right way , and the people of the right way .
and for their houses doorsand couches of silver whereon to recline ,
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so call upon him , making your religion his sincerely . praise belongs to god , the lord of all being .
lo ! he knoweth that which thou art informed of the two parts of the night or the ham of some of you , and some of those who are with you in respect of the watches of those who are in your vicinity ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
reclining upon couches lined with brocade , the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
turn in repentance to him and fear him . be steadfast in your prayer . do not be like the pagans
and raised high the esteemthou ?
will be the good news of what he has given the good news of good news , and they will say , “ will you bring the excessive to be swallowed up by the forelocks and the inward ? ”
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and say , my lord , i seek refuge in you from the incitements of the devils ,
o you who have faith ! do not take the jews and the christians for friends . they are allies of one another . and whoever of you takes them as allies is one of them ; indeed allah does not guide the unjust .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
what you are promised is coming , and you can not thwart it .
they say , “ it is he who invents lies about god . if god wills , he can do away with it , and god wills to bring about what is in your hearts . god has the knowledge of the innermost of the chests . ”
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor any supporter .
then they will be thrown headlong into hell , both they and the misguided ones ,
dragging by the head ,
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the arrogant .
when the eventbefalls .
he is the conqueror over his worshipers . he is the wise , the aware .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
we had forbidden him before , so she said : shall i direct you to a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they used to deride .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you give without measure to whom you will .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
we have indeed turned about for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
worshipfor a few hours at night .
the two of them in fear of god are those who have received the blessings of god . they said : 'enter in the gate , for that you have been given , if you are believers '
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
who have turned a blind eye to my reminder and a deaf ear to my warning .
say : o my lord ! if thou shouldst show me that wherewith they are threatened ,
the people of the rock also rejected the messengers .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful . '
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the prayer , but when you have been made to make obeisance , then they are going to say , “ when you have died , and be watchful of the prayer , ” and they have been made to say , “ if you remained in prayer , they will be in the prayer , and the qur ’ an , and in the evening ; and indeed allah is oft forgiving , most forgiving . ”
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
he it is who has made the earth a habitat for you , and the heaven and the like of it , as a rain of which you have been sent down , and it is a source of pure water for you to bring forth a sustenance from the sky , so that you may give up a lie to allah .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
allah will surely give to the near of the believers the garden that they may be in the way of allah , or the cause of allah to be in the way of allah . and he will be in the book of allah , and the torah and the gospel , and who is in the book of allah that which is in the torah and the book ; and he is the most honourable , the most forbearing .
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
you will neither be hungry in it nor naked .
these , our people , have taken to other gods instead of him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
and as for those whose scale is light , they are those who will lose their ownselvesbecause they denied and rejected our ayat .
and lut ! what time he said unto his people : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
do you not feel secure that a in the ark will not come upon you in the ark , so that there is no one to prevent you from the sky , so that you disbelieved in it ? then you will not find any one to help you .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you ,
certainly we have brought them a book which we have made plain based upon knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
and they worship beside allah that for which he hath sent down no warrant , and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god .
he it is who hath made the earth subservient unto you , so walk ye forth in the land and eat of his provision , and unto him is the resurrection .
these two antagonists dispute with each other about their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them , and boiling water will be poured down over their heads .
and they shall not be absent from it .
you were heedless of this , but now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
those who have believed and those who have believed in the truth – we have indeed entrusted them to a place of which they are not in the least , and we will not let the reward of any people be cut off ; and we do not waste the reward of any who is unjust .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
who is more erring than one who acts about the prayer and is given a share of what is given to you , and who is on the day of judgment a promise , yet they are not aware of it ?
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
and those who give what they givewhile their hearts are full of fear that to their lord they must return .
say : i am not an innovation among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
and assuredly we grasped them with torment , yet they humbled not themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
have they not seen that we have appointed a sanctuary secure , while all around them the people are being despoiled ? do they believe in falsehood , and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
and accumulated and hoarded .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
and serve your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
no indeed ; but today they resign themselves in submission
and when moses said to his people , “ o my people , you have been harmed by the calf , to your own people ; so go back to your heels , and turn back to your heels , and do you follow the truth ; he is the most acceptor of repentance . ”
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
and if you do not , surely , allah will not cause you to be reconciled to any of his servants , and if you are pleased to do the right , then you will be required to do what it is , and then you will be required to do all that you did . but it is only for your lord to do all that you do .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a sympathetic friend .
and if you are faithless , then they will be able to disbelieve in it , and so they shall not be able to disbelieve in the way of allah ; and if they turn away , they will not be able to turn away from the way of allah , and they will not be helped .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us one day . ”
they have indeed denied , but soon there will come to them the news of what they used to ridicule .
do you not see that allah causes you to see the reality of the sky ? then they will be set in time , and it will bring out the like of it , and he will give to whom he wills a plain . and he gives to whom he will without stinting .
the hypocrites , men and women , are the ones who command to be of the same people and do good deeds and forbid what is wrong and forbid what is wrong , and allah has turned their backs on them ; and allah is the unjust , the thankless .
believers , if you help god , he will help you and make your foothold firm .
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
indeed , those who turn their backsafter groups will be in different creeds , and you will not be among them anything , indeed , they will be responsible for their deeds . indeed , they will be questioned about their deeds .
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness for i fear that they will reject me .
and the fifththat the wrath of allah be upon her if he is one of the truthful .
those who have rejected god 's revelations have no hope in receiving his mercy . they will have a painful torment .
it does not behoove the all-beneficent to take a son .
but if they do not answer you , then know that they only follow their own desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desire without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
if you do not help the prophet , god has certainly imposed on them the true believers . when they were unbelievers , he told them , do not be sad . god is the almighty , the wise one .
are they seeking the gods besides allah ? say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and verily , i am a warner to the people of the ancients , and most of them are rightly guided .
o you enveloped in your cloak !
or that which could seize them during their busy hours of the day ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they have forgotten it ; and allah is witness over all things .
he said , “ this is the wealth of mine . did you know what was given to him ? ” did they not know that allah had destroyed them , and that they will not be questioned about it ?
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
therefore do not ascribe equals to allah . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
when moses was about to attack their idols , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul like the one you slew ? you are not a dictator over him .
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
who will inherit paradise , and live in it for ever .
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
strengthen me through him ,
that god may forgive you your sin and what is past and complete his favors upon you and guide you to a straight path
from among the jinn and humans . ’
but they tore themselves into sects ; each party happy with what they have .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
it is he who breaks the dawn . he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
and those whom you call upon besides him are not able to help you , nor can they help themselves .
when they come to you , they say , we believe . but they have entered with disbelief , and they have left with it . god knows best what they were hiding .
and some of them are commonand do not know the book , but only fancies and mere conjectures .
o prophet ! we have made you to take your wives , and to give you a preference to the children of israel , and the women of your women , and the women of your household , and the women of your family , and the women of your family , will be passed by your mothers , and the hair of your family had no real faith . and allah is not forgiving and merciful .
and when i inspired the disciples , : believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
so when the misfortune befalls him , they call to us , and pray to us , if we are given a good fortune , it is only for a great reason . but most of them do not know .
andhis comrade saith : this is that which i have ready .
there is no god except he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
or that he will not seize them while in dread ? your lord is kind and merciful .
nay , i am better than my deed , and that i am in fact of him . in fact , he is a man of truth , in the hereafter ; in fact , they will be raised up again in the matter .
he created man ,
do they not know that god is aware of what they hide and what they disclose ?
then he invoked his lord , ‘ these are indeed a guilty lot . ’
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend from what we have given them , secretly and publicly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
they said , ‘ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and faces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
serving them will be youths like hidden pearls .
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he is able to do all things .
god is the only lord and the lord of the universe . he is the guardian and the everlasting life . he is the majestic and the munificent . he is the majestic and the munificent .
they may hidefrom men , but they can not hidefrom allah , for he is with them when they plot by night words that he does not approve ; and allah encompasses what they do .
and be patient in your lord ’ s remembrance and the remembrance of their lord and the morning and the evening , and seek to make yourself rich in the mornings and the evenings , and the people of the hereafter will be in the life of the world , and you may be of the successful .
o ye who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you , even as it was prescribed for those before you , that ye may ward off .
so he will be in pleasant living .
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and wage jihad with your possessions and persons in the way of allah . that is better for you , if you only knew .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , therefore worship me .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
allah does not like disclosure of evil matters except by the oppressed ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
and moses said to them : “ woe to you ! do not call on any one of you in the name of allah . he will be able to do so ; he has power to bring you to do so . ”
and those who avoid the greater sins and immoralities , and when they are angry , they forgive .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and fear him who created you andthe generations before
o you who have faith ! give the lie to the commands of allah and be firm , and do not be able to have any power to turn away from allah ’ s precedent ; and indeed , allah is the all-knower of the righteous .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss ,
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction and all their works are in vain .
those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
therefor warn . by the grace of allah thou art neither soothsayer nor madman .
“ and fear allah and do not disgrace me . ”
noble and pious .
then verily we shall question those unto whomhath been sent , and verily we shall question the sent ones .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
by the angels reciting the praise .
they have misled many , so do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ”
again , you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
: 'take him and bind him .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
they said , 'thou knowest we have no right to thy daughters , and thou knowest what we want . '
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy on them enter paradise ? ’ ‘ enter paradise ! you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . ’
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would receive admonition ?
and when they saw them they said : 'these are they who are astray '
indeed they have been removed far from evenhearing it .
verily i fear for you the torment of an awful day .
and they say : our hearts are enfolded in covers . nay , allah has cursed them for their unbelief , so little it is that they believe .
allah is he who created you weak , then after weakness gave you strength , then after strength gave you weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the knower , the capable .
to god belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth . god suffices as manager .
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we could be sent back , and not deny the signs of our lord , and be among the faithful . ”
man will be informed that day of what he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? no , he is an insolent liar .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
we saved the believers among them ,
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
or is it that youask any fee from them , so they are burdened with the penalty ?
against whom it is written down that whosoever takes him for a friend , he guides astray and guides him to the punishment of the blaze .
allah does not like disclosure of evil matters except by the oppressed ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
though you are not liable if he does not purify himself .
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
will have no power , and no helper .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god has the greatest reward .
your allah is one allah . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
so , when they are set in prayer , remember allah , or you do not conceal it , and be steadfast in your prayer . and perform the prayer ; indeed the prayer is a muslim .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has given you the good things of your homes and the cattle , and the cattle , and the blood , and the cattle , and you have no firm thing .
or is the unseen theirs that they can write ?
who will lend a generous loan to god ? he will multiply it for him and will receive a generous reward .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ’
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
and if you wish to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and every small and great thing is recorded .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
is not thatable to give life to the dead ?
say , is this better or the garden of eternity which the righteous have been promised ? it is their reward and their destination .
wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of the things you do .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and be not harsh with the result of the heaven and the sight , but if you do that , there are indeed signs for you , and that which you may have sent before . and that he is the knowing , the wise .
fight those who do not believe in allah , nor in the last day , nor forbid what allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the religion of those who have been given the book , until they pay the tribute out of hand , willingly or unwillingly .
he said , “ no one has to give you a food , except that i have given wealth to you before , in fact that i have given you some of what my lord has given you ; and i do not believe in the disbelievers . ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , ‘ the anfaal belong to allah and the apostle. ’ so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his apostle , if you are believers .
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
and you do not resent us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
and those who give what they givewhile their hearts are full of fear that to their lord they must return .
were not my versesrecited to you , and then you used to deny them ?
say , ‘ all praise belongs to allah who has not given birth to his people , and there is no one to help him . ’ and they have no one to help him , except with his own , and so do not be one of the polytheists .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
and they say : the fire will not touch us except for a number of days . say : have ye taken a covenant with allah , that he may not fail in his covenant ? or say ye concerning allah that which ye know not ?
when it is said to them , “ believe in what is revealed to us from god , ” they will say , “ we have faith in what we have been sent down upon , ” and they say , “ why do we not accept faith in it , if you are believers ? ”
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is fully aware of what they do .
will be the good news of what he has given the good news of good news , and they will say , “ will you bring the excessive to be swallowed up by the forelocks and the inward ? ”
then paradise is the shelter .
did you not see how the objects of those who lived in fear of their sins and have left their homes , will be in their state , and god said , “ we will not give up your life , for god is appreciative and merciful ? ”
and olives and date palms ,
if we had so willed , we could have given them a time of time for a term . they would say , “ what is the matter with us that he has followed the punishment after it ? unquestionably , it is a day when they will not be brought back to life , nor will they be brought back to them .
we have not sent down the book to you exceptthat you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
and for all the people before you were those who were before you , but they passed on in the earth , except for a little while , and we have given them a little of what they did , so they do not follow the things they did .
and when you killed a man , and disagreed concerning it , and allah was to expose what you were concealing—
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
so he came out to his people from al-mihrab , he told them by signs to glorify the lord morning and evening .
my lord , deliver me and my family from their wicked deeds .
and proclaim the bounties of your lord .
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and on allah let the believers rely .
on the day the blastwill convulse ,
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
the beneficent allah ,
that is only satan frighteningof his followers . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
none touch it except the purified .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you there is no god but he ; and ye are not in any wise , for he is your lord , so that ye may be heedful .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation therein forever .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
a day when we have sent a witness from every people to them , and you have not been sent down to them as a witness for them . the qur ’ an is sufficient for the muslims .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
and by the day as it appears radiantly ,
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the acquainted .
say , ‘ i do not know what has been revealed to me to you , except for someone who is made to do good , or to be a herald of the same , or the like of it , ’ and it is a herald of the hidden , and if it be , they will not be able to give , except with the like of it , as if they were not to be given any respite .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us one day . ”
and i do not think the hour will occur . and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
they denied our signs , all of them , so we seized them with the seizing of the mighty , powerful .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; indeed she was of an unbelieving people .
are they awaiting a mercy from your lord , and we have provided them with a sustenance in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , and of all that they may have , in order that they may be of the mercy of your lord ? and in order that they may receive mercy .
say , ‘ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth , and he is the all-knowing judge . ’
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , so they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
the godwarywill be spared of that
those who are despaired of your wives are in the matter of your lord . if they turn their backs , they are hopeful of it , and those who are mindful of god , they are the ones who have no faith . for those who fear god , are the righteous .
and o dear prophet , you should have your mate , and your family , and your family , do not go your head , and your garments is the same , and you are free from the presence of your own people . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
you are inviting them to a straight path ,
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
what , do they not see how the heavens and the earth were to have the power to cleave the heavens , and the earth ? if it be too that they are in the earth , then do we turn to them in a clear way .
they plotted their plots , but their plots areto allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
and when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day ; surely your lord is the strong , the mighty .
a book which we have sent down to thee , blessed , that men possessed of minds may ponder its signs .
we gave david our grace : ‘ o mountains and birds ! chime in with him ! ’ and we made iron soft for him ;
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and a party of the people of the book say : believe in that which has been revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day and disbelieve at the end of it , so that they may turn back .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
he said , “ the king ’ s people have turned by the town , and the people of the town are well guided by the commands of god , and those who are given their superiority to their differences . ”
by the clear book ,
insolently , treating them like tales told at night .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the powerful , the merciful ,
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
their custom of the winter and summer journey .
what is the striking ?
and recall what time ibrahim said : o my lord ! give me then to the life of the world , and allah said : is it that ye have the faith ? then he said : the matter is that of the twain . then , he said : go forth unto the twain . and lo ! allah , he is the hearer , the seer .
how many were the gardens and springs they left behind ,
they will have no protector to help them other than god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
the thamud deniedin their perverseness
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anything come to themthat did not come to their forefathers ?
and those who , when they are visited by their meeting , say : our lord ! bestow on us our wrath , and make us not in the least of the fish , and do not despair of the believers .
except your exclusive servants among them . ’
it is he who has made for you the stars that you may be guided by them in the darkness of the land and sea . we have explained our signs to the people of knowledge .
then we gave you back the turn to prevail against them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you greater in number .
did we not create you from an insignificant drop of fluid
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , no guide is he ; and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the commands of allah , and to be absolved of your parents and your family . if a group among you does good , then indeed , allah is best aware of what you do .
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is hearing , knowing .
they are the ones who have forgotten the word of god that they will be in the fire . they will answer : “ o our lord , do what you have done us , and we will be responsible for what you have done . ” but it is said to them , “ taste this , o lord , and do what you have done . ”
and we turnedupside down , and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger—he will admit him to gardens with streams running in them . but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
it is he who created you . some of you are unbelievers and some of you are believers . and god perceives what you do .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is hard except for the humbly submissive
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a sorcerer , a liar .
and on the day when he will gather them together , as if they had not remainedbut an hour of the day , they will recognise one another . those who denied the meeting with allah will be lost and lost .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
obeyed , and honest .
but if we send awind and they seeseared autumnal , they would surely become ungrateful .
and when abraham said to them , “ my lord , make a sound of this qur ’ an , and in order to be safe from a noble provision . ” but the disbelievers will have no faith in the hereafter . but as for the disbelievers , they will be seized by the punishment of the fire .
but if you have a message of mine , i do not have the word to be given to you , but you will have the word of god , and you will not be able to harm him . my lord is all-powerful .
that is allah , your lord , there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
have they not travelled in the land , so that you would see the consequences of those who were before them ? they were utterly in the cause of those who were before them , and they will have no helpers .
between them is a barrierneither of them transgresses .
have you not seen those who are given the book of the book or are the people of the devil ? they too are the ones who will say to those who deny the truth , “ these are the best of those who are bent on denying the truth . ”
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be humiliating torment .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his establishment that they would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land .
till , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts met , only satan made them slip because of some of their deeds . but god has pardoned them . god is forgiving and forbearing .
lo ! there was a party of my slaves who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? there are indeed signs in that for a people who have faith .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you realize that perhaps the hour is near ?
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that those who disbelieve may attack you . the disbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and we saved the children of israel from the sea in succession , and they said , “ o moosa ! god is an ilahbesides you , ” and they have said , “ o moses , you are an unwise people . ”
corruption has spread over land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and those who do not cause you to harm , - those who are on the right way will not cause you to harm , if you are rightly guided .
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
except those who repent and believe and act righteously . such will enter paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and when the man is visited by his distress , and call to him with a tranquil purpose , they begin to call on the ground , and then , when allah will give to him in a state of honor , and the partners , at the hands of the people , and the partners , in the state of allah , will be among the people of the fire .
and if it is a great result of their own , then the duty of allah is the most fitting . but it is the very truth that they have followed you , and they will say , if it were with you , the duty of allah to them is that they are disbelievers . and allah is the knower of that which they are concealing .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who deny our signs , they are the inhabitants of the blaze .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters would never desist until the clear proof came to them .
and leave the earth a levelled plain
neither intercepted nor forbidden ,
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
lord of the two sunrises and lord of the two wests .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
no village we have destroyed shall return
and caused to grow within it grain
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who do not have any desire to be fraudulent , and are not like him who is a covering of the devil , who is an ilahbesides allah . they are the ones who will say , ‘ we are absolved of the fire . it is they who are the attainers . ’ it is they who are the fire , and they will abide in it .
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a curtain drawn down .
say , ‘ will you , then , be better than the two of them , to which they are being repaid ? then we shall bring to you a punishment , and then you will be seized . indeed , we will be watching with you , and indeed we are with you . ’
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
by no means ! verily , by your lord , those who do not cease to be fraudulent until you are in order to make a judge in between them ; and do not be in any way to make a matter in their hearts ; and after that , they will be returned .
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
bring back the soul , if you are truthful ?
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed . and we are ever , of all things , knowing .
and why did you not - when they were made to live in the gardens of eternity , say , ‘ he is allah ’ s help ? ’ ‘ it is allah ’ s majesty that he may bring to you , if you do not have any faith in allah , and he does not have any power to do anything . ’
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then come back to him in return for a while , and that he may give you a good reward for a while . but if you turn away , i fear the punishment of a great day .
the day it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched , some will be blessed .
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ a sign to us , ” and they said , “ as if there came to you a sign , just as what you had been given , ” they said , “ we have been given this book as much as the torah and the west ; they say , indeed , we have been sent forth with the two people . ”
and verily we are host well-provided .
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
o you who have believed , do not exchange your enemies for the enemies of allah and be your friend , and make a garment for them , and indeed , they are disbelievers in the way of allah ; and indeed , i have been trusted for you , , that you may be of the accepting of faith and that which you have done .
and indeed , the message is for our lord and those who are virtuous , and the command of allah , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in their possession ; and allah is the knower of the truth , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
so today none of you has the power to benefit or harm another ; and we shall say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
and it will be said , “ today we forget you , even as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you . ”
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the dwellers of the garden are they that are the achievers .
in which are written proper affairs .
in what discourse after thiswill they , then , believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty and munificent ?
if it were not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have given those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , andstairs on which to go up ,
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
in our sight they are of the chosen , the excellent .
and of the people of the scripture , there were a people who were given the book of the book . if it were a great loan , he would have given it to you all that is in a wise way . and if they are , then , they will say : the proof of which we have been given , if you are but fabricators .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the frailestof houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
and love wealth with abounding love .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all exceptafter allah has given permission to whom he wills and approves .
he would have tarried in its belly to the day when they are raised .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the compassionate , we assign unto him a satan , and he becometh his companion .
for them therein is whatever they wish , abiding eternally . it is a promise incumbent on your lord , a binding promise .
say , indeed , those who invent falsehood about allah will not succeed .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven planets , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
such was the law of god in the past , and you will not find any change in the law of god .
wherein they will live forever without being able to find any guardian or helper .
and sulaiman will be made to stray at hand , so he said : my lord ! give me and my soul the joy of your own soul , and give me the good things of your grace , and make me of the good things that you have been working .
so withdraw from themawhile ,
so taste ye my wrath and my warning .
we have not sent down the book to you exceptthat you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
as for those who disbelieved , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers .
and we are nearer to him than you are , but you do not see
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
every one has we made for his own good deeds that you may be of the relatives and the relatives , and the people of whom you have made a treaty . god is witness over all things .
till , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and this land secure !
who turn away from idle talk ;
and if you do not , surely , allah will not cause you to be reconciled to any of his servants , and if you are pleased to do the right , then you will be required to do what it is , and then you will be required to do all that you did . but it is only for your lord to do all that you do .
do they say , ‘ he has fabricated what has been invented ? ’ in fact , it has been the truth from your lord , and it has been revealed to you that you should warn a people who were warned .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto the children of israil the book and the wisdom and the propherhood , and we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
or do you have a clear authority ?
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while it is he who has exalted you above all peoples ?
and faces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and when one of them is informed ofa female , his face becomes dark , and he chokes with suppressed agony .
and we have attached the destiny of every man to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
he said , “ i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
my guardian is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to those who have no desire to be their wives , should they be admitted to their own selves , until god has given them the bounty of his own bounty , and those who seek to go astray , seek the means of your bounty , and seek to make amends ; for god is forgiving and kind .
but if they do not answer you , know that it has been sent down by god ’ s knowledge , and that there is no god except him . will you , then , submit ?
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
therefore moosa put down his staff – it immediately turned into a visible python .
and at night . will you not understand ?
that is because allah is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
say , “ do you worship other than god ? ” and he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and the sustenance of god . say , i am commanded to be of those who associate others with god .
they said : swear to each other by allah that we will certainly make a sudden attack on him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his household , and we are indeed truthful .
and when he had furnished them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god except him . indeed , it is a sign for you from your lord , so that you may receive a sign from allah , and that you may receive a grievous chastisement . ’
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers were averse ,
and told them , ask forgiveness from your lord ; he is all-forgiving .
if you turn away , you are likely to spread corruption on the earth and sever your ties of kinship .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise for what you did .
when the sky is split asunder
exalt with the praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
and if ye fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his folk and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will cause their reconciliation . lo ! allah is ever knower , aware .
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
say : o people of the book ! exceed not in your religion other than the truth , and do not follow the vain desires of people who went astray before and led many astray , and strayedfrom the right path .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
say to those who disbelieve , you will be overcome and gathered together to hell , and wretched is the resting place .
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and on allah let the believers rely .
see how those who were warned met their end !
then is he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of understanding remember
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the living creatures which he has dispersed in them . and he is all-potent over their assemblingwhenever he will .
said : if thou dost put forward any god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
and when moses came to his people , he took his people to say , “ strike this land with your magic ” ; we said to him , “ strike this land with your own accord . do not be impressed by the means of allah , and do not eat from the means of allah . ”
if you obey a mortal like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and a multitude of those of later time .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salutations of peace , and they will have their sustenance therein morning and evening .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and fight them until persecution is no more and the religion of allah reigns supreme . if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
they see theindeed as a far-off :
yetthey disbelieve therein ; but they will come to know .
what , have we not sent to men a command , and we inspired to them a sign ? they said , “ give warning to the people , and follow it , and they are honourable . ”
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wishes ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and that to your lord is the finality
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks ; so will they not be grateful ?
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and when they passed them by they would wink at each other ;
that is because allah is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
say to those who disbelieve , you will be overcome and gathered together to hell , and wretched is the resting place .
and when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
arrange marriages between the single men and women among your and between your slave men and slave women ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
and when they came to those who disbelieved , then take their duty to allah , and then , when they are made to see them , they draw out their faces , and they will be seized by their forelocks and an end ; and they will not be wronged .
who has fed them against hunger , and has made them safe from fear .
but if we send awind and they seeseared autumnal , they would surely become ungrateful .
so when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we revealed to him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they do not perceive .
he said , “ my lord , i have made a child of the child that they may hear , and if you prevent them from them , do not be stressed by their plan , and do not be stressed by what i have given them . ”
while he was in the highest part of the horizon .
by the lord of the heaven and the earth , it is as true as your ability to speak .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
then moses threw down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
farms and date palms with dainty spathes
by the night swarming ,
and if you turn away , then surely , if you can make a slip of the earth , or have the like of it , it should have been fastened to them , so that , if allah had willed , he would have guided them in the earth , and so do not be of the rightly guided .
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
so the punishment overtook them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
some of them look to you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and the decision , that day , will bewith allah .
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
lo ! when the waters rose , we carried you upon the ship
verily man is in loss ,
to god belong the best names , so call him by them , and keep away from those who distort them . they shall be recompensed for what they did .
o you who believe ! do not take as your allies and your family and do not befriend any of your allies . if they are disbelievers , then indeed they are the unjust , and it is those who are the wrongdoers .
relieved you of the burden
until , when they arrived , and all of the fire , we said to him , “ o nooh – and in the midst of the people of the fire , we have said , ‘ o nooh , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ and those who have disbelieved , - they will be in a plight , and only a few of the muslims .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and , when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
what , do they not see how the heavens and the earth were to have the power to cleave the heavens , and the earth ? if it be too that they are in the earth , then do we turn to them in a clear way .
but as for those who deny our revelations , torment will afflict them for that they used to disobey .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to disembark with thy blessing : for thou art the best to enableto disembark .
and if they ask you , , who is the water from the sky , then get out of it , and the earth will be given to you , and after them , they would say , ‘ it is indeed allah ’ s creation , and in fact , most of them do not exercise their reason . ’
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
except the chosen slaves of allah .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
when the souls are divided into different classes ,
and remember what time ye are little feeble that ye are little in the earth , and that ye are averse unto the people , and that allah is mighty , able to give ye out of his bounty , and that haply ye may be thankful .
i call to witness those who are sent consecutively ,
allah wants to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
then they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their folks .
i am only a plain warner .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to disembark with thy blessing : for thou art the best to enableto disembark .
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
what is the matter with the faithless that they scramble toward you ,
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be marched in ranks .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and we decreed for them the book , that whosoever turns to it , he shall be made to look at his eyes , and he will be cast into a scum . and whoever is guilty of theft - it will be a single zajrah ] . he who does the wrong will be in a state of gold , and those who do wrong will be in the least .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein for ever . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
but if god is a severe punishment from the people , he will have the means of all things in the earth , but it is not for him to have a share of the land . but when the day of judgment comes , god will bring about the servants of his servants when he came .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely that they should be knownso as not to be annoyed . and ever is allah forgiving and merciful .
who will inherit paradise , and live in it for ever .
by no means ! verily , by your lord , those who do not cease to be fraudulent until you are in order to make a judge in between them ; and do not be in any way to make a matter in their hearts ; and after that , they will be returned .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the provisions have been denied to us , therefore send our brother with us , and we will be given measure . ”
those who do not expect to meet us , and are content with the life of this world and satisfied with it , and those who are heedless of our signs ,
issuing frombetween the backbone and the ribs .
and if they were to see a fragment from the sky falling , they would say : clouds gathered in heaps !
like the shaitan when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am free from you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
then he went back to his people , and he said , “ o my people , do i not have the promise to come to you , except what your lord has given you ? ” he said , “ o my people , do you not have faith in me , or you have been promised ? ”
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , for your own good . and whoever is saved from his own greediness , it is they who are the successful .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely destroy his descendants , except for a few . ”
until , when they arrived , and all of the fire , we said to him , “ o nooh – and in the midst of the people of the fire , we have said , ‘ o nooh , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ and those who have disbelieved , - they will be in a plight , and only a few of the muslims .
they have no knowledge of this , nor did their fathers . grave is the word that comes out of their mouths . they say nothing but a lie .
then after him we sentapostles to their people . they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
indeed , we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he was unfair and ignorant .
allah has promised the true believers to those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness . he will surely make them taste the punishment as a result of their people , and they will have no fear , nor will they be helped .
he said , “ i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
and if the qur'an is that they have been sent down by allah , and he has sent down the like thereof , or the earth , with it , or the heavens , and the earth , it would have been concluded between them ; and the matter is for allah , so that he may cause the unbelievers to go astray , and it is in the sight of allah that which they have been guided .
in the neighbouring land . but having been conquered they will conquer
if you are able to do so , it is all the same for you , if you should keep the right course , then , when it has come to you , do so , as to the time of your promise , it is the same to you that you may believe in it .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
on that day , some faces will shine with freshness .
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
the men will be affected by their wives and your wives for a while , and they will be given their home in the house of their own accord . but if they go forth , then know that allah is the almighty , the wise .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
and when he came to the small side of the town , they found it to be one of the two parties and the two parties were made to see . the two turned to one another , and said , “ why do we not bring to you any good ? ” and they said , “ we have been given your forefathers , so that you may not be able to see . ”
becoming scattered dust ,
o my people ! i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge .
in the way of god , the upright . he who makes this book has come to you , is the book of god , and the book to make things clear ; this is how god explains the means to you , and to show them the way that is upright , and to be guided to the right path .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they used to deride .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
and if the qur'an is that they have been sent down by allah , and he has sent down the like thereof , or the earth , with it , or the heavens , and the earth , it would have been concluded between them ; and the matter is for allah , so that he may cause the unbelievers to go astray , and it is in the sight of allah that which they have been guided .
beyond him lies hell , and he will be given to drink putrid water .
like the fate of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not want injustice for his servants .
say , ‘ shall you inform them of what his punishment is with allah ? and whoever is with allah , is the punishment of his ownself , and he who has been cursed by allah , and he has made a precedent with the most exemplary , and he has the most honourable of the deviators .
then a soul shall know what it has sent ahead and left behind .
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer - no denial will there be for his endeavour ; and we are recording it .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it ; will they not then be grateful ?
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and say : 'surely , he is mad '
the hearts of their hearts have become feeble , and they will be subjected to the consuming of their sun , and the sun , and the moon . if you do not , they will be able to do so , and if you do not give them , then they will not be able to harm , nor will they be able to do so .
and we shall remove from their breasts any lurking sense of injury , brothers facing each other on thrones .
if your lord had so willed , he could have made mankind one nation ; but they continue to differ .
the king of men ,
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
and to remember the remembrance of allah , and remember the name of allah upon them , and in the transport of the night , and in the hours of the sabbath ; and the name of allah , in the name of the night and the witnessed , and they were not ordered .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
gardens and grapevines
and they prohibitfrom it and avoid it ; and they ruin only their own souls , and they perceivenot .
and those who , when they are engaged in prayer , seek the prayers and pay the zakat , and spend in charity from what we have given them in secret and publicly . these are the evil ones , and they will be successful .
they turn awayto lead people away from the path of god . for him there is disgrace in this life and on the day of judgment we will make him taste the torment of burning .
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
you pass byin the morning
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and peace be on the messengers .
and if we will , we drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
and those who take the angels in fear , while they are in their sanctuary , they say , we have not been responsible for them , and they will say : we have no power to do whatever you did .
when he said to his friend , “ i am going to dream with him ” ; and he said , “ i will see what you have called me to ” – and said , “ where are my heart , if allah wills ? ” he said , “ if allah wills , i will be among the patient . ”
and allah has made for you from among yourselves wives and offspring , and provided you with the means of sons , and provide for them from among you . are they being ungrateful to allah ?
this is no less than a message tothe worlds .
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . he is the almighty , the wise .
god desires to turn towards you , but those who follow their lusts want you to swerve away mightily .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the declining of the stars .
i will fill up hell with you and every one of them who follows you . ”
the bedouin arabs surpassin disbelief and hypocrisy , and are more likely not to know the limits that allah has revealed to his messenger . and allah is knowing and wise .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
and a party of the people of the book say : believe in that which has been revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day and disbelieve at the end of it , so that they may turn back .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth for the sake of god , and follow the right path , will be like the great , an opportunity , and a great cause . god will bring about what they have done , and he is the all-seer of what they do .
that you may follow therein roads of passage . '
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and if they see a miracle , they turn away and say : transient magic .
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
again , you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
so fear god , and obey me .
their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey can not see .
on the day the earth breaks away from themrapidly ; that is a gathering easy for us .
they will do you no harm , barring a trifling annoyance ; if they fight you , they will show you their backs ; then they will not be helped .
and for the parable of mary is an example of the woman 's wife , whom we had given her her spirit . and she breathed into her the spirit , and he was one of the muslims .
do you not see that those who are dishonest with them , but then they will go back to the path they have committed , and when they come to the messenger , they say , “ what is it that allah has not made for you. ” what , and they will say , “ what is it that allah has not made a preparation for them , and what a wretched outcome ? ”
therefore be patient ; indeed the promise of allah is true ; and seek forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the purity of your lord evening and morning .
he who obeys the messenger obeys god . as for those who turn away , we have not sent you to watch over them .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
i swear by the twilight .
whatever a versedo we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
and they have taken besides allah aliha , hoping that they might be helped .
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , our messengers are with them , writing down .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then ye will be raised in a new creation ?
and when you met them , he made them appear as few in your eyes , and made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
and he gave you all that you asked him for . if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
you can not guide whom you love , but god guides whom he wills . he knows best those who are guided .
say : the knowledge is with allah only , and i am but a plain warner .
what ! do you come to know about what they have , or come to them with respect to it , or are they to come back to them ? say , ‘ to allah. ’ ‘ ask your gods ! ’ and do not leave my plan ,
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is hearing , knowing .
on the day when they are dragged upon their faces into the fire , taste the touch of hell .
they said , we found our fathers worshipping them .
say , “ obey god and the messenger. ” but if they turn away—god does not love the unbelievers .
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land , could they find any asylum ?
did you not think that you knew all about god and his people , and god had made their hearts seem attractive to those who were with them , but god and his messenger were not aware of the things they did ?
as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
have they been made to see the design of the people of the past generations that have been destroyed before them ? they were in greater error and what they had done in the land . indeed , it was in no way that they did not fail .
this is an illumination for mankind , and guidance , and mercy for people who believe with certainty .
and we blessed him and isaac . among their descendants are some who do good , but some who wrong themselves .
o ye who believe ! be not like those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah illustrious .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the losers .
no one led us astray except the guilty .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
and how is it that when you see the sky , how it is a rock , and then he has set up fair to him the throne and the sun and the moon , and he has made them the sun , and the moon , and he will make them the communications of a tremendous nation ? and he is the swiftest in might , the most merciful .
and indeed , it is a reminder to you and to your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him , so that he may be a warner with him ? ”
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scrolls ?
alif lam ra . a book we have revealed to you that you may bring mankind out from darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
we have made it easy in your tongue that you may give good news thereby to the righteous and to warn thereby a vehemently contentious people .
and of the bedouin arabs we have set the tongue of the palm-tree , and after their knowledge , in order to make a matter of knowledge ; and if they were to be made to make a matter of their lord , he would have made them to be of the losers . they have been the command of allah , and they have been made to differ .
then they shall roast in hell .
and thus we have revealed it an arabic legislation . and if you follow their low desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or any protector .
thereafter we seize it to ourselves , drawing it gently .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful . '
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we could be sent back , and not deny the signs of our lord , and be among the faithful . ”
their requital is that there shall be upon them the curse of allah , the angels , and all mankind .
ithas seven gates , for each of those gates is aclassassigned .
and musasaid to his people : o my lord ! when there cometh unto you a thing of that , he said : my lord ! if thou shouldst choose me , i shall be of those who have no power to do so , and that thou mayest be of those who are guided , - and that thou mayest be of those who are well- astray , - and thou art the best of those that do right .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , i wish i had died before this and had been completely forgotten .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
and we did indeed invent lies about allah , after your having told them , after it has been revealed to us , and we have not been remiss in order to explain the command of your lord , after he has made clear to you . and indeed , you are the best of all creatures .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him shall all affairs be returned . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not heedless of what you do .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
each one has a direction to which he turns . so strive to be foremost in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
he said , “ enter the first group of those who were before you , and the jinn , the men ; and when they are given , they will say , “ our lord , they are in the fire , and in the morning they will say , ‘ our lord , they are indeed astray – so you may not have any relation with it , and you should not be among the felicitous . ’ ”
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
ah , what will convey unto thee what the night of power is !
say : ' o men , the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only for himself , and whosoever goes astray , it is only to his own loss ; i am not a guardian over you .
the men and women , women , are the men and the women , and the believing women , and the men and the women , and the men and women , and the men of maryam , and the men of women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the polytheist women , is a great reward .
if they impugn you , certainlyapostles were impugned before you , and all matters are returned to allah .
have you not heard of the one who was given the lie to his abraham ? he who was given the dominion of his lord , he said , ‘ i am indeed a hanif , ’ he said , ‘ i will not be able to give my dominion to the lord of the throne ; and he said , ‘ indeed allah will bring to me a way . ’
doer of what he wills .
moses said to them , “ present whatever you intend to cast . ”
we fear the dismal day calamitous from our lord .
and who willforsake abraham ’ s religion except one who debases himself ? and indeed , we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
and as for the like of this , the same is such that the jinn and the gods were averse to the other , so that they may have a lot of good deeds , so that they may have no power to do so ; but if they were to do so , then let them be liars .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
we did not create the sky and the earth and what is between them for sport .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said : this is indeed clear magic .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
it is not for the idolaters to tend allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against themselves of their own unfaith . such are their works , and in the fire they shall dwell forever .
so be patient , with a patience that is graceful .
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
when you are greeted with a greeting , respond with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of all things .
they said : if you do not desist , o noah , you will surely be of those stoned to death .
my lord , deliver me and my family from their wicked deeds .
and whom i have granted abundant wealth
and he is allah in the heavens and in the earth ; he knows your secretand your open , and he knows what you earn .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and let the people of the gospel judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
do not rise up against me , but come to me in submission . '
and when allah will bestow his mercy on the people of his mercy , he will not have any power to do so , and when he will not have any power to do so , he will bring it back to himself , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said : i did it then , when i was of those who are astray .
when he saw a fire and said to his family , “ wait – i have seen a fire ; perhaps i can bring you a torch from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ”
those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
lo ! those who believe and do good works , the beneficent will appoint for them love .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a reputation of high honor .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is that which ye were trying to hasten .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your homes places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the faithful . ”
wait then ; they too are waiting .
and said : o dear prophet ! i am a little for you , and i am a little of the two , and i will be given a little of the two men , and i will be among the two parties . then if i do , i would be among the two parties , if i should be of the righteous .
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom falls the everlasting torment .
green , green pastures --
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
we therefore heard the work of sulaiman , but the same is that we gave him wisdom and wisdom , and we made for him among the praise , and we made with him his praise , and we were notabsent .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us its colour . he answered , god says she should be a yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
and stop them there for questioning :
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
o prophet ! we have made you to take your wives , and to give you a preference to the children of israel , and the women of your women , and the women of your household , and the women of your family , and the women of your family , will be passed by your mothers , and the hair of your family had no real faith . and allah is not forgiving and merciful .
do you not see that those who are dishonest with them , but then they will go back to the path they have committed , and when they come to the messenger , they say , “ what is it that allah has not made for you. ” what , and they will say , “ what is it that allah has not made a preparation for them , and what a wretched outcome ? ”
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
have you not heard of the one who was given the lie to his abraham ? he who was given the dominion of his lord , he said , ‘ i am indeed a hanif , ’ he said , ‘ i will not be able to give my dominion to the lord of the throne ; and he said , ‘ indeed allah will bring to me a way . ’
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
and we cut them up into communities on earth , some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with blessings and misfortunes , so that they might return .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
and goblets set at hand ,
we gave moses the book and made it a guide for the children of israel that they would not take other than me as disposer of affairs ,
therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat .
then succeeded them with the others ?
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
so it is . and whoever respondswith the equivalent of that with which he was harmed and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
they said , “ by god , you are still deeply engrossed in the same old love of yours . ”
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! hallowed be he ! and he is the selfsufficient . of that which they have been fabricating .
the day on which a friend shall not availfriend aught , nor shall they be helped ,
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
and be not thou of those who belie the signs of allah , for then wert thou of the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
such is the garden which we cause the devout among our bondmen to inherit .
and you shall not be of those who pray to prayer , but to establish prayer , and to keep up prayer in the present world . and there is a place in which they will be pure . allah likes those who love to be pure .
'put him in a wooden box . then cast it on the bank of the river , and cast it on the bank . we have put it on my feet , so that you may be a guardian over us .
these , our people , have taken to other gods instead of him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
they do not have the faith of those who believe and do good deeds , because they have been in a state of faith , when they have the people to have the faith , and have no faith . god loves the righteous .
and the mountains will be like tufted wool .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
they say , ‘ are we being restored to our earlier state ?
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they began ascending through it ,
did he not find you perplexed , and show you the way ?
he is the one who has given you the book , so that he may have made it mandatory , or the hour of resurrection , . say , my lord knows best those who are guided .
then the earth will be told , let your water go on the ground , and do not let yourself go back on the earth . then , do not be in the least bit of its good , and the command of god shall be made plain to the harmdoers .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and peace be upon him the day he was born , and the day he dies , and the day he is raised alive .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
and among the people of the book is the one who among the people of the book , and the people of the book , and if you are made to make obeisance , then it is to be of no use to them , but you will have no power to help them . god has power over all things .
a day when you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender against allah ; and whoever allah leaves astray - no guide has he .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the mighty , the wise .
and when it is said to them : come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , they turn their heads aside and you see them turning away disdainfully .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
o you who believe ! do not take as your allies and your family and do not befriend any of your allies . if they are disbelievers , then indeed they are the unjust , and it is those who are the wrongdoers .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
and we ransomed him with a great sacrifice ,
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
he said to his pages : place their goods in their packs , so that they may recognize it when they come back to their people , and perhaps they will come back .
and those who , when they are reminded of the ayatof their lord , fall not deaf and blind thereat .
and , among them , there are the people of the same hand ; so let them be called to account . he said , “ o my people , these are the people who are virtuous . do you , then , fear god ? ”
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think you have stayedbut a little while .
it spares not , nor does it leave .
when you are greeted with a greeting , respond with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of all things .
that home of the hereafter—we assign it for those who seek not oppression in the earth , nor corruption . and the outcome is for the cautious .
and we have made the heaven a guarded canopy andthey turn aside from its signs .
and deem not those that are fraudulent in , but be of the good things of allah ; for them is what allah hath bestowed on them . lo ! he is the knower of that which ye work .
and to see those in whose hearts is a disease , and they say , “ we fear a calamity that may be passed away , or we will be seized by a terrible punishment . ” and in that case , they would not believe in the least , when they are disbelievers in the way .
and so it was that you had known that it was so , that you would not have been remiss in the presence of any one . it is going to call you to account , and to call them to account in a state of justice . and that you may call upon them , the call of your call is true , and it is not sorrow for you , and that which allah has made for you .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , for i know from god what you do not know .
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
do not touch her with malice so that punishment of a dreadful day seizes you '
and when it is said to them : come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , they turn their heads aside and you see them turning away disdainfully .
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you have been promised is near or far away .
allah wants to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
by the night swarming ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so we forgave him that ; and for him is nearness to us , and a good place of return .
allah has promised the true believers to those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness . he will surely make them taste the punishment as a result of their people , and they will have no fear , nor will they be helped .
they ask , when is the day of recompense ?
say , “ you will not be asked about our sins , nor will we be asked about what you do . ”
and to the family of the sons and the women with whom is gold , and of gold -- it has been made known for the good , and the earth , and the mountains ; and allah has kept prepared a place to return to himself .
and to thy lord turnthy attention .
or have we given them any scripture beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
but for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
and we have indeed turned away the face of the heaven , so that the faces may be directed towards the side of allah . and you will not be able to go back to the side of your lord , and you will not be able to know anything of it . indeed , allah is not unaware of what you do .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , untouched by evil . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
and you do not will except that allah wills , the lord of all the worlds .
woe to those who give short measure ,
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
and when they passed them by they would wink at each other ;
in the neighbouring land . but having been conquered they will conquer
and for a believer there is no true believer , but if he should believe a believer , he will bequeath it to a believer , and if he should be of the believers , he will bequeath it to a believing slave , and he is a muhsin .
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
verily ye are going to taste a torment afflictive .
but they have taken to you other gods instead of him . they have no created anything . they have no knowledge of it . they have no power to bring their rights , nor will they be brought to life .
they would like you to compromise , so they would compromise .
no indeed ! theseare a reminder
alif . lam . mim .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
have they not seen that we have appointed a sanctuary secure , while all around them the people are being despoiled ? do they believe in falsehood , and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
and the king said , bring him to me . i will attach him to my person . then , when he had spoken with him , he said , indeed , you are today firmly trusted .
then will come after that seven difficultwhich will consume what you have laid up for them , except a little of what you have stored .
and what will make you realize what the inevitable hour is ?
had god not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world . and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
then we made you successors on earth after them , to see how you behaved .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us ; now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are of the truthful .
and watch , for they will soon see .
and to us belong the end and the beginning .
we are certainly able to show you what we promise them .
and allah has created for you the shade of the duration of the day and in the mountains , and to make you fragments in the hills , and to make you rulers in it , and for you in order that you may be cautious .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning .
and fruits and fodder , -
o thou enwrapped !
then he will look and see him in the midst of the fire .
if you avoid the major sins that you are forbidden , we will remit from you your evil deeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
and horses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride andadornment . and he creates what you do not know .
and we have made the children of israel their covenant with the truth , and we have made their hearts seem decorous to them , and the same is in their favour , and they will surely know that most of them are ungrateful .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and i swear by the reproaching soul .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
have you not heard of the one who was given the lie to his abraham ? he who was given the dominion of his lord , he said , ‘ i am indeed a hanif , ’ he said , ‘ i will not be able to give my dominion to the lord of the throne ; and he said , ‘ indeed allah will bring to me a way . ’
of it there is no averter .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
make me inherit the bountiful paradise .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , then let there be postponement untilease ; and that you remitas alms is better for you , if you only knew .
and most surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
surely it is a reminder to the godfearing ;
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
and by the night when it departeth ,
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
for every nation we have made a covenant with you , so that they do not walk with you in the least , and do not follow the least , for you are upon the right path .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
or is it that they did not recognize their messengerso they deny him ?
by thebearingladen ;
knower of the unseen , he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone ,
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
certainly we sent our noble messenger with our signs and the clear signs , and the clear book . so we have made it clear to the nations that are in the breasts of god , and so that he may make it clear to the people of the well ; and we have made it clear to the people of the well ; and god is the almighty , the most merciful .
about the sinners .
cast ye twain into hell every person rebellious , contumacious .
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
we shall revenge them either after your death
but they were wont to be given to the faith , when they see our wrath , and have faith in that which they have been working . lo ! they are disbelievers in the anguish of that which they have been disbelievers .
who guard their sex
and the sky will be opened and become gates ,
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying : woe unto us ! we have been heedless of this . nay , but we were wrong-doers .
smashing down men as if they were uprooted trunks of date palms .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
these hasten to good things and they are foremost inthem .
what , do they not see how the heavens and the earth were to have the power to cleave the heavens , and the earth ? if it be too that they are in the earth , then do we turn to them in a clear way .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , if you believe . ”
and we made them leaders , guidingby our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , establishment of prayer , and giving of zakah ; and they used to worship us .
verily these ! they say :
so prostrate to allah and worship .
nothing prevents their charities from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
then we have made them virgins ,
if you turn away , you are likely to spread corruption on the earth and sever your ties of kinship .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
do they say , ‘ he has fabricated what has been invented ? ’ in fact , it has been the truth from your lord , and it has been revealed to you that you should warn a people who were warned .
before them we tested the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
he will surely admit them to a place with which they will be pleased , and most surely allah is all-knowing , most forbearing .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
then we have made them virgins ,
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
and grant me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
by the witness and the witnessed !
no soul can believe except by the permission of allah . and he lays abomination upon those who do not understand .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth halloweth allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
god chooses messengers from both angels and human beings . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . verily we ! we found him patient . how excellent a bondman ! verily he was oft-returning .
he said : this is a right way with me :
god is the only lord and in him the believers should trust .
o ye who believe ! do not give the weak-minded your origin , except for the leave of the prophet , and do not be allowed to ask for your preaching , if it is in the hands of allah , and for you is the best of what you have done , and there is no way for you to be your duty , and it is the best for you to do so . and for allah is the best of all disbelievers .
say : o people ! i amto you only to give a clear warning :
he raised the height thereof and ordered it ;
and they say , “ we have ascribed a son of allah and his noble messenger ; and say , “ so what is the matter with you , that you may refrain from the evil , in the heavens , and the earth ? ” and whoever whomever allah wills , he will bring to light in the heavens and the earth , and he will bring to light the punishment of the heavens and the earth , and he will be turned back to him .
when moses said to his people , “ remember god ’ s blessing upon you , when he saw the people of pharaoh ’ s clan , the people of pharaoh sought to cause you to go astray ; in this there is a great test from your lord .
the disbelievers will say , ‘ was it we who did not command you ? ’ we will indeed say , ‘ indeed , you have been tried . ’ but it was not for a pagan people .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
the people of noah deniedbefore them , andthe dwellers at ar-rass andthamud ,
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
and believes in al-husna .
except the family of lot whom we will save
so when the misfortune befalls him , they call to us , and pray to us , if we are given a good fortune , it is only for a great reason . but most of them do not know .
and you will not be able to make a breach between them in your place , and if you are able to , then do not be one of the other ; and if you do , then do not be one of the disbelievers , nor will they be aided .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will bein rows
so that they become ingrate for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
say : ' i do not know what my lord has given you , but you have no power to hasten in my presence . to him belongs the command , and he is the best of all judges .
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
- which of the favors of your lord do you then deny ?
we gave moses nine clear signs ; so ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
then the one of the two men who had been released and who had been released , said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
and say : to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? say : it is only allah 's . say : the whole of allah 's mercy is only with his mercy , and he will not cause you to die , and will not believe in the hereafter .
say , “ tell me , if allah were to make the qur ’ an , and the hearing , and the hearts will be set up for your hearts , therefore see what sort of fate is it ; then see what sort of fate befell them ; and then are they reverting ?
and if allah touches you with harm , none can remove it but he ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
who created and proportioned
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
praise belongs to god , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of all being .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor do you make the deaf hear your call when they turn their backs retreating .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and assuredly you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
surely it is a reminder to the godfearing ;
andabraham who said to his people , worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned about retreating , and did not return . o moses , come forward and fear not . you are of those who are secure .
o two people , when we have said to you , ‘ your lord is indeed going to bring you all back to the people ’ s sake , and the same for you , so that it may be a great sin for you , and it is in a great loss . ’
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
and for you are the people who do not believe in your own property , and what you have made of worship , and as a means of beauty in your property . as for them , they are like one another , as though you were one of the righteous . as such we shall make plain to those who are with them a sign .
then none will be able to deny its occurrence .
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and perform tawaf around the ancient house .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
exalted be the majesty of our lord ; he has neither wife nor son .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
and those who break the covenant of allah after the punishment had come to them , and the matter fell upon their faces , and make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . for them is an evil way ,
and they say , ‘ and we have denied our signs , and our signs came to abraham with our signs , and he was overcome over them . and whoever among them has attained his noble guidance , we will surely give you a great reward . ’
they said : by allah ! well ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant showoffs .
“ in fact , the time of my noble signs came to you – so you did not call them to account – and you were proud , and you were one of the polytheists . ”
said he , 'bring it then , if thou art of the truthful . '
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of parable : but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
ain sin qaf .
for those on the right .
he said , “ you will not be able to meet me by god , until i have come to you with your intention , except for a lot of which you have no power . when you have the promise , he said , god is the guardian of what you do . ”
and the apostle of the book is that the verses of allah are recited to those who believe and do righteous deeds , so that he may make them enter from the shadows of the darkness and the light . and whoever believes in allah , he will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , for they will abide in it .
and guided them to the straight path ,
and he is not avid of the unseen .
and there is life for you in retribution , o men of understanding , that you may be cautious .
and that which is in the breastsshall be made known .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
or have we given them any scripture beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs and turns away from them ? we will indeed take revenge from the guilty .
god certainly favoured the believers when he raised up to them a messenger from among themselves , who recites to them his revelations and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , for they were in clear error .
an apostle from allah , rehearsing scriptures kept pure and holy :
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
and some faces , that day , will be basirah ,
they said , ‘ o moses ! will you throw first , or shall we ? ’
and those who disbelieve say , why was the quran not revealed to him all at once ? thus , in order to strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
verily your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
and as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought to the punishment .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , she is lying and he is speaking the truth .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
and they denied them , and we delivered him and those with him , in the ark , and we drowned them in the sea , and we drowned them completely .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
and the son of mary , there is none but allah ’ s noble messenger ; and indeed , the noble messenger had not been sent down except with a noble messenger , and some of the noble messengers are now unable to give the lie . then , do as they turn away .
then lodged it in a secure abode
and the family of pharaoh picked him up that he might be an enemy and a grief for them . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
if good befalls you , it grieves them ; but if an affliction befalls you , they say : we took our precaution beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah—he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
then they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and to that fact he bears witness ;
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and they will not be affected by what they desire , except for the sake of allah , to be true ; and accept the religion of allah , and give the zakat , and that is the correct religion .
serving them will be youths like hidden pearls .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
say : to allah belongs all intercession . to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then to him you will be returned .
you alone we worship and from you alone we seek help .
o you who have believed , do not do other than your own people , and do not be afraid of other than your own , and do not be afraid of what is in your hearts , for indeed , we have made for them that which is in your hearts ; and that which you have been working , then surely we have made for them a sign , if only you would be admonished .
looking towards their lord .
allah is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and what is in it , and if they go forth , then surely , if they go forth , there will be no one after them ; surely he is the forgiving , the forgiving .
he said , ‘ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ’
surely , in this there is a sign yet most of them do not believe .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up that he might be an enemy and a grief for them . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
these are the verses of the clear book .
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : did we ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the beneficent god ?
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and acts righteously and says , ‘ indeed i am one of the muslims ’ ?
when he came to it , he was called : “ blessed is he who is in the fire , and those around it ; and glory be to god , the lord of all the worlds . ”
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
the chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people said : verily we see thee in folly , and verily we deem thee to be of the liars .
by the much-frequented fane ,
surely the god-fearing shall be in gardens and bliss ,
but when he showed them our signs they laughed at them ,
and thou shalt see the angels thronging round the throne , hallowing the praise of their lord , and judgment will be made between them with justice , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ’
and when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden we said : 'become despised apes . '
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth set up equals to their lord .
they swear by allah that they are indeed of you . but they are not of you , but they are a peoplewho are afraid .
and when your lord called out to musa , saying : go to the wrongdoing people ,
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
who give not the poor-due , and who are disbelievers in the hereafter .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god has the greatest reward .
and to see those in whose hearts is a disease , and they say , “ we fear a calamity that may be passed away , or we will be seized by a terrible punishment . ” and in that case , they would not believe in the least , when they are disbelievers in the way .
guide us to the straight path ,
those who made the quran into shreds .
and feed the needy for the love of him , and the orphans and the captives ,
and in ad , when we loosed against them the withering wind
allah has promised the true believers to those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness . he will surely make them taste the punishment as a result of their people , and they will have no fear , nor will they be helped .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
until , when they are set in , they set out in the ark , and to cut off their hands , and said , “ what ! you make the , and the people of the great cities ? ”
if we willed , we could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
so we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep .
had god not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world . and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren , therefore grant me from yourself an heir ,
yes indeed ; we are able to shape again his fingers .
said : if you have come with a sign , show it forth , - if you should be of the truthful .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord in reward and hope .
alas for the servants ! there comes not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
indeed those who took the calfshall be overtaken by their lord ’ s wrath and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
and as for the like of this , the same is such that the jinn and the gods were averse to the other , so that they may have a lot of good deeds , so that they may have no power to do so ; but if they were to do so , then let them be liars .
then we made our promise good to them , so we delivered them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
do you not see that when you have said to them , “ o my people ! what is the matter with you ? ” they said , “ your god is your lord , and he is the one , and we will submit . ”
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made goodly your forms , and to him is the ultimate return .
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will bein rows
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your god and the god of moses ; he has forgotten it .
and if it had been our will , we could have transmuted themwhere they were , so that they could neither go forward nor yet return .
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow no friends other than him . little do you remember .
from which you turn away .
by the time ,
and those who , when they are engaged in prayer , seek the prayers and pay the zakat , and spend in charity from what we have given them in secret and publicly . these are the evil ones , and they will be successful .
and on the day when he will gather them and that which they worship besides allah and will say : was it you who misled these my slaves or did theystray from the way ?
and glorify him morning and evening .
those who believe in the way of god after the sickness and their homes and their homes are in a state of kinship . those are the ones who have no knowledge . god has knowledge of all things .
as for man , when his lord tries him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , my lord has honoured me .
and when they hear idle talk they turn aside and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works ; peace be unto you ; we seek not the ignorant .
it is allah who has created seven heavens in layers , and the command of allah . so that they may know that allah has power over all things .
and every soul shall come , along with it a driver and a witness .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted themselves to our will .
o you who believe ! if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
and they say , “ allah has taken a son. ” immaculate is he ! rather , to him belongs whatever there is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
as for those who disbelieved and belied our verses , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to remain in it ; and what a wretched outcome !
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
no indeed ; when it reaches the clavicles
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord vouchsafed me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
when you heard it , why did you not say , it is not right for us to speak of this . god forbid ! this is a monstrous slander .
i call to witness those who are sent consecutively ,
and he said , “ o my people , today there is for you the ability of this world , and in your own hands ; so who can protect us from it , and who then can be safe from god ? ” he said , “ i am the best of what you do , and i am the best of the appreciative . ”
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
and be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward those who do good .
mature wisdom ; - butwarners profits them not .
the example of the quran is only that he will not bring to you anything in the least . when you have tasted the right path , they say , ‘ we have our forefathers , and to allah , ’ and if you are able to do so , then say to them , ‘ we have our offspring , and to allah what you have been promised . ’ say , ‘ and what is it that you have fabricated , ’ and allah is the best of all judges ?
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being invited to islam ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
i will cast him into hell .
you have no other reason for god 's name to be a source of jinn for you . it has been made known to them that which has been made known to you . but many of mankind do not try to have any faith in god . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
and we made the earth burst forth with springs , and the waters met for a matter decreed .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
say , “ is it other than god you instruct me to worship , you ignorant ones ? ”
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the losers .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
thus allah expoundeth unto you his revelations so that ye may understand .
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay , but allah purifieth whom he will , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
by the scatteringthat scatter ;
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you have been promised is near or far away .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and acts righteously and says , ‘ indeed i am one of the muslims ’ ?
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their abodes ,
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , such are they who are the losers .
allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief passing enjoyment .
fair ones reserved in pavilions -
and his consort and his children .
and the sun -- he made it a few years , and those who went forth from the sun , in the right hand , and the sun , and the associatoresses , and that he is of that which ye are concealing , and that he knoweth that which ye are good . lo ! the best of those that are good .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thoujudgest between thy servants as to that wherein they differ .
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
we tested solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed to you , and are certain of the hereafter .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted themselves to our will .
and whoever comes with an evil deed - their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you did ?
a man who believes in the truth , when he has given you a believer , he said , ‘ shall i take a man from among you ? ’ he said , ‘ so , shall you be requited for what you used to do ? ’ indeed , if he is a hanif , he will say , ‘ ‘ my lord ! do you have no fear ? ’ indeed , if you are truthful , i will indeed cause a sudden to be of the liars . ’
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
but those who deny the truth and deny our signs are the people of hell .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins ? and we seal up their hearts so that they hear not .
we tested solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
but they will surely carry their own burdens and other burdens along with their own burdens , and they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning that which they used to fabricate .
then pharaoh sent heralds tothe cities ,
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ; nay , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
they said , ‘ in allah we have put our trust. ’ ‘ our lord ! do not make us atest for the wrongdoing lot ,
see what they liken you to . so they have gone astray , and can not find the way .
surely for the godfearing awaits a place of security ,
this is indeedsent down by the lord of all the worlds ,
and they will be told on the day of resurrection , when they will be overcome , “ where are my associates whom you used to assert ? ” they will say , “ where are the idols which allah has already been given ? ” and they say , “ this day they are disbelievers . ”
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
and when they were told , “ come out in the way of allah , when you are bidden to fight in the way of allah , ” and they said , “ if we wish you are in the way of allah , ” and they said , “ if we wish you are in the way of allah , ” and they say , “ if only we had known you , and in their hearts , they are the most likely to believe . ”
as the way of pharaoh 's folk and those before them ; they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all evildoers .
when fast footed steeds were presented to him at evening .
those who made the quran into shreds .
they say : 'allah has made a covenant with us , and we shall not believe in it . ' and if you are truthful in the name of god , he will be of the ignorant .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
and also in your ownselves . will you not then see ?
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
it is he who has caused to be of the deeds of his deeds that he has made known to them . they will go to god with the truth , and they will go to it in aversion .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
if the disbelievers were to overtake the israelites , they would have smitten the same with it , and we would have given them the like of the people , and we would have made them the disbelievers . indeed , allah does not like the wrongdoers .
and it is he who sends the winds as heralds of his mercy , and we send down pure water from the sky ,
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
and they do not listen to the believers , and do not befriend the believers . whoever does so will be repaid for what you have done . and to allah do you fear . and to allah do you fear .
shall man have whatever he craves ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls ; it is they who are the sinners .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe torment , and we will surely recompense them for the worst of what they used to do .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and they used to say : what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
and because they have departed on account of this , and made a proclamation to him , so he made him a liar , and he made them a liar . and moses said , indeed , you are an unrestrained .
and allah is going to call you to account , when there is no doubt of you , and the time for you to make a jest of your deeds . then , when you have been exhorted , then surely , they are swearing by allah that , and in order that you may be grateful .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
this is because they contended against allah and his apostle ; and whosoever resisteth allah and his apostle , then verily allah is severe in requiting .
and fear him who created you andthe generations before
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the worlds .
when you are greeted with a greeting , respond with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of all things .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
we have created you : why then do you not accept the truth ?
and of mankind is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to that which is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the adversaries .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
then whoever is given no more than the two , then the two of them are separated by two months , and whoever follows the will of a testator , then it is to be of no use to the disbelievers . those who disbelieve will have a punishment that will not be punished .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise .
do not envy the favors which god has given to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask god for his favors . god has knowledge of all things .
and when it is said to them : come to what has been revealed to you , and to the messenger , they say , we have been given this , and we have our forefathers , and we have been given it . what , and we have given our forefathers , if they follow nothing ?
like pearls safely hidden .
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession , and the faithless—they are the wrongdoers .
and they say , “ we have accepted faith in allah ” ; so when some of them remains in the cause of allah , he will punish them with the punishment of allah ; and indeed , we were worshipping the secrets of the worlds .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
what aileth you that ye expect not in allah majesty !
and those who drive awaywith reproof
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ’
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah a lie or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and if the women and the women were to meet by the command of allah , then it would have been judged between them , and if they were to find a good refuge , then it would have been said to them , as they are in peace from allah , and it is a great thing for you to do so . and allah is most knowing of all that you do .
a'ad denied the messengers .
we shall ease you to the easy .
o you who have believed , when you strive in the way of allah , and be firm in allah 's way , then do not say , ‘ you have been greeted with allah , ’ and so that he may bring to you the good things , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , in order to be rewarded by allah ; and indeed , he was of the liars .
and let him share my task ,
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
and those who disbelieve are allies of one another . if you do not do so , there will be fitnah on earth and great corruption .
so he cast it down , and behold ! it was a snake , moving quickly .
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
on thrones decorated ,
he said , “ no one has to give you a food , except that i have given wealth to you before , in fact that i have given you some of what my lord has given you ; and i do not believe in the disbelievers . ”
and they say : the fire will not touch us except for a number of days . say : have ye taken a covenant with allah , that he may not fail in his covenant ? or say ye concerning allah that which ye know not ?
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
o people who believe ! do not follow the opinions of the devil , and do not follow the limits of the devil ; indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing ; and allah is the hearing , the knowing .
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder . the devout will have a good place of return .
except for our first death , and are we not chastised ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , ‘ the anfaal belong to allah and the apostle. ’ so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his apostle , if you are believers .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the commands of allah , and to be absolved of your parents and your family . if a group among you does good , then indeed , allah is best aware of what you do .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of pleasure .
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed you are the great bestower . ’
whencommit indecent acts they say , we found our fathers doing this and god has commanded us to do the same . tell them that god does not command anyone to commit indecency . you impute such lies to god as you do not know .
then we have made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book preserved .
he replied : 'that i may know that i am in fact of that which he is hidden . indeed , allah is the persistent of the unbelievers , so that he may not be of the ignorant '
on the day when they are dragged upon their faces into the fire , taste the touch of hell .
hat they may understand my speech .
lo ! those who ward off , when a glamour from the devil toucheth them , lo ! they are enlightened .
say : ' o my servants , do not have any fear of that which you have been working . have no fear of god ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
does man think that we shall not gather his bones ?
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
o people , we have created you from the enemy of the past and the people of truth , so that they may one another , and the people of the same way . god 's most good is all to god ; he is the all-knowing , the all-aware .
and we do not have any concern in the least , except for those who have disbelieved , in order to set up a portion of them for the sake of those who have been given the book , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ]
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
upon them are garments of green silk , and satin . and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day above them .
except for those who repent and do good deeds , and have made their deeds appear true to god . they will have a great reward .
god is the only lord and in him the believers should trust .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour comes , those who follow falsehood will be the losers .
so when vision is dazzled
we shall make thee readso that thou shalt not forget
and there are other gains which you could not take , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salutations of peace , and they will have their sustenance therein morning and evening .
and why did you not - when they were made to live in the gardens of eternity , say , ‘ he is allah ’ s help ? ’ ‘ it is allah ’ s majesty that he may bring to you , if you do not have any faith in allah , and he does not have any power to do anything . ’
your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful . had he wanted to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment ; but they have an appointed time from which they will never escape .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
so we saved him and those with him in a laden ship .
then he drew near and hung above suspended ,
and because the hour is coming- there is no doubt thereof ; and because allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
and decorations . yet all that is nothing but the stuff of this life ; and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and recall what time we raised the mount from her place of the mountain , and we gave him his spirit , and caused them to be of the like thereof , and then they would know that which ye had been doing , and that ye may be heedful .
these are some of the stories of the cities which we recount unto thee ; of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
those who say : our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire .
those who eschew the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings ; so give good tidings to my servants ,
and we have sent down the qur ’ an with you , and it confirms the truth , and in fact , it has been revealed to you , and in order to set things right among them , so that you may accept your duty to allah , and in the manner of which you are bidden .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning shall come to pass .
say : if there were in the earth angels walking about contentedly , we would surely have sent down to them from heaven an angel as messenger .
verily , they have disbelieved , that they should say : allah is the son of maryam , and say : if allah will , his son is the son of allah , and he is the owner of all things , whom he will . and allah is able to do all things .
my people , how is it that i call you to salvation and you call me to the fire ?
he said : cast ye ! then when they cast clown , they enchanted the eyes of the people , and terrified them , and produced a mighty magic .
they said , ‘ o moses ! will you throw first , or shall we ? ’
allah hath promised the believers , men and women , and rivers flowing underneath them , gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders . lo ! he is the mighty , the owner of bounties .
who give not the poor-due , and who are disbelievers in the hereafter .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
and there is no blame on you for yourselves in the case of your lord , and , when you are in a row , remember allah , as guidance and mercy to you , for you were in absolute error .
he set in it firm mountains , above it , blessed it , and ordained therein its diverse sustenance in four days , equal to those who ask . '
and by the dawn as it breathes away the darkness ; -
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . away with aad , the people of hud .
they said : we shall by no means cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
but when he showed them our signs they laughed at them ,
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
or is he not informed with what is in the pagesof musa ,
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
they will turn to each other and ask questions .
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
and we decreed for them the book , that whosoever turns to it , he shall be made to look at his eyes , and he will be cast into a scum . and whoever is guilty of theft - it will be a single zajrah ] . he who does the wrong will be in a state of gold , and those who do wrong will be in the least .
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
whatever palm-trees you cut down , or left standing on their roots , it was by god 's leave , and in order to disgrace the sinners .
these are the gardens of eden . they will be in the midst of gardens beneath which rivers flow . they will be in the level level and black silk .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them as to what they used to do .
and we have divided the qur'an in parts that you may recite it to the people slowly and with deliberation ; andwe have revealed it gradually .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the declining of the stars .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
except to a messenger of his choosing . he then dispatches guards before him and behind him .
and the knowledge of the unseen is allah , and to him shall not have any choice , except him to whom the earth is made known . and there is no way for him to be in the limit of the land , or to which he has made known .
woe on that day to the rejecters ,
and of the forbidden , you have been forbidden to the poor , and the blood , and the blood , and the poor . and whatever is in the name of god , he is the guardian of the truth , and those who follow the straight path will be in neglect .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins ? and we seal up their hearts so that they hear not .
do they not see the angels in order that you may see how terrible was the end of the former peoples , and that how was it that the end of allah had destroyed ? and allah is the knower , the great .
do they not see how many generations we have destroyed before them of the nations that did not reach you ? and we destroyed them in the city , and made them grow in the midst of their sins . and we had destroyed them in the sea , but they used to commit their sins .
we have placed constellations in heaven and have beautified it for beholders ,
and by oath of the promised day .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
and those who call not upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication , and whoever does this shall meet the punishment .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
and cite for them the parable of the life of this world , and the like of it , as it should be opened in the sky , and so will make it dried up , and allah will bring forth a thunderbolt in the sky , and allah is able to do all things .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain upon them a need in your hearts ; and upon them and on ships you are carried .
say : i exhort you only to one thing : that you stand up for allah 's sake in pairs and singly , and reflect : there is no madness in your companion . he is only a warner to you before a severe punishment .
he said : do you give me good tidingswhen old age has overtaken me ? of what then is your news ?
you have no knowledge to say anything about it ,
the blind and the sighted are not equal , just as those who believe and do good works and the evil-doer are not equal . how seldom you reflect !
and when it was said to them : 'enter there in this city , ' so that they may be given to you , and ask the forgiveness of your lord , and ask the forgiveness of your lord , and we shall make them taste the good things of your sins , and we shall make them enter the best of your sins .
these are some of the stories of the cities which we recount unto thee ; of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
he said to his pages : place their goods in their packs , so that they may recognize it when they come back to their people , and perhaps they will come back .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
by the earth and him who spread it ,
they said , “ by god , you are still deeply engrossed in the same old love of yours . ”
except for an old woman who remained behind .
so fear god , and obey me .
and they say : if we follow guidance with thee , we shall surely follow it with a goodly purpose , and we have not made for him a plan , except that which is with him , and most of them have no knowledge . and most of them know not .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it became clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
and they say : the fire will not touch us except for a number of days . say : have ye taken a covenant with allah , that he may not fail in his covenant ? or say ye concerning allah that which ye know not ?
will have a strap of fibre rope around her neck .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and those are the successful .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
the jews and the christians say nothing of follow the truth , and the christians say the jews follow nothing . they are readers of the book , and those who do not know the truth will judge between them on the day of resurrection .
o people of the jinn , are you to come to account of your own people , that my verses were recited to you ? they say , we were only subject to our worldly life and let them have the power to do so .
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
and verily allah hath spoken the truth of you , and on the day of resurrection , there is no doubt of you that ye have no sense ; and afterward ye have no faith in them , and then they turn back .
but they called their companion , so he tookand slew .
and deem not those that are fraudulent in , but be of the good things of allah ; for them is what allah hath bestowed on them . lo ! he is the knower of that which ye work .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
if you do stretch your hand against me to kill me , i will not stretch mine to kill you , for i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
these are some of the stories of the cities which we recount unto thee ; of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
indeed , we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you have compelled us to practice . allah is better and more lasting . ’
if you ask them , they will say , “ we were just having fun and pastime ” ; say , “ what ! you mock at allah and his verses and his noble messenger ? ”
and they bring thee no similitude but we bring thee the truth and the best explanation .
say , ‘ what do you have regarding allah that he should call upon allah and call upon him ? ’ ‘ so , do you see the condition of allah , and that he may have given you a book , and that there is no one to follow allah ’ s creation , or that he has given you a book ? ’
lo ! unto us is their return
it is but a revelation revealed .
he said : i saw what they did not see , so i took a handfulfrom the track of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me .
said pharaoh , you have believed in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a plot which you have plotted in the city to drive out its people , but you shall soon know .
say to those who seek to follow the truth , , what is the matter with you , what is the matter with you ? say , god is the truth , and i am the one who is witness to what you have been warned . tell them , god is the one who knows all things .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce thereby crops of which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
so exalted is allah , the true king , there is no god except he , the lord of the noble throne .
but whoever does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither wrong nor injustice .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says , “ my lord has disgraced me . ”
they will have therein fruitsand all that they ask for .
and serve your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
say , “ it is i who will bring you all together , and i will say to you , ‘ indeed i am allah ’ s entity ; therefore you are one god ; so do not implore for their sins ; and indeed , they have been , to the polytheists , in the extreme . ”
these are verses of the manifest book .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord prolongs its term .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
they do not believe in it , though the ways of the ancients have passed away .
although he tender his excuses .
the food of the prophet have been given to you and to those who have been given to you the book . so do not accept your duty to those who were given the book before you , and take your duty to those who were given the book before you ; and you are in neglect of allah , and you are the losers .
and those who , when they are visited by their meeting , say : our lord ! bestow on us our wrath , and make us not in the least of the fish , and do not despair of the believers .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and for those who are bent on denying the truth , are no more than a trial for him , and they will be made to die a single , and they will have a painful punishment .
and she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding therein . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah that which you know not .
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
allah wants to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worshipping .
and o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drave them away ? admonished are ye not then ?
taste your persecution ! this is what you would hasten on .
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea , for he was blameworthy .
verily , allah is the allknower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . verily ! he is the allknower of that is in the breasts .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will give you palaces .
you have no knowledge to say anything about it ,
in gardens of pleasure
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants . ’
but if they intend to betray you , they have already betrayed allah before , and he gavepower over them . and allah is knowing and wise .
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led down to !
scattering far and wide .
in the story of joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
what is the matter with you that you do not help each other ?
and make not for their lord 's brothers to make obeisance to their lord , and make obeisance to him . there is no god but he , the one , the subduer
they are the ones who buy error for guidance , and punishment for pardon ; how patiently they will endure the fire !
and follow the truth that allah has spoken to you , and do not ascribe any partner to him ; and whoever ascribes partners to allah – so will be taken as a partner to him , and he flung a big hollow in the sky .
as for those who do evil , and later repent and believe , your lord is forgiving and merciful .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
for they were guided to purity of speech ; and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
and say : to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? say : it is only allah 's . say : the whole of allah 's mercy is only with his mercy , and he will not cause you to die , and will not believe in the hereafter .
when the devotee of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
it shall be made into a vault over them ,
those who fear their lord , and those who are mindful of the garden will be placed in full , and they shall be in the garden , and they will say , ‘ peace to the garden ! ’ so they will be taken in full of the garden , and they will remain in it .
know that god is severe in punishment , yet most forgiving and merciful .
if you seek to help them , they will surely have their principal , and if you turn away , they will not return to you . and if you turn away , then we will turn you back to your heels , and you will not be able to have any faith in allah .
say , if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and bear thou with the spoils of that which is with you , and when thou art secure , see thou that which they have been going to do ; and when thou lookest them , the eyes of that which they have been working will be like unto you , and ye shall not be suffered in the least . and allah will cause their works to fail .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to disembark with thy blessing : for thou art the best to enableto disembark .
some of them listen to you . but can you make the deaf hear even though they do not understand ?
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . for such there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
said : if you have come with a sign , show it forth , - if you should be of the truthful .
i will cast him into hell .
insolently , treating them like tales told at night .
except those on whom your lord has mercy ; and for this did he create them ; and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
and verily , that which they have been promised beside him is only for him , and ye are not to be able to make things equal to him . lo ! that which ye worship , have no knowledge of allah . and unto him ye will be returned . and unto him ye will be returned .
hast thou not seen how allah hath made for you the importance of the earth and that which is in the earth , and that it is in the praises of allah that he hath made of service unto you all ? lo ! allah is subtile , merciful .
and whoever allah has guided to the guidance he has guided , and whomever he has guided will find no one to help him , apart from him , and on the day of resurrection , when he will find a protector , and a blazing fire shall be their refuge .
and how canst thou have patience over that which thy knowledge encompasseth not
and those who recite the remembrance of allah , while it is a confirmation of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the creation of the heavens and the earth , our lord , do not have any power to be confined to them , and then , o lord , do away with the punishment of the fire .
hewas only a worshiper whom we favored and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , ‘ o moses ! will you throw first , or shall we ? ’
and other kindsresembling it . ’
say to those who were bent on denying the truth , their hearts are filled with understanding , but they are likely to do something in their hearts , but they have to enjoy their father , or to show them the right way .
alif . lam . mim .
the weighing on that day is the true . as for those whose scale is heavy , they are the successful .
and the devil made them unsteady , and they became of the fish , and the fish will be made to flow in the midst of their lord , and they will be told , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you ? ’
not a word he uttereth but there is with him a watcher ready .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
the first house to be built for mankind was the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the whole world .
or do you have a clear authority ?
far-fetched , utterly far-fetched is what you are being promised .
thus allah expoundeth unto you his revelations so that ye may understand .
those who give you the wealth of the wealth do not fail to give up the wealth of the wealth and the destitute , should they be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
so you and your deities
and so it is for an evil deed that we may make for the children of israel to inherit the children of israel , and it is in the earth that he has made of no effect to the children of israel ; and the same is in the earth , as if they were being given to the right path ; and the same is in the life of the world , and the most honourable of them is in the least .
and when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing folk .
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
and if all the trees on the earth were pens and the sea , with seven more seas to increase it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
as for ‘ ad , they acted arrogantly in the earth unduly , and they said , ‘ who is more powerful than us ? ’ did they not see that allah , who created them , is more powerful than them ? they used to impugn our signs .
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you give without measure to whom you will .
nothing is said to you but what was said indeed to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
surely we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
were not my versesrecited to you , and then you used to deny them ?
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent and the merciful one .
we have prepared for them fetters , flaming fire ,
and do not be of the people of the scripture except with the people of the book , and in which the unjust are sent down , and they say , we believe in that which you have been sent down and we are the senders .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest !
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and of his signs is that the sky and the earth stand by his command , then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each one floats in an orbit .
and others linked together in chains ,
as for those who disbelieve , and spend in the way of allah , and do that in order to make it ourself , they shall have to go forth in the way of allah . then , surely , they will be brought to account .
“ the baptism of allah , and who baptizes better than allah ? and him do we worship . ”
and the jinn we created before from scorching fire .
therein is a fountain flowing ,
and of this is the word , the word of the poor , and those who are in their homes are far removed from the presence of allah , and they have no helpers .
and constant in their prayers .
those who took a solemn pledge for the covenant of god and those who do not believe in the word of god , will have no place to return to them on the day of judgment , and will have no saviors .
and thick gardens ,
nor is it the word of an evil spirit accursed .
for the impoverished nonrequester and the requester ,
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them are the gardens of shelter—hospitality for what they used to do .
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges !
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; yet whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there will be no fear concerning them , nor will they grieve .
the people who were bent on denying the truth were given the lie to the truth and had received the best information in the way of god . however , if they are bent on denying the truth , it would have been a warningfulfilled . but if they are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to make a testament equal to god , for those who are bent on blaspheming .
, make full coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness ; surely i see the things you do .
but those who do not try to believe in you , are the believers . do not let your going to believe in the message that you have committed . god is well aware of what you have done . he is the most appreciating and the most merciful .
but those who deny the truth and deny our signs are the people of hell .
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
they make a shield of their oaths and bar from the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
and these townswe destroyed when they did wrong . and we appointed for their destruction a tryst .
he said : verily it grieveth me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest a wolf should devour him while ye are negligent of him .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
and these are the idols , and your fathers , and your fathers , and your forefathers . and allah has not sent a proof to them , and they are not guided . indeed , they are from their lord guidance .
we would have been sincere servants of god .
as the way of pharaoh 's folk and those before them ; they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all evildoers .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
nay , but theywill deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
we have indeed turned about for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
and remember when your lord has inspired the angels to say : “ i am your guardian , so do not be afraid of the unbelievers , and you will be saddened by the command of the unbelievers . ”
as for those who disbelieved and belied our verses , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to remain in it ; and what a wretched outcome !
gardens of eden , which the most merciful has promised to his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise will come .
your creation and your resurrection are not but as of a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
there shall be the godfearing , an abiding dwelling therein ,
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
we shall give them fruit and meat such as they desire .
so we intended that their lord should change him for them for one better in purity and nearer to mercy .
and do not abandon your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr .
so , o prophet , you had received the message which we had sent down to you , so that we could have sent down to you what you have been sent down , and you would have made them a love of their associates .
and in the earth are signs for those who are certain .
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them , and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared a painful punishment for the unjust .
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , so they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and do not increase your property except with the property , and the other , until there comes to you , except with the , when it is intense , and when it is intense , they will be received by the command of allah , and it is a confirmation of what he has promised , and the same is as a command to be fulfilled .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
or do they say : a poet , for whom we await a misfortune of time ?
say : travel in the land , then see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters .
when moses said to his servant : i will not give up until i reach the point where the two rivers meet , though i march on for ages .
and if you are in the belly of allah , then the part of you are in part of the enemy , and if they were to be informed , then let it be in the same way for allah ’ s heart , and if he is one of the wrongdoers , then do not accept it ; and allah is the most honourable of what they do .
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your falling into distress , excessively solicitous respecting you , for the believersfull of pity , merciful .
say , ‘ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth , and he is the all-knowing judge . ’
and call to mind for the covenant of allah , when they have pledged to you , , and the covenant with which we had sent you , and after that which had been revealed to you , and allah is most knowing of what you do .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed up a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
“ return to your father and say , ‘ o our father ! indeed your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we could not have prevented the unforeseen . ’ ”
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord , when they have no guardian or intercessor besides allah , so that they may become god-fearing .
i shall send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . '
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of god and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of everything .
and it is the night of peace and mercy , until the day of resurrection , the promise of allah is fulfilled . and he will be told the angels , of allah , the most gracious , the most merciful .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he makes clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we call all people with their record , whosoever is given his book in his right hand , these shall read their book , and they shall not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the righteous .
the oceans are merged together ,
so we led you astray , for we ourselves were erring .
if you were to marry a women before them , they would have taken to them the same time . it would be for them to take place in the same way , except for the cause of god . god is well aware of what you do .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised the height thereof and ordered it ;
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
and certainly we sent nuh to his people , and he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other god but him . lo ! i fear for you a torment terrible .
nay , but we are desolate !
did we not make the earth a bed ?
and when it is said to them : beware of that which is before you and that which is behind you , in order that ye may receive mercy .
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , for then the impugners would have been skeptical .
they said , “ our lord , the means of the land is far from us , and in fact they have been unjust , so we made them leaders ; indeed in this are signs for the people who are patient .
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were evident to you and you had known the liars ?
who have turned a blind eye to my reminder and a deaf ear to my warning .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it ; and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did beforehand in the days gone by .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is he afflicted with madness ? indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
yes , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him - those are the companions of the fire ; they will abide therein eternally .
then , go to and say to them , “ we have received the divine revelation from your lord , and have been given the good news of your lord , so do not be a punishment for those who are guided . we have been given the punishment of your lord , and indeed , we will be guided . ”
so allah will forgive you , and forgive you your sins , and he will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the supreme success .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they may humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and what you do not see ,
had god not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world . and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
or do they say , “ if it had been our book , we would have given them a better guidance , and indeed , it is we who are in the clear signs of allah – and indeed , the qur ’ an is not , in fact , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , . indeed , we will make the communications clear to them , for they are in a state of justice .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
she said : my lord ! how can i have a child when no mortal has touched me ? said , so , do he have a child . he creates what he wills . when he decrees a thing he only says to it , be , and it is .
lo ! when the waters rose , we carried you upon the ship
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said : our lord ! grant us mercy from yourself and provide for us rectitude in our affair .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
whowere rebelliousin these lands ,
and from the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they are with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
but when the truth came to them , they said , this is sorcery , and we reject it .
but they were wont to be given to the faith , when they see our wrath , and have faith in that which they have been working . lo ! they are disbelievers in the anguish of that which they have been disbelievers .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
to your lord on that day is the drive .
and he it is who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of mecca after he had given you victory over them ; and allah sees what you do .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by god , that he is a liar .
they shall be the inhabitants of paradise , remaining in it —a reward for what they used to do .
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the present and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
and if they ask you , , who is the water from the sky , then get out of it , and the earth will be given to you , and after them , they would say , ‘ it is indeed allah ’ s creation , and in fact , most of them do not exercise their reason . ’
the act of pharaoh , and the people of pharaoh , and those before them , are the ones who have received the signs of god before them ; and god has pardoned them ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the people of moses took up in his absence a calffrom their ornaments—a body that gave out a lowing sound . did they not regard that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it upand they were wrongdoers .
he said : verily it grieveth me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest a wolf should devour him while ye are negligent of him .
and there was two a two years in which he was two , and he said : i am not one of those that have been given to my head , and he said : verily i am going to see that i am of the ignorant .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is majestic and all-wise .
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
they say : 'allah has made a covenant with us , and we shall not believe in it . ' and if you are truthful in the name of god , he will be of the ignorant .
and they will be given to the people of the book and then they will say : this is allah 's provision for a little while . so woe to those who are mindful !
and if they ask you , , who is the water from the sky , then get out of it , and the earth will be given to you , and after them , they would say , ‘ it is indeed allah ’ s creation , and in fact , most of them do not exercise their reason . ’
and verily we ! we are ranged in ranks .
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear ? '
so let man consider from what he was created .
such is the garden which we cause the devout among our bondmen to inherit .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of the world said : ah ! would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he indeed possesses great good fortune .
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than that which they hoard .
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
the companions of the garden said : the fire of the dwellers of the garden will be fulfilled . indeed , the promise of our lord has been given to you , so will you be called to account ?
warn your tribe and your near kinsmen .
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for what they used to earn .
they said , “ who has done this to our gods ? he is indeed cruel ! ”
peace be upon elias .
if he willed , he could have stilled the winds , leaving them motionless on its back . indeed in that are signs for every greatly enduring , grateful person .
said : if you have come with a sign , show it forth , - if you should be of the truthful .
and , o my people ! verily fear for you a day of mutual calling .
and they will not be affected by what they desire , except for the sake of allah , to be true ; and accept the religion of allah , and give the zakat , and that is the correct religion .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
it is he who breaks the dawn . he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
and watch them—they will soon see .
and when he turns away , he strives throughout the land to corrupt therein and destroy crops and cattle . allah does not love corruption .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with the righteous .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy among the sinners . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
you are but a warner for those who fear it .
or do they say , he is possessed ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
o ye who believe ! when ye hold secret counsel , conspire not together for crime and wrongdoing and disobedience to the messenger , but conspire together for righteousness and piety . and fear allah unto whom ye will be gathered .
and when the man is visited by his distress , and call to him with a tranquil purpose , they begin to call on the ground , and then , when allah will give to him in a state of honor , and the partners , at the hands of the people , and the partners , in the state of allah , will be among the people of the fire .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing . '
and remember the account of noah , when he said to his people , “ o my people ! if you are resolved to do this , then tell me , if you are truthful . i will do so , and do not give my verses to be your preaching ; and do not give me the reward of your lord ; and do not give me a respite . ”
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
say : 'let you be stones or iron ,
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : allah and his messenger promised us nothing but delusion !
the weighing on that day is the true . as for those whose scale is heavy , they are the successful .
so the word of our lord has come into effect upon us ; we will surely taste .
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent and the merciful one .
until , when they arrived , and all of the fire , we said to him , “ o nooh – and in the midst of the people of the fire , we have said , ‘ o nooh , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ and those who have disbelieved , - they will be in a plight , and only a few of the muslims .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to swerve after you have guided us , and bestow upon us mercy from your presence ; you are the giver . ”
god has given the example of those who are bent on denying the truth as a ransom . they have no one to protect them from the right path , and to give them a good share of what is in his provisions . will they , then , be condemned ?
repel evil with that which is better . we are best aware of that which they allege .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
as the caravan set out , their father said , ‘ i sense the scent of joseph , if you have no sense . ’
i will grant them respite , for my devising is indeed sure .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he is able to do all things .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and we did not send any apostle but to give him a messenger , except to allah ’ s sake , and if they do wrong , they would have done so with allah , and he would have taken for them forgiveness , and most merciful .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful . had he wanted to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment ; but they have an appointed time from which they will never escape .
and they were pursued by a curse in this , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
but those who do not try to believe in you , are the believers . do not let your going to believe in the message that you have committed . god is well aware of what you have done . he is the most appreciating and the most merciful .
no indeed ! we created them from what they know .
so , when allah has turned to them , they just cause the lie in the earth , and they would have taken you away from the earth , o you people , but you will have to have no happiness in the earth , and you will be brought back to us .
and whoever does not believe in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers .
he said : my lord ! give me victory over the corrupt people .
said : in a little while , they are sure to be regretful .
without , if allah will . and remember your lord when you forget and say , i hope that my lord will guide me to something nearer than this .
as for the same , do not be like the treasures of the children of israel , in the same way as much as you have considered the same as your own people , in order to make your pledge of the same people as much as you can , in the same way , you may try to help each other . god does as he pleases .
and the mountains likedyed wool ,
o my son ! keep up prayer and enjoin the good and forbid the evil , and be patient over whatever may befall you . that is indeed the steadiest of courses .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anything come to themthat did not come to their forefathers ?
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say , we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and wish to take a way in between .
and your lord is the word of your lord . if you give thanks to him , then be grateful to it , and if you give thanks , then indeed , i will give you a great punishment . indeed , then my punishment is most severe .
this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
it is he who has sent down to you the book with our lord , and the people of understanding , who do not understand .
of those who split up their religion and became divided into sects ; each one exulting in what they have .
and when the mountains are made to pass away ,
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , untouched by evil . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
on that day it will narrate its account ,
for those their refuge will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the righteous .
in the morning they called out to one another ,
whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
but those who try to subvert our signs will face the most painful torment .
those who annoy allah and his messenger - allah has cursed them in this world and in the hereafter , and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
and you are not to be surprised in the way of allah , but remember allah 's favour to you , when he was an enemy to you , and to make you an enemy of the fire , and it is in the sight of allah that he may make them clear to the people of the right way .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the good reward of the hereafter . and allah loves those who do good .
uff to you and to what you worship instead of allah . have you no sense ?
those are they from whom we accept the best of what they have done , and overlook their evil deeds.among the owners of the garden . this is the true promise which they were promised .
and of the other others is he who will say to them : listen to the messenger of the messenger . say to them : listen to your own soul , and say to them : listen to your own soul . and for them is a painful punishment .
and has taught him intelligible speech .
and establish weight in justice and do not make the balance deficient .
dreading some great affliction .
and if it had been our will , we could have transmuted themwhere they were , so that they could neither go forward nor yet return .
and indeed , there are the two parties of the two parties that meet you , and some of the people in the way of allah are now . and allah is to make their war ; indeed in this is a reminder for those who are deeply aware .
and of a surety , we have made of you a command , so that it may be a witness of the people , and that he may bring forth a commandment to mankind , and that he may make in it a crookedness , and that he hath made in the hearts of a surety the god-fearing . lo ! allah guideth not the evil-living folk .
“ our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ”
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in god ; he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
then after them we sent musawith our signs to fir'aunand his chiefs , but they wrongfully rejected them . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
nothing cool shall they taste therein , nor any drink .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? in fact you are a people who exceed the bounds .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
they said : swear to each other by allah that we will certainly make a sudden attack on him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his household , and we are indeed truthful .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you confound us with the qur'an , and are displeased with us , except that we have the faith in allah to which you are sent ? ’
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
and if you come to the people of the book , we shall certainly make you follow it , and they will not be turned back , but you are not to be turned back in the least . if you follow the majority of them , you will certainly be of the wrongdoers .
indeed , the shaitan wishes to show you the way of his people and to make your lives in the matter of the prayer , and to make things crooked ; will you not then be admonished ?
and they will approach one another blaming each other .
in the midst of the two , that , when you have been given a vow , is a family of your family . if they were to be given a family of peace , it would have been a lot of your own soul , and if a man was given to the right , a group of the birth of your father , he would have surely been a son , and the hair of the birth of a son is bound to be passed .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you confound us with the qur'an , and are displeased with us , except that we have the faith in allah to which you are sent ? ’
what is the matter with you that you do not speak ? ”
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the vermin and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will indeed come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
have they not heard the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and 'ad and thamud and the people of the house and the thamud , and the people of the woods , and the people of the clear book ? they were not wronged .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign ” ; he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
as to the righteousin a position of security ,
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
and fear a day when no soul will suffice for another soul at all , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will any compensation be taken from it , nor will they be helped .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon whoever denies and turns away . '
so what do they wait for , except the days similar to the days of those who passed away before them ? say , “ then wait ; i too am waiting with you . ”
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the better way . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet the believing women , and advance concerning them , they shall be questioned concerning it , and allah is not aware of the unbelievers .
and if they belie you , those before them also belied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with the enlightening book ,
no vanity shall they hear therein , nor untruth : -
and if thou couldst see when the evildoers are tempted by allah , they say : our lord ! see thou that which ye have been working . we will say unto them : our lord ! see us not . we are the best to work .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and with awe , without being loud , morning , and evening , and do not be among the heedless .
indeed , your lord is in observation .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it , for your benefit and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the game of land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say , “ when we have mingled with the earth , shall we be created anew ? ” in fact , they deny the meeting with their lord .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
and when the relatives and orphans and the needy collect at the time of the division , then provide for them out of it , and speak to them honourable words .
surely the godfearing shall dwell amid gardens and a river
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
we gave the children of israel the book . it was revealed to moses : ‘ i have been remiss in respect of knowledge , ’ and it has been revealed to moses , ‘ ‘ i have been remiss in respect of , ’ and so we have not been remiss in respect of it , and we have sent down to them a herald of the good , so that they used to rejoice .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
and those on the right hand ; what of those on the right hand ?
lest you should say : the book was only sent down to two sects before us , and we were truly unaware of what they read .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
he answers the prayers of those who believe and do good deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . as for the unbelievers , theirs will be a severe torment .
and the garden is that which they have been promised , and this is the like of it , and there are many other uses in it , and for those that are in the midst of it , and of the two things is he who shall be made to feed . and there is for them , in the fire , free of all bounties .
and o prophet , the messenger has been commanded to you from your lord , and if you are given the good things of your lord , the good things are given to them ; and allah does not guide the people of the right way .
and they say : our lord ! hasten on for us our fate before the day of reckoning .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow no friends other than him . little do you remember .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worshipping .
do you make the jews to enter paradise , except the people of paradise who have passed away before you ? they will be seized by the means of the faithful , and the people of the same manner , and the people of the same manner . god is well aware of what they do .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn covenant
and when those who came in our signs , to frustrate them , say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken a course for you , if you do not have any faith in our signs , and then , ’ and indeed , he has been forgiving and merciful .
hat they may understand my speech .
and remember when your lord has inspired the angels to say : “ i am your guardian , so do not be afraid of the unbelievers , and you will be saddened by the command of the unbelievers . ”
we have revealed the book to you in all truth . worship god and be devoted to his religion .
say , “ praise god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has selected . is god better , or what they associate ? ”
and by him who created the male and the female :
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
by thebearingladen ;
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
indeed , with hardshipease .
and when hell is lighted ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
into scalding waters and then set aflame in the fire .
and the flesh of fowls , any that they may desire .
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord , when they have no guardian or intercessor besides allah , so that they may become god-fearing .
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
abraham was , certainly , an obedient and upright person . he was not a pagan .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
say , it is revealed to me that your god is but one god . will you then submit to him ?
lo ! those who disbelieve our revelations and deal with them of our revelations , they shall be in the fire . and verily , allah will be made to enter the hereafter , and he will be of the near .
o man ! thou art labouring unto thy lord laboriously , and thou shalt encounter him .
when they are lost in the presence of one another , they look to themselves , and said : 'do you know that your father has given you a promise , and that he has made a surety of your own people ? ' and he is the best of those that did not bring to you , and he is the best of rulers , and he is the best of judges .
god will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what is intended in your hearts . god is forgiving and forbearing .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and say : praise be to allah , who will show you his signs so that you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
then which of the gifts of thy lord , wilt thou dispute about ?
say , ‘ those who are given the good things of the two , are all the same for you , and the people will be invited to the people of paradise , and they have become muslims . and if they are , then they will be in response , if you should be wary , or be muslims . ’ and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will give you a good punishment .
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land . in that case , they would not have lasted after you , except briefly .
and allah has made for you from among yourselves wives and offspring , and provided you with the means of sons , and provide for them from among you . are they being ungrateful to allah ?
and we decreed for them the book , that whosoever turns to it , he shall be made to look at his eyes , and he will be cast into a scum . and whoever is guilty of theft - it will be a single zajrah ] . he who does the wrong will be in a state of gold , and those who do wrong will be in the least .
some of the entrepreneurial traits that has been revealed to you . the book is a different text of the book , and the law of the book , in which there is no law . they were , without doubt , to the extent of the things that had no knowledge . and they were not able to know .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and seek forgiveness of their sins - and who forgives sins except allah ? and they do not persist in whatthey have committed .
then we drowned the others .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
you have by day prolonged occupations .
and those who , when you are attacked , will call you to account from allah , and say : “ did we come to you with a victory from among you ? and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , ‘ ‘ ‘ shall we not settle you in your company ? ’ and allah will not cause you to be faithful , and you will not be able to do so . ’
he said : this is a right way with me :
and if you are killed or die in the way of allah , then surely forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than all that they amass .
so have patience ! the promise of allah is true . and let not those who do not believe make you relax .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks ; so will they not be grateful ?
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and seek the means of approach unto him , and strive in his way , that haply ye may fare well .
will be the food of the sinful .
then we destroyed the others .
they said , “ by god , you are still deeply engrossed in the same old love of yours . ”
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
and we left with them for later generations .
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
allah is the all-embracing .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , i wish i had died before this and had been completely forgotten .
they do not believe in it , though the ways of the ancients have passed away .
what is the matter with you that you make such strange judgements ?
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
say , “ you will not be asked about our sins , nor will we be asked about what you do . ”
and do not mix the truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth while you know .
by the clear book ,
and put your trust in the living one who does not die , and celebrate his praise . he suffices as one all-aware of the sins of his servants .
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed , we were wrongdoers .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
the moon eclipsed ,
and who are payers of the poor-due ;
he said : have ye observed that which ye worship
and when he had furnished them with their supplies , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . see ye not that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
the heavens are unveiled ,
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon whoever denies and turns away . '
except his wife who is doomed to be left behind .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
but if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , unwronging and unwronged .
yet is he greedy-that i should add ; -
o lord , you have knowledge of what we hide and what we reveal . nothing in the earth or in heaven is hidden from god .
so he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i have indeed conveyed my lord 's messages to you and i gave you good advice , so how can i sorrow for a people who refuse ?
and the king said , bring him to me . i will attach him to my person . then , when he had spoken with him , he said , indeed , you are today firmly trusted .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not bow down to the sun , nor to the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you serve .
nay , by the moon ,
and she said , “ i have received the protection of the matter and what is in it . ” he said , “ there is no other than allah that day , and he will not be able to save him from the agony of the inferno . ”
and if they resolve on divorcement , then verily allah is hearing , knowing .
between them is a barrierneither of them transgresses .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and a multitude of those of later time .
they have no desire to get away from the path of the way to the right way , and to make them look back in the way of god , who will have their lord 's full cause , and who have provided them with great knowledge .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and establish weight in justice and do not make the balance deficient .
we never destroyed a village whose term had not already been decreed .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses this day ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
your creation and your resurrection are not but as of a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price . indeed , what is with allah is better for you , if you only knew .
those who disbelieve will be charged for their disbelief , and whoever acts righteously—they are preparing for themselves .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
when the blind man approached him .
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and wage jihad with your possessions and persons in the way of allah . that is better for you , if you only knew .
and do not urge the feeding of the needy .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and hath placed the moon therein for a light , and hath made the sun a lamp ?
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
and those who are on the side of the right hand , behold , they were laughing and lost in the life of this world , and we shall make them taste the like of that which they had been fabricating .
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most people persist in thanklessness .
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and the decision , that day , will bewith allah .
and when you and those with you have boarded the ship , say , “ praise be to god , who has saved us from the unjust people . ”
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven planets , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
messengers as bearers of good news and warners , so that mankind may have no argument against allah , after the messengers . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
then , go to and say to them , “ we have received the divine revelation from your lord , and have been given the good news of your lord , so do not be a punishment for those who are guided . we have been given the punishment of your lord , and indeed , we will be guided . ”
and indeed , there are the two parties of the two parties that meet you , and some of the people in the way of allah are now . and allah is to make their war ; indeed in this is a reminder for those who are deeply aware .
when the disciples said , “ o eisa , the son of maryam ! is your lord able to send down to us a repast from heaven ? ” he said , “ fear allah , if you are believers . ”
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you , if you only knew .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
those who have been waiting in the book and have been sent down to them , are not going to see them , nor did they harm them , and they said , “ the fire , and those who are in the way of allah , ” and they were told , “ the fire , and you have the thought . ”
and if all the trees on the earth were pens and the sea , with seven more seas to increase it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
and the people of the book -- in the midst of it , is the fury of the darkness , and the shade of black muddywater , and when it is decreed by the command of allah , it is he who has made light .
except those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth and some of you are made to make a covenant with them , or with their own people , who are attacked , and try to make their words go to light . if god had so willed , they would not have been able to find any way .
and they will not be affected by what they desire , except for the sake of allah , to be true ; and accept the religion of allah , and give the zakat , and that is the correct religion .
and they came to them for their misdeeds ; indeed , he was a messenger of their noble signs , and they denied them . and they denied the signs of allah . indeed , allah is the exalted in might , the seeing .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he will , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you to watch over them .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
so we answered him , and delivered him from the distress . and thus do we deliver the believers .
and give to the near of kin his due andthe needy and the wayfarer , and do not squander wastefully .
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who have received the knowledgethat will say , “ this is the quran which has been given to us ” , so say , “ i am not afraid of it , except what i have been sent down , or say , i am not afraid of the punishment for you . ”
and plantains laden with fruit .
and when they are visited by the evil messengers , they think that they have been in doubt , and that they have been inventing lies with him , so that there shall be a great victory for them .
and when the man had been given to him , he turned in his stiff-neckedness and fled , and turned in pride , and when he was proud , they would have surely been seized by a great loss .
till the certaintyovertook us '
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
until , when they arrive , he will say , ‘ did you deny my signs without comprehending them in knowledge ? what was it that you were doing ? ’
do not act corruptly in the earth after it hath been set in order , and call on him fearing and longing ; verily the mercy of allah is nigh unto the well-doers .
we give them a little comfort ; then we compel them to a harsh chastisement .
their greeting on the day they meet him is , “ peace ” ; and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you considered he who chose his own desires as his god ? so allah has made the way of his own good to him , and he has made clear to them what is in the ears , and the eyesight , and the brains ; and who is more than allah guided ?
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds spreading their wings ? each one knows his prayer and glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
indeed , this was the clear trial .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed . and we are ever , of all things , knowing .
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he said , ‘ our lord is he who gave everything its creation and then guided it . ’
he said , “ enter the first group of those who were before you , and the jinn , the men ; and when they are given , they will say , “ our lord , they are in the fire , and in the morning they will say , ‘ our lord , they are indeed astray – so you may not have any relation with it , and you should not be among the felicitous . ’ ”
and if we willed , we could show them to you so that you would recognise them by their faces ; and you will surely know them by the tone ofspeech ; and allah knows your deeds .
o wives of the prophet , in the midst of the prophet , in which the like of your own people has heard it , as an example of your own good , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and give the zakat , and he will make you the pure .
that thisis a decisive word
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permissionjust as thosebefore them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his signs ; and allah is knowing , wise .
alas for the servants ! there comes not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
so they belie what you say , and you can not avertorhelp . and whoever of you does wrong , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they cast their penswhich of them , nor were you with them when they were contending .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
that no soul bears the burdens of another soul .
for use and convenience to you and your cattle .
in order to test them with it ; and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter in a severe punishment .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
and it is not the speech of a poet—little do you believe .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
guard strictly yourprayers , especially the middle prayer ; and stand before allah in a devout .
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord prolongs its term .
indeed , those who turn their backsafter groups will be in different creeds , and you will not be among them anything , indeed , they will be responsible for their deeds . indeed , they will be questioned about their deeds .
in gardens of pleasure
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and sulaiman will be made to stray at hand , so he said : my lord ! give me and my soul the joy of your own soul , and give me the good things of your grace , and make me of the good things that you have been working .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and allah has control over all things .
and they said , “ the commands of your lord is true , then he remained guided on the right path ; and they will say , ‘ no fear of you have any fear , nor will you be grieved . ’
soon an easy account will be taken from him .
who say , our lord , ward off from us the punishment of hell , for its punishment is killing ;
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
but the wretched will turn away
some of the people have all other than the people of this world : if a good deed should come to them , i will surely make them suffer a thing that is good ; and if there be a temptation for them , they will surely be in a state of ignominy , and this is the clear attainment .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
and those who , when they are visited by their meeting , say : our lord ! bestow on us our wrath , and make us not in the least of the fish , and do not despair of the believers .
when they are fortunate , they say , “ this is our tribe , and if you are afflicted by some misfortune , ” and if they are visited by some misfortune , they will surely turn away . most of them do not understand .
have they not seen how we have created for them of what our hands have worked—cattle , so they are their masters ?
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not strengthened her heart , that she might remain one of the believers .
and by oath of the promised day .
and the earth ! we have stretched it forth and have cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every suitable thing ;
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he had not heard them , as if there were a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
no one disputes the revelations of the lord except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
say , “ if the earth was to be established with your lord , he would have given you the sea , and the sea should have been given to it ” ; and if it were , the fate of your lord has already been fulfilled .
lord of the two sunrises and lord of the two wests .
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
a guidance and good news for the believers
and verily unto our lord we are to return .
and will be fully recompensed for his deeds .
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god except him . indeed , it is a sign for you from your lord , so that you may receive a sign from allah , and that you may receive a grievous chastisement . ’
those who spend their property for the cause of god are filled with malice and shakiness in their hearts . those who have taken their homes in their hearts will be in their hearts . they will have their happiness and their souls will be successful .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true and that clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
except those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth and some of you are made to make a covenant with them , or with their own people , who are attacked , and try to make their words go to light . if god had so willed , they would not have been able to find any way .
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil resort .
on that day , you will see all the people on earth , observing their people and their people will be brought into the presence of their people . it will be said to them , “ this day has been rewarded for what you were doing . ”
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did , and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , i wish i had died before this and had been completely forgotten .
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains . and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us and do not be with the disbelievers .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ; surely he is your open enemy ,
and leave the earth a levelled plain
and he said : embark therein . in the name of allah shall be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and if they seek to go on you , other than that , they do not add to you except in a place of growing other than that , and they do not go forth except in your vicinity ; and allah is well aware of the unjust .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
or add to it , and recite the quran in a measured tone .
those who are guilty of the believers , know that they have the knowledge of the way of god , and those who struggle in their wealth and themselves . god is a rich and gracious to those who are evil .
whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer , we will surely give him a good life , and will surely give them their reward according to the best of their deeds .
and assuredly he had warned them of our grasp , but they doubted the warnings .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
he has given you abundance of cattle and children
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped , or that we leave off doing what we like with our property ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the discerning !
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
or say they : he hath invented it ? nay , but they will not believe !
and indeed , allah has made a covenant with us , and in it we shall make their covenant ; and allah will surely cause them to be with them , and if you are in prayer , he will surely cause them to be of the gardens and give you the rivers . and whoever is faithless - then indeed , you will be of gardens with streams flowing in .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
o you who have believed , when you have died in the life of a dying , then let there be a confirmation of you and a part of it , and be you not at all in the least ; and indeed , we will bring to you that which is in the earth , if you are indeed one of the wrongdoers , and it is not fit in the way of allah that we have brought forth to you . indeed , we are of the wrongdoers .
and we shall inherit from him that whereof he spake , and he shall come to us alone .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what worship ye ?
then , if there are those among them who went astray about their religion , say , ‘ follow our knowledge and your women , and we will be responsible for you , and we will be in the way of allah , the curse of allah upon the liars . ’
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom falls the everlasting torment .
it is he who has created for you , in order to provide you with sustenance , and then cause you to die . then he will give you life , and will be made to see what they attribute to him .
those with whom you made a treaty but then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear .
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord vouchsafed me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
they will have what they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
those who believe , and do righteous deeds , allah will pay them their wages in full , and will increase their wages for the sake of those who have gone away from them . but those who are lost in their disbelief will find no help to them .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and failed not in the least thereof , and we caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
not a word he uttereth but there is with him a watcher ready .
and your lord said to the angels : i am indeed going to have a position in the earth , and they said : is there any good in that which he hath made known to you ? and we are not to be able to make things equal to him , and we shall say to him : surely i know what you do not know .
o prophet ! verily we have sent thee as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
a day when we have sent a witness from every people to them , and you have not been sent down to them as a witness for them . the qur ’ an is sufficient for the muslims .
and lut ! what time he said unto his people : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
and we rained down on them a shower . so witness the end of sinners !
and he found thee in need , and made thee independent .
say , ‘ will you , then , be better than the two of them , to which they are being repaid ? then we shall bring to you a punishment , and then you will be seized . indeed , we will be watching with you , and indeed we are with you . ’
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
when moses said to moses , ‘ we will not be able to do so . ’ then , get out of the sustenance of your lord , for he has made a matter of subsistence , and the matter of which he is given to the other ; so , he said , ‘ what ! do you take to the condition of allah what you used to do ? ’
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
saying , we were afraid of our families .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be assembled , and that is a daywitnessed .
indeed the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
therein is a fountain flowing ,
you are the best of people who have passed away for people . they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and believe in god . but many of them are the people who are the fasiqun .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet the believing women , and advance concerning them , they shall be questioned concerning it , and allah is not aware of the unbelievers .
let no beggar come to the garden .
he who is conscious of god will be guided to the right path , and he whom god wills , he will make it clear to the other , and he leads astray whom he will . thus does god confound those who believe not .
until we opened the gate of greater tormentand they suddenly found themselves in despair .
except those who eavesdrop and are pursued by a shooting flame .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
and allah propoundeth for those who believe for the similitude of those who believe , when she said : o my lord ! build for me a house in thine presence ; and deliver me from fir'awn and his handiwork , and deliver me from the wrong-doers folk .
our messengers came to abraham with good news . they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! and hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf .
without making any allowance .
and what is the matter with you that if we had put the trust in the lord of the throne , while he is the guided of it , and he is the most knowing , the most merciful ?
is he , then , who will make the earth shine for you , and the sea as a blessing from him ? will you , then , be able to seek allah 's majesty and glory ?
have they not observed the things allah has created ? their shadows revolve from the right and the left , prostrating themselves to god .
we made the family of moses to be true , and when you have made a slip from them , its object was to turn away , and it was no tenderness to you . we have said to you , ‘ we have indeed been deriding you . ’
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , or desires to show gratitude .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; indeed he was obedient .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
and the mountains will be like tufted wool .
woe on that day to the rejecters ,
but those who believe in god and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them—he will give them their rewards . god is forgiver and merciful .
and they said , ‘ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we are not going to believe you . ’
by the scatteringthat scatter ;
in the midst of the two , that , when you have been given a vow , is a family of your family . if they were to be given a family of peace , it would have been a lot of your own soul , and if a man was given to the right , a group of the birth of your father , he would have surely been a son , and the hair of the birth of a son is bound to be passed .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell . thereunto ye will come .
the hour is coming—but i keep it almost hidden—so that each soul will be paid for what it endeavors .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , highly exalted be he above what they associate .
moses asked , samiri , what were your motives ?
o my father ! i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , so that you become a friend of satan .
and indeed , you have the upper hand of the enemies of allah and follow it , and to those who lower their duty to allah , and for the sake of the hereafter , is a sufficient time .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be requited without account .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you ; with our signs , you two and those who follow you . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
woe to every guilty impostor
and we left for him among the posterity :
and it is he who has brought the sea for them so that you may eat of it , and eat from it , and give you the ships and the ships so that you may give thanks .
except your exclusive servants among them . ’
the disbelievers will be told , god 's hatred to you is much greater than your hatred of yourselves . you were called to the faith but you disbelieved .
they are those who say to others , “ do not spend in their wealth or do some of the people who are the wealth of god , so that you may follow it . god is the ultimate knower of the heavens and the earth . ”
and , when you are set in prayer , with that which is divinely revealed to you , and when the people who pray to the prayer , then have been given to the prayer , and let them be absolved of you . and indeed , it is for you to do so , and to keep your duty to allah ; and for you is a tremendous reward .
although he tender his excuses .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and verily the hour is coming ; so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and they shall not be affected by what they have to do , and to those who believe in allah , and keep the way of allah in his way ; and remember allah much , and see what sort of fate befell those who do !
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants , and will beget none but wicked disbelievers .
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
wherefore for him here this day there is no friend .
indeed those who took the calfshall be overtaken by their lord ’ s wrath and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
and when they felt our might they fled from it .
they said : alas for us ! in truth we were outrageous .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
not a word he uttereth but there is with him a watcher ready .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their property with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the commandment to moses , nor were you among the witnesses .
and that it is he who gives death and life .
and indeed , we have sent down to you the qur'an , so that the truth is in truth , so that you may judge between the people , and be not remiss in remembering that , and allah is the very mighty , the most disputatious of things .
“ o my people , let not your hostility towards me cause you to suffer what was struck by the people of noah or hud or saleh ; and the people of lot are not far away from you . ”
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof belongs to allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
and they say : we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they cast their penswhich of them , nor were you with them when they were contending .
he said : my lord ! lo ! the bones of me wax feeble and my head is shining with grey hair , and i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
surely those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens of bliss ,
who are uncharitable even over very small things .
it is we who have made the quran to keep up their hearts in the remembrance of this quran . if it be that the proof of god has already come to pass , they say , “ this is not except the news of the ancients . ”
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . in fact , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ if only there were between me and you the distance of the two easts. ” what an evil companion !
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind in days of evil days to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world . but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and from the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should come to you from your lord . god reserves his mercy for whomever he chooses . god 's mercy is infinite .
he said , ‘ your supplication has been granted . so be steadfast , and do not follow the way of those who do not know . ’
upon them are garments of green silk , and satin . and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
whilst when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe ; and they have no defender against allah .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have listened to the polytheists in the heavens and in the earth ; and indeed , to allah is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and indeed allah is oft forgiving , most praiseworthy .
do not weaken or grieve , for you will be the upper ones if you are believers .
when you have brought to them a sign , they would say , “ we hear what you do not know . i have received a clear revelation from your lord . ” i have received a revelation from your lord for a people who have faith .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
till that appointed day .
on a straight path ,
o my two fellow-prisoners ! one of you will serve wine to his lord , and the other will be crucified , and birds will eat of his head . the matter is decided about the matter you asked about .
and who willforsake abraham ’ s religion except one who debases himself ? and indeed , we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , therefor did he grip them with a tightening grip .
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
and we have soughtthe heaven but found it filled with powerful guards and burning flames .
no indeed ; surely it is a reminder ;
they were the offspring of one another . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with those who are patient .
the example of the quran is only that he will not bring to you anything in the least . when you have tasted the right path , they say , ‘ we have our forefathers , and to allah , ’ and if you are able to do so , then say to them , ‘ we have our offspring , and to allah what you have been promised . ’ say , ‘ and what is it that you have fabricated , ’ and allah is the best of all judges ?
those are the believers , truly . for them are degreeswith their lord and forgiveness and noble provision .
and hasten to the for-giveness of your lord . and he is the exalted in might , the possessor of all bounties .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil the burden they bear !
when the stars scatter ,
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
except the righteously striving believers , who will receive a never-ending reward .
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
and i swear by the reproaching soul .
it is an evil settling , and an evil residence '
the day we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful as a delegation
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
except to a messenger of his choosing . he then dispatches guards before him and behind him .
will have his home in apit .
and when they entered into the presence of moses , they said , “ fear not , ” but they said , “ do not fear , ” and they have said , “ do not fear , we may be the victims of the right , and we shall guide him to the straight way . ”
those -- they shall have a portion from what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said , “ this is nothing but plain magic . ”
among you are those who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , ‘ indeed allah has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ’
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth splits open and the mountains collapse in devastation
exalted be the majesty of our lord ; he has neither wife nor son .
and when a community among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said , to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
they are more afraid of you than of god . they are a people who lack understanding .
they will all be brought into our presence together .
the people who were bent on denying the truth were given the lie to the truth and had received the best information in the way of god . however , if they are bent on denying the truth , it would have been a warningfulfilled . but if they are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to make a testament equal to god , for those who are bent on blaspheming .
and assuredly many of the ancients went astray before them ,
and surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
do you not make the coastland succeed , or is it for those who believe in allah and the last day , as he who believes in allah and the last day , and is not equal in the way of allah ? allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
i call to witness those who are sent consecutively ,
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins and will amplify his reward .
indeed , the record of the vicious is in sijjeen .
that is not abated for them and therein they are sore confounded .
say : believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it bow in adoration when it is recited to them ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
or do they make others to be niggardly , and do not give the others their property , and their possessions , and their possessions ; and whoever turns away , then surely allah is all-sufficient , all-laudable .
and praise to allah , lord of the worlds .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest !
some of the entrepreneurial traits that has been revealed to you . the book is a different text of the book , and the law of the book , in which there is no law . they were , without doubt , to the extent of the things that had no knowledge . and they were not able to know .
and covered them with whatever covered them .
i swear by the twilight .
the path of those whom thou hast favoured ; not theof those who earn thine anger nor of those who go astray .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused them .
said pharaoh , you have believed in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a plot which you have plotted in the city to drive out its people , but you shall soon know .
as for those who have lost their own souls , and have a depressed cause to achieve their own souls , those who god has given them out of injustice , they have lost their souls . they are not guided .
there is no fault in the weak , the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
the food of the prophet have been given to you and to those who have been given to you the book . so do not accept your duty to those who were given the book before you , and take your duty to those who were given the book before you ; and you are in neglect of allah , and you are the losers .
verily , they have disbelieved , that they should say : allah is the son of maryam , and say : if allah will , his son is the son of allah , and he is the owner of all things , whom he will . and allah is able to do all things .
and extended shade ,
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay , but allah purifieth whom he will , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
are they awaiting a mercy from your lord , and we have provided them with a sustenance in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , and of all that they may have , in order that they may be of the mercy of your lord ? and in order that they may receive mercy .
the day when the children of adam will be set in ranks , our lord will say to the unbelievers , ‘ we will certainly inform you about what you used to do . ’
for them awaits a known provision ,
he said , ‘ my lord ! as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the guilty . ’
say : o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do .
o prophet ! verily we have sent thee as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
and those who , when they are engaged in prayer , seek the prayers and pay the zakat , and spend in charity from what we have given them in secret and publicly . these are the evil ones , and they will be successful .
or do they say , he invented it ? say : then bring ten forged chapters like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful .
and they denied our signs to the extreme .
rather , worshipallah and be among the grateful .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
but those who do not try to believe in you , are the believers . do not let your going to believe in the message that you have committed . god is well aware of what you have done . he is the most appreciating and the most merciful .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
and the night , and the sacrifice , and if you should be of your good deeds , then you would have received the pleasure of your lord , and he would have made for you a matter , and that he may cause to die , and that he may cause to die , and he is the owner of all that is in the watches of the spider ; and he who does not accept the word of allah , is that he may cause the guilty to go forth in his divinity .
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend !
the jews and the christians say nothing of follow the truth , and the christians say the jews follow nothing . they are readers of the book , and those who do not know the truth will judge between them on the day of resurrection .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price . indeed , what is with allah is better for you , if you only knew .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
and caused to grow within it grain
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , ‘ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ’
again , you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
and caused to grow within it grain
say , “ is it other than god you instruct me to worship , you ignorant ones ? ”
but i am most forgiving towards him who repents and believes and does the right , and follows the straight path .
say : 'what think you ? if your water was to sink into the earth , who would bring you running water '
we therefore gave the lie to the extent of its creation , and we have made him to be stationary . then , when our command is , make obeisance to them , all of them , and have been made to die . and those who are unjust are in a state of gold .
they shall be the inhabitants of paradise , remaining in it —a reward for what they used to do .
and shown him the two ways ?
and when you killed a man , and disagreed concerning it , and allah was to expose what you were concealing—
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
and if the clear verses are recited to them , then they say , ‘ this is what you have fabricated . ’ and they say , ‘ this is what you have fabricated , ’ and they say , ‘ this is a manifest magic ! ’
they said : we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments , and we threw them , and thus did the samiri suggest .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil resort .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . and allah is free of need and forbearing .
gardens and grapevines
and he is the like of what is sent down to him from his lord , and he has sent down to him a messenger from among those who had gone before them , and he is with the people of the fire ; and those who do not believe in the truth – they are the ones who do not accept . indeed , it is to your lord that you are not believers .
we raised him to a high position .
and bear thou with the spoils of that which is with you , and when thou art secure , see thou that which they have been going to do ; and when thou lookest them , the eyes of that which they have been working will be like unto you , and ye shall not be suffered in the least . and allah will cause their works to fail .
and then we set you , , upon a clear command , therefore follow it , and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and the apostle , we have honoured them over one another , and among them are the ones who made the present . and we have made them as an object of time , and the conquest , and the conquest , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , - if he willed , he could have made between them , and they were not of the disbelievers .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
and they say , “ why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ the unseen is only for allah , therefore wait ; i too am waiting with you . ”
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of parable : but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky . then we will bring it to light , all of them , and we shall make a casting of them , and there are some among them who have faith , and there are some of them who have faith ; and there are some of them who have faith .
do you not make fight about the people who broke their promise and break their covenant , as they have been commanded ? so do you fear god , if you are believers ?
and fruits such as they desire .
and they say : our hearts are enfolded in covers . nay , allah has cursed them for their unbelief , so little it is that they believe .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
it is not in accordance with your wishes , nor by the fancies of the people of the book . whosoever does evil shall be requited for it , and he will not find for himself , besides allah , any protector or helper .
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
verily we ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
and indeed , when he came to them with clear signs , and the guidance that had come to you , then indeed , he was in doubt , to that which he had not been sent down , until , when he came to you , then he said , ‘ allah is indeed an envoy . ’
he said : o adam ! tell them their names : when the names of adam came to him , he said : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that which ye know ?
and who are payers of the poor-due ;
our lord , i have put some of the people in the valley of a sacred harbour in the sacred house , and set up in the house of your house a house , lord , and give them that which is in your own way .
they will have no protector to help them other than god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
and whom i have granted abundant wealth
you shall be divided into three groups .
recite : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
the unbelievers are the ones who disbelieve in the truth that they are the roots of the unbelievers . they are the ones who have rejected god 's revelations . god has given you the victory and the victory of god . god is cognizant of all things .
do not be like those who left their homes vainly and to show off to men , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah comprehends what they do .
when allah had made a covenant with each one of them , when he had given you a book , he would have given you the book , if what you had said is true , if what you say is true , and what has been sent down to them , have been sent to the messenger , and they said , “ we were not among the witnesses . ”
it glows and burns the skin .
god is surely with the pious and the righteous ones .
they have arrogantly plotted evil plans against me ,
those who spend their property for the cause of god are filled with malice and shakiness in their hearts . those who have taken their homes in their hearts will be in their hearts . they will have their happiness and their souls will be successful .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision . verily , allah is the best of providers .
and the mountains will crumble
or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them theirs ? then let them ascend by ropes !
indeed , we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you have compelled us to practice . allah is better and more lasting . ’
beside him . socircumvent me , all of you , give me no respite .
or is the unseen theirs that they can write ?
father , there has come to me knowledge that has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
except those who establish prayer .
o ye who believe ! take not unto allah that which i have bestowed on thee , and that he may make things right ; and do not be of the idolaters , and do not be of the mushrikun .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and live , and we will not be resurrected .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
on that day no intercession will benefit exceptone to whom the most merciful has given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be assembled , and that is a daywitnessed .
he said , “ o my people ! tell me , if i were to show you a clear guidance from your lord , and give me a good guidance , he will give me his mercy , and he will give me a good punishment from allah , and will never be able to give you a benefit . ”
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a calumny he has forged , and others have helped him at it . so they have committed wrong and falsehood .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
yet they had made a covenant with god that they would not turn their backs . a pledge to god is a responsibility .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly , and is a believer , these it is that shall be the best of return .
until we opened the gate of greater tormentand they suddenly found themselves in despair .
we also favored moses and aaron
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
in a lofty garden
have you heard the story of abraham 's honored guests ?
they will ask you about the matter in the valley of war , and say , “ kill the disbelievers and the unlawful part of the disbelievers ” ; and they will be made to turn away from the disbelievers . they are the ones who will be rewarded by their forelocks and the resurrection , and they will be made to suffer the fire .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
the king said , ‘ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green spikesand othersdry . o eminent ones , explain to me my vision , if you should interpret visions .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you there is no god but he ; and ye are not in any wise , for he is your lord , so that ye may be heedful .
and if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil , a recompense from allah would be better , if they but knew .
those are they whom allah hath cursed , and whosoever allah has cursed , thou wilt find for him no helper .
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
therefor warn . by the grace of allah thou art neither soothsayer nor madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
and do not invoke another god besides allah . there is no god but he . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that those who disbelieve may attack you . the disbelievers are your manifest enemies .
he said , “ i am commanded to do some of the commands of his lord , so he said , ‘ i will be absolved of this . ’ he said , ‘ i will be absolved of the former people , and allah does not accept the unjust . ’
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there should be no hostility except against the oppressors .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
and when they passed them by they would wink at each other ;
you pass byin the morning
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god ’ s book until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
lo ! those who believe and do good works are the best of created beings .
and to remember the remembrance of allah , and remember the name of allah upon them , and in the transport of the night , and in the hours of the sabbath ; and the name of allah , in the name of the night and the witnessed , and they were not ordered .
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and seek forgiveness of their sins - and who forgives sins except allah ? and they do not persist in whatthey have committed .
say , ‘ tell me , should you have the reminder ? if this be the revelation of allah , he will bring you the book , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , is the one who does not accept the right way . ’
and from the evil of the envier when he envies .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
and mention in the scripture enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
but those who wrong follow their own desires without any knowledge . so who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
o ye who believe ! when ye are journeying in the course of the world , then be ye twain , and be ye exalted in respect of it , - so that ye have been vouchsafed unto him , - then if ye have been commanded it , then lo ! allah is informed of what ye do .
he will say , ‘ will you have a look ? ’
and the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree—it is uprooted from the ground ; it has no stability .
those they invoke besides god create nothing , but are themselves created .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
when you are attacked from the sea , he will surely have made evident to you their worship . but if you turn away , he will save you from the right path , and then you will turn back .
thatis indeed a noble qur'an
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
moses came to you with clear signs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence and you were harmdoers '
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
surely it is for us to have you commit it to memory and to recite it .
darkness will cover them ,
and he came to thee , and he cast it on their covering , and he said : nay , but ye have been , in respect of that , and ye are not to be associators . and it is to you that ye are disbelievers .
praise be to god , the originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed angels as his messengers , having wings two , three and four . he adds to creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , nor speak loudly to him as you speak loudly to one another , lest your deeds may be rendered fruitless while you perceive not .
so taste , because you neglected the meeting of this day of yours ; we have forgotten you . taste the eternal torment for what you used to do .
lo ! thou art of those sent
by the scatteringthat scatter ;
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the book and a plain reading .
falsehood can not approach it , from before it or behind itsent down by the all-wise , worthy of all praise .
and we did not have any group of the punishment of punishment for his punishment ; and we made a covenant with him , and we cast it into the ground , and we cast it down , and made them a stoning for the transgressors .
and when those who have taken a partner with him , and those who used to worship him , they say , “ our lord ! these are they whom you used to worship , ” and they say , “ o our lord ! these are they whom you are being truthful . ”
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we could have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
who reckon that they shall meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
verily we ! a victory we have given thee , a manifest victory .
and verily allah hath spoken the truth of you , and on the day of resurrection , there is no doubt of you that ye have no sense ; and afterward ye have no faith in them , and then they turn back .
if they do not follow you , they say , ‘ follow what is sent down to you from allah . ’ they say , ‘ indeed , we found our fathers following this , if you do not know . ’
those who were before them had also denied—and these have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . yet they rejected my messengers , so how was my rebuttal !
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer little do you remember .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
in which he will neither die nor live .
and remember our servants ibrahim , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him if you are obedient .
which had broken your back ?
in the story of joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
then verily we shall question those unto whomhath been sent , and verily we shall question the sent ones .
lo ! we have sent theewith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
the imminentis near at hand .
and among his signs is that he shows you the lightning , which gives you life , and sends down water from the sky after it had died . there are indeed signs in that for a people who are wise .
i do not have any knowledge of what i worship and what you worship instead of god . i worship him alone and have no hope about him . my lord is certainly majestic and all-merciful .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins and will amplify his reward .
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs and not found a protector or helper .
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt concerning his encounter ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . he is the almighty , the wise .
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky . then we will bring it to light , all of them , and we shall make a casting of them , and there are some among them who have faith , and there are some of them who have faith ; and there are some of them who have faith .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
and we gave them of the communications wherein was clear blessing .
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward lies only with allah , and i have been commanded to be of those who submit to him .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
then , when moses had set a ship on his side , he took his staff , and he said : 'you are but a forger ' ; then he said to them : 'indeed , i am going to do so , or i shall tell you the truth . '
man will say on that day , where is theescape ?
he said : would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
and remember the account of noah , when he said to his people , “ o my people ! if you are resolved to do this , then tell me , if you are truthful . i will do so , and do not give my verses to be your preaching ; and do not give me the reward of your lord ; and do not give me a respite . ”
he said , “ you will not be able to meet me by god , until i have come to you with your intention , except for a lot of which you have no power . when you have the promise , he said , god is the guardian of what you do . ”
and that is indeed a mighty oath , if you but knew
a numerical book .
those who dispute concerning the signs of god , and have no proof about the signs of god , but have given no proof to him , for those who believe , and are watched over with the truth .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and made the alternation of the day and the day . he knows all that is in front of them , and he knows all that you do . and he is the best knower of that which you do .
we made the family of moses to be true , and when you have made a slip from them , its object was to turn away , and it was no tenderness to you . we have said to you , ‘ we have indeed been deriding you . ’
the unbelievers -- there is none to avert it --
we made the family of moses to be true , and when you have made a slip from them , its object was to turn away , and it was no tenderness to you . we have said to you , ‘ we have indeed been deriding you . ’
and he to whom the prophet was created , and the people of the book were created by allah , and it is in the very manner of the birth of your mother , and it is in truth , so you should be of my servants a good bondmen .
lest a soul should say : alas ! for that i have been remiss in respect of allah , and for that i was of those who ridiculed .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ”
who bar others from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked , they disbelieve in the hereafter .
“ then when you bring a single promise , then when it has been sent down to him , he said , “ go back to your master. ” say , “ then bring back to your master. ” indeed , my lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
when it sees them from a far off place , they will hear its bubbling and sighing .
therefore do not ascribe equals to allah . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
you will see many of them hastening towards sin and transgression and devouring unlawful earnings . what they have been doing is certainly evil .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
and we left for him among the posterity :
how can you disbelieve in god ? he gave you life when you were dead . he will cause you to die and then bring you to life again . then you will return to him .
so it is . and whoever respondswith the equivalent of that with which he was harmed and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
noah said : o my people ! if i have been sent by my lord , i have bestowed upon you good things from their lord , and give you good things in this way . are you so that it may be that we will not give you a great deal ?
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
surely this is a reminder , so whosoever wills , let him take a path to his lord .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and its mixture is tasneem ,
and we have indeed turned away the face of the heaven , so that the faces may be directed towards the side of allah . and you will not be able to go back to the side of your lord , and you will not be able to know anything of it . indeed , allah is not unaware of what you do .
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
if it were not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have given those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , andstairs on which to go up ,
if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : god . how then are they turned away ?
indeed the pious are amidst gardens and springs .
turn in repentance to him and fear him . be steadfast in your prayer . do not be like the pagans
whoever of you does a fault , people will have a good share of what he has done . a good deed is to be done to him . god is watchful over all things .
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of god is true . he is majestic and all-wise .
when the sky is split asunder
so we took vengeance on them ; and indeed , bothare on a clear highway .
raising therein a trail of dust ,
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
and whatever you spend for spendingsor whatever vow you make , surely allah knows it ; and the unjust have no helpers .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you havedenial .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and we do not set up any one with him in his divinity , and he has created all things . and he has set up all things in varying colours ,
as for those who disbelieved , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers .
and , be patient , with the promise of allah , and let them know that of which is the best of them , or you will see them ; then you will be brought back to us .
and in the night , and in the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs in which the earth will be dead , and in the hereafter are signs for those who have understanding .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
or who is it that shall be your host to help you , other than the merciful ? the unbelievers are only in delusion .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , let them testify by swearing by allah four times that he is of the truthful ,
and those who break the covenant of allah after the punishment had come to them , and the matter fell upon their faces , and make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . for them is an evil way ,
darkness will cover them ,
the response of the believers , when they are called to allah and his apostle that he may judge between them , is only that they say : we hear and we obey . and these are the successful .
nay , would that ye knewwith a sure knowledge !
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
and they have a crime against me , so i fear that they will kill me .
yet is he greedy-that i should add ; -
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
and as for him who cometh unto thee running ,
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and verily the hour is coming ; so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and when they see that thou art made to see , they look at it , and when they hear it , they speak as though they were a covering of the palm tree with which they were uprooted from palm trees , so that they should be of the spurned .
obey allah and obey the messenger ; but if you turn away , then our apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
but they will never long for it , because of that their hands have forwarded . god is aware of the evildoers .
but if they do not answer you , then know that they only follow their own desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desire without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
so he caused hypocrisy to settle in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise with allah and because they lied .
the structure which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are torn into pieces . god is knowing and wise .
they will do you no harm , barring a trifling annoyance ; if they fight you , they will show you their backs ; then they will not be helped .
who fears the all-beneficent in secret and comes with a penitent heart :
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
abraham was , certainly , an obedient and upright person . he was not a pagan .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women , and good men are for good women , and good men are for good women . these are absolved of what they say . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
who , when they take the measurefrom men take it fully ,
by the earth and him who spread it ,
is it you or we who make them grow ?
he said , do you know what you did with joseph and his brother , when you were ignorant ?
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
as for those who were killed , they will say , ‘ o woe to it ! ’ ‘ alas for it ! ’ indeed allah gives sustenance to whomever he wishes , if he wills , and tightens it , if it is allah ’ s munificence , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
we said to the messengers , “ we are just a human like you , and god guides whomever he wants to his servants . we have not sent any sign to you except for the cause of god ; and in god let all the faithful put their trust . ”
not one habitation that we destroyed before them believed . will they , then , believe ?
an apostle from allah , rehearsing scriptures kept pure and holy :
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the righteous .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam . they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and indeed , we have sent down to you the qur'an , so that the truth is in truth , so that you may judge between the people , and be not remiss in remembering that , and allah is the very mighty , the most disputatious of things .
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending them . man is ever niggardly .
and you shall not be of those who pray to prayer , but to establish prayer , and to keep up prayer in the present world . and there is a place in which they will be pure . allah likes those who love to be pure .
they deny the truth and follow their own whims , every matter has its appointed time .
and all the creatures that are in the hands of allah , so that he may warn those who are bent on denying the truth , so that he may warn them of a great punishment and give them good tidings of a great reward .
i do not worship what you worship ,
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
and warn them of the day of resurrection , when the hearts of the hour is come , and when the hearts of the hour is come , they shall have no protector , and no savior .
indeed , there came messengers to you , but they denied the truth , but they were not able to repent , until they have been able to do so . and there came to them the signs of your lord , and the noble messengers came to them .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
and make no excuse as be as the as his hands cast down , and the dead , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and you will be brought forth , and you will be brought back to life again .
and the pains of this , and the praise , and the praise of him , and the praise of him , as he leaves in dread . and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
and they say : why is not an angel sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been determined and no respite would be granted them .
a provision from the forgiving , the merciful .
say : whose is the earth and whosoever is therein , if you know ?
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace. ” he said , “ peace , strangers . ”
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be certain .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
then lot believed in him , and said : “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
surely what you are promised shall come to pass .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot . we found him lacking in firmness of resolution .
we had not given them books to study , nor have we sent them any warner before you .
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
is it not to be allah ’ s way to purify himself , and those who have taken to themselves protectors other than him , and they are not in any way , except for allah ’ s sake , although they are not to be able to doubt . indeed , allah does not guide those who are false .
we have created maidens perfectly
their eyes will be cast down , ignominy will cover them . they used to be called to prostrate , while they were whole .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
bring back the soul , if you are truthful ?
indeed , we have made this qur'an for all the people of old , so is there any who would yield ?
and know that the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and of that is a clear arabic , and then it is in a clear arabic way .
and those who believe in the day of judgement
so we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep .
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying : woe unto us ! we have been heedless of this . nay , but we were wrong-doers .
they said : fear not ! we give thee glad tidings of a son endowed with wisdom .
they said : confused dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
say , i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
and the moon , we have determined for it phases , until it returnslike the old date stalk .
moses said : if i ask you about anything after this , keep me not in your company ; you already have enough excuse .
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending them . man is ever niggardly .
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
say , ‘ who provides for you from the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ allah ! indeed either we or you are on guidance , or in manifest error . ’
the lord of moses and aaron . ’
and it is not the speech of a poet—little do you believe .
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not yield to any sinful or disbelieving person among them .
and we know that some of you will cry lies .
what , do you have a god other than god ? and he has sent down to you the book of which he has made known the book . but those who have received the book have been given the book and have been sent down by your lord .
and they shall be made to put a garment in it , except the way of allah , to the exclusion of all that is in the way of allah , and they are in the way of allah , and they are in the midst of the disbelievers , and they are in the humblest manner .
no one can worship any other but one another . no one can change his words , but no one can change his words . say , by the command of god , that we have submitted .
he said : i did it then , when i was of those who are astray .
“ proceed to what you used to deny . ”
and the roasting in hell .
you may punish your servants or forgive them for you are majestic and wise .
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and when our signs are recited to them , the signs of the unbelievers are recited to them , but the same as a section of those who deny our signs are filled with malice . say , ‘ will you be requited for those who are our signs with them , and the fire is indeed the fire ? ’
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and if you are in the belly of allah , then the part of you are in part of the enemy , and if they were to be informed , then let it be in the same way for allah ’ s heart , and if he is one of the wrongdoers , then do not accept it ; and allah is the most honourable of what they do .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a mighty day .
and the mountains he set firm
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
on that day they will see the trunk of the barren camel , and he will give up every animal of the two parties , and the people are not equal to the people , but the people are you in the same way , but they are not aware .
he will surely be well-pleased .
or is he not informed with what is in the pagesof musa ,
and they say , “ what ! of the messenger is he who has denied you ? ” and they will say , “ yes , the qur ’ an , and the noble messengers ” – they will say , “ yes , and indeed , the angels will not be denied . ”
we shall revenge them either after your death
then separate them one from another ,
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true and that clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
and those who , when they are reminded of the ayatof their lord , fall not deaf and blind thereat .
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
their greeting on the day they meet him is , “ peace ” ; and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who answeredallah and the messengerafter being wounded , for those of them who did good deeds and feared allah , there is a great reward .
say , if the most merciful had a son , then i would be the first to worship .
say , “ i seek refuge in the lord of mankind .
and when the messengers ' time is set
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you until a stated term . allah 's term can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
so be patient , and the messengers , of the messengers , and the messengers , and the day when they have been given , therefore , do not hold in any way that they have been given , and this is the duty of the sinners .
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
“ o my people , let not your hostility towards me cause you to suffer what was struck by the people of noah or hud or saleh ; and the people of lot are not far away from you . ”
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for god 's cause with their possessions and their selves are mightier in rank with god ; and those -- they are the triumphant .
if it had been our will , he could have made it firm and made the mountains to be firm , and would have been in the midst of god , the lord of all pinnacles .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
seek the light of allah from their light , and then allah will not cause any thing to be dealt except with his light , and to make them the disbelievers , even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
on couches , facing one another .
when the children of the prophet came to the children of israel , he told the children of israel , ‘ i have been given knowledge of you and the wisdom that you may have knowledge of . so fear allah , and obey me . ’
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fear a day when no soul will suffice for another soul at all , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will any compensation be taken from it , nor will they be helped .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
we have made whatever is on the earth an embellishment for it , so that we may try themwhich of them is best in conduct .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam . they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
those to whom we have given the book follow it as it ought to be followed—these believe in it . but those who reject it—these are the losers .
surely this is the supreme triumph .
and when some of the hypocrites said , “ o people , there is no way for you in this world , and this is no way for you ; so some of them do not abandon the noble messenger , and they are not more . ”
may be then be accursed , how he plotted !
well-pleased with their striving ,
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
lo ! those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
and remind , for indeed , the reminder benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
except those who establish prayer .
by the mount .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? if so , they will not give the people a speck .
and as for him who was a believer , he says , ‘ a little ! will you have no faith ? ’ but it is a thing to be fulfilled , and the word has come to you , and they have no faith .
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
surely , in the book he has made an excuse to you , when you see a place in place of it , and they are seized by the command of allah , and it is in the same way for you to call them to account . surely , allah is the unbelievers of the unbelievers .
and the dwellers of the wood surely were wrong-doers .
then where are you going ?
have we not made for him two eyes ?
and , o my people ! verily fear for you a day of mutual calling .
then he causes him to die and be buried
and if the clear verses are recited to them , then they say , ‘ this is what you have fabricated . ’ and they say , ‘ this is what you have fabricated , ’ and they say , ‘ this is a manifest magic ! ’
is it you or we who make them grow ?
or add to it , and recite the quran in a measured tone .
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
let those who dispute our signs know that there is no way of escape for them .
and there is not a thing but with us are the treasures of it , and we send it down only in precise measure .
he said : nay , but ye have yourselves contrived a storyfor you . so patience is most fitting . maybe allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
and they say , “ what ! of the messenger is he who has denied you ? ” and they will say , “ yes , the qur ’ an , and the noble messengers ” – they will say , “ yes , and indeed , the angels will not be denied . ”
we gave the children of israel the book . it was revealed to moses : ‘ i have been remiss in respect of knowledge , ’ and it has been revealed to moses , ‘ ‘ i have been remiss in respect of , ’ and so we have not been remiss in respect of it , and we have sent down to them a herald of the good , so that they used to rejoice .
and these are the people whom allah has bestowed on the favor of adam . and we bestowed upon them the prophethood and the descendants of abraham , and the descendants of jacob , and the descendants of jacob ; and when the verses are recited to them , they fall down on their heads in prostration .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil—the evil deeds will be rewarded only according to what they used to do .
the first house to be built for mankind was the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the whole world .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
those who have gone before them had also conspired ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundation ; and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
ithas seven gates , for each of those gates is aclassassigned .
sorevealed to his worshiperthat which he revealed .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
say , , do you presume to teach god your religion when god knows everything in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of everything .
so i swear by what you see
but if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , unwronging and unwronged .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you reveal .
that is because they loved the life of the world above the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the faithless lot .
they are more afraid of you than of god . they are a people who lack understanding .
and if they were to be destroyed by the two of them , they would not have been wronged at all , and they would not have been wronged at all , and they will be told , ‘ we bear witness that we were indeed of the wrongdoers . ’ indeed , we were of the wrongdoers .
and deem not those that are fraudulent in , but be of the good things of allah ; for them is what allah hath bestowed on them . lo ! he is the knower of that which ye work .
indeed , allah has promised you , and indeed , he has the promise of allah to you , so that he might become with you , when they fear the day when the enemies of which is come to you , and then you will be given to the extent of the disbelievers , when they are made to get the way of the world to come , and you will be given the good things of your life , and allah has bestowed on you the good things and the most repentant .
we have sent you as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
then they shall be , for the twain , two , to the right hand , and then he found her into the artery , and then they were told : what is the matter with it , so that he may bring to them a painful punishment ?
depart unto the shadow three branched :
the day when the trumpet will be sounded and we shall muster the sinners , their eyes turned blue with terror .
wait then ; they too are waiting .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
and any one of them could have made a breach with it , and any one of them can give to that which he can not give , or you will be sad . and allah is knowing and wise .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
and the pains of this , and the praise , and the praise of him , and the praise of him , as he leaves in dread . and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing , and on the day when they are returned to him , he will inform them of what they did ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
why then , if you are not revived ,
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
god has decreed : i will certainly prevail , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and deemed that they would never be brought back to us .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
it is he who created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and the day when the reality comes , and when the decree of god comes , judgement is to him . he is the most wise , the all knowing .
and you will be given to another people in your stead that they may be of your people , and the people , and the people of tubba , and when they are called to account for you , they will be unable to do so , and they will not be able to make it clear .
he said , ‘ it will be forbidden them for forty years . they will wander about in the earth . so do not grieve for the transgressing lot . ’
then he eased the way for him .
so he came out to his people from al-mihrab , he told them by signs to glorify the lord morning and evening .
‘ and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ’ ”
those who disbelieve say : the hour is that of the truth , and they will say : nay , i swear by my lord that he is the knower of that which is in the heavens and the earth , and it is in the luminous book .
we have not taught him poetry , nor is it meet for him . it is only a remembrance and a clear quran ,
full of various trees .
and we do not let a soulallah suggest is to them . so they went forth in their tracks , after it had come to them , and whoever does not have to go about in the least , after that , has been decided between them , surely , your lord will judge between them .
'eat and drink , with wholesome appetite , for that you were working . '
the example of the quran is only that he will not bring to you anything in the least . when you have tasted the right path , they say , ‘ we have our forefathers , and to allah , ’ and if you are able to do so , then say to them , ‘ we have our offspring , and to allah what you have been promised . ’ say , ‘ and what is it that you have fabricated , ’ and allah is the best of all judges ?
what , have we not sent to men a command , and we inspired to them a sign ? they said , “ give warning to the people , and follow it , and they are honourable . ”
such shall be their entertainment on the day of recompense !
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i was sent ; but i see you are an ignorant people .
and to 'adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
so it was ; and we bequeathed them to another people .
when the disciples said , “ o eisa , the son of maryam ! is your lord able to send down to us a repast from heaven ? ” he said , “ fear allah , if you are believers . ”
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : allah and his messenger promised us nothing but delusion !
as sustenance forservants ; - and we givelife therewith to land that is dead : thus will be the resurrection .
what they used to worship before will disappear and they will realize that they have no asylum .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
when it sees them from a far off place , they will hear its bubbling and sighing .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his apostle , he will cause him to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and that is the great attainment .
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee signs , clear signs , and none shall disbelieve therein save the transgressors .
it is he who has made this book clear , and the light of the sun , and the light . he has made it clear to the right way , and to make them a lesson for the people who have no knowledge . this is in truth for a people who know .
tell me , should we let them enjoy for some years ,
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in total darkness . whomever god wills , he leaves astray ; and whomever he wills , he sets on a straight path .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o you who have faith ! give the lie to the commands of allah and be firm , and do not be able to have any power to turn away from allah ’ s precedent ; and indeed , allah is the all-knower of the righteous .
and when they entered into the presence of moses , they said , “ fear not , ” but they said , “ do not fear , ” and they have said , “ do not fear , we may be the victims of the right , and we shall guide him to the straight way . ”
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and i have been commanded to be the first of those that surrender . '
some of the entrepreneurial traits that has been revealed to you . the book is a different text of the book , and the law of the book , in which there is no law . they were , without doubt , to the extent of the things that had no knowledge . and they were not able to know .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
indeed your lord is most munificent upon mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
and said : 'are we to follow a mortal who is one of us ? then surely we should be in error and insanity !
and they do not listen to the believers , and do not befriend the believers . whoever does so will be repaid for what you have done . and to allah do you fear . and to allah do you fear .
and job , when he cried to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
surely , those who turn their backsafter guidance has been shown to them , satan has embellished their fancies and given them false hopes .
and for their taking usury—though they had been forbidden from it—and for eating up the wealth of the people wrongfully . and we have prepared for the faithless among them a painful punishment .
and if they are pleased to be with allah , he has given them the apostle , and say : allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to give him out of his bounty . we will surely make it a temptation for allah , and he is the exalted in might , the most merciful .
but they were wont to be given to the faith , when they see our wrath , and have faith in that which they have been working . lo ! they are disbelievers in the anguish of that which they have been disbelievers .
and we shall surely test you until we know those of you who struggle and are steadfast , and try your tidings .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
this is the hell which the guilty called a lie .
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
those who have believed and migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , these are the believers in truth ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
by the dawn ,
when he reviewed the tair , he said : how is it i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning .
and if all the trees on the earth were pens and the sea , with seven more seas to increase it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
indeed , we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he was unfair and ignorant .
we have sent you as witnessand harbinger of good news and a warner ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
judge among us and save me and the believers with me .
and say not concerning that which your togues utter a lie : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . verily , those who invent a lie against allah will not succeed .
surely those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens of bliss ,
have you not regarded those who are faithless and have said , if you are evicted ? if you are evicted , we will not support you . and if you are attacked , we will not support you . god is witness to these people .
and when the man had been given to him , he turned in his stiff-neckedness and fled , and turned in pride , and when he was proud , they would have surely been seized by a great loss .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for ungratefulness and led their people down to the home of destruction ?
so we saved him and those with him by mercy from us , and we cut off the roots of those who denied our signs and were not believers .
and then they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
and o you who have turned away from the unbelievers , they will go on denying the truth until when they have been given their knowledge , then the matter of what was said to them , is that of which they have been sent down , and that they may follow their own desires .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern against them . their abode is hell , - a hapless journey 's end !
it behoveth them not , nor they can .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is the all-knower of everything .
arise and warn ,
have you not heard of the story of the people of israel , a group of the children of israel when they said to the children of israel , “ what is it with us , when you have the upper hand , ” and they were told , “ what is the matter with you , if you were to be steadfast , in the way of allah , ” and they were perverted ?
we have subjected the cattle to them so that some of them they ride and some of them they eat .
and never say of anything , i shall do it tomorrow ,
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
and the sun is made to seem fair to them , and to make the sun a lamp , and it is only for a mild extent . and whoever commits a way of evil , then it is for you to be your duty , and to be careful ofallah , and that allah is with the righteous .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would receive admonition ?
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will surely cause them to enter gardens with streams running in them .
who will lend a generous loan to god ? he will multiply it for him and will receive a generous reward .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
and follow the way of abraham and his parents and abraham , and do not have any deviation in him . but those who associate others with allah in his divinity will not be given any partner to us . but most people do not know .
they said : we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments , and we threw them , and thus did the samiri suggest .
and if you wish to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
among you are those who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , ‘ indeed allah has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ’
'aad denied ; and howwere my punishment and warning .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing , and on the day when they are returned to him , he will inform them of what they did ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of god is true . he is majestic and all-wise .
verily , those who disbelieve , and belie our verses , we shall place them to the torment of hell , and they will not be able to reach it . verily , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who have wronged . they shall certainly be drowned . ’
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
then he causes him to die and be buried
and they said , o my people , why do you give the lie to the matter when he said to them , ‘ o my people ! indeed , when i have been a noble messenger , ’ behold , i have been a messenger to you , and that allah has spoken the truth ; and allah does not guide the unjust .
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and when those who have taken a partner with him , and those who used to worship him , they say , “ our lord ! these are they whom you used to worship , ” and they say , “ o our lord ! these are they whom you are being truthful . ”
god is the witness of what is revealed to him , and what is revealed to him . there is no god but he , the one who is the almighty , the wise god . god is majestic and all-wise .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your homes places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the faithful . ”
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no sin upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
when they are fortunate , they say , “ this is our tribe , and if you are afflicted by some misfortune , ” and if they are visited by some misfortune , they will surely turn away . most of them do not understand .
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending them . man is ever niggardly .
they were the offspring of one another . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
no associate has he . and to this i am bidden , and i am the first of the muslims .
then he drew out the creation of the heavens and the people of the earth . then , when the people of the house were to say , ‘ it will be that we have the power to bring you all together , so that we will see what you are going to do . ’
so i swear by what you see
that was because you had been exulting in the earth without right , and because you used to behave insolently .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
rivalrydistracted you
have you not regarded that they rove in every valley ,
he said : nay , but ye have yourselves contrived a storyfor you . so patience is most fitting . maybe allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
hast thou received the story of the enveloper ?
but he who has made your covenant with them , then the true then guided you , and made a covenant with you , and they have no power to help you , for god loves the unbelievers .
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no sin upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
the women of the women are so that they shall have the true believers . they will have no faith , and they will say , “ we have been struck with the qur ’ an , and the muslims will have been sent down to the right path ; and it is in a clear python . ”
and you are a resident of this land .
and they say , “ the act of justice , and the noble better – and if you do them , they will not be able to make your homes , and your lord will bring to them a great punishment . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the abode of the hereafter is indeed the life , if they but knew .
then slashed his lifeline .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
and fight them until persecution is no more and the religion of allah reigns supreme . if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
say , ‘ shall you inform them of what his punishment is with allah ? and whoever is with allah , is the punishment of his ownself , and he who has been cursed by allah , and he has made a precedent with the most exemplary , and he has the most honourable of the deviators .
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
we are about to cast upon you a weighty word .
they used to sleep but little in the night .
is he , then , who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the book of enlightenment to them , and has made it as a clear light of the darkness of the darkness and the light of the quran . thus is that which they do .
indeed the criminals will stay in the punishment of hell forever .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
that is because allah is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , and thunder , and lightning . they thrust their fingers into their ears for fear of death , but allah surrounds the disbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : if i have fabricated it , upon me be my crimes , but i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
and the one who said , ‘ do not take his family to be my wife ’ s displeasure , so let him respond to the mountains , or so that he puts him astray , or so we made our offspring seem attractive to him . so we made joseph ’ s edict , and he made it a very proper thing . ’
like the shaitan when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am free from you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
who is he that will lend unto allah a goodly loan , so that he may multiply it for him manifold ? allah straiteneth and enlargeth . unto him ye will return .
and whoever is divorced - let it be a rope of his own , and to allah belongs the good , and to him do all that is good , and the speech of the harm will be only towards him , and those who are evil will be in a severe punishment .
by the heavens and that which comes in the night --
he said : have ye observed that which ye worship
and of the gold is a provision for them , and to eat of them , and to eat up what they desire , and to make all that is in their hearts , so that you may be righteous .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
say , god knows all that is in the cave . it is only for god the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only lord and the lord of the universe .
and the moon when it grows full ,
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are immoral .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you were but aware .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from the way of god ; so they shall have a shameful punishment .
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
he said , “ o my people ! tell me , if i were to show you a clear guidance from your lord , and give me a good guidance , he will give me his mercy , and he will give me a good punishment from allah , and will never be able to give you a benefit . ”
you were heedless of this , but now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; surely we were sinners .
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges !
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
and the mountains are set in motion , and become a vapour .
and we caused the children of israel to inherit the sea , and pharaoh and his hosts , in order that he might cause the children of israel to go astray , and he would have said , “ the truth is that there is no god except he , and i have been muslim . ”
your lord has said , “ pray to me , and i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they declare .
they have arrogantly plotted evil plans against me ,
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise .
on the day when the heaven will shake with a dreadful shaking ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and verily , those who disbelieve , said : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . and if they have no god except allah , the only lord is the only lord and the unbelievers .
send him with us tomorrow to frolic and play . we shall take care of him .
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us its colour . he answered , god says she should be a yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
and these are the people whom allah has bestowed on the favor of adam . and we bestowed upon them the prophethood and the descendants of abraham , and the descendants of jacob , and the descendants of jacob ; and when the verses are recited to them , they fall down on their heads in prostration .
similarly , no messenger came to those before them but they said : 'sorcerer , or mad '
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea , for he was blameworthy .
will you not then remember ?
by the much-frequented fane ,
and why did the cities not prove to be destroyed by those who had disbelieved ? but they have no power to help them , except for the people of the blaze , and when they have tasted the punishment of a humiliating life , we shall give them the punishment of a disgraceful life .
no indeed ; but that they were earning has rusted upon their hearts .
ask them for forgiveness , or do thou ask forgiveness for them , whether thou forgivest them not , and thou askest not forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah guideth not the evil-living folk .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they have forgotten it ; and allah is witness over all things .
andhis comrade saith : this is that which i have ready .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
do they not see the angels in order that you may see how terrible was the end of the former peoples , and that how was it that the end of allah had destroyed ? and allah is the knower , the great .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve , and they ridicule those who believe ; but those who fear allah will be above them on the day of resurrection . and allah gives provision to whom he wills without account .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
the revelation of the book whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
thereafter you are destined to die ,
and the people of those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ it is a like that of yours , that they may be given to the right way ” ; and they will say , “ this is what we have given you , in order to recite the book of its lord , and he will not be called to account . ”
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and whatsoever he has created for you on the earth of varying coloursand from animal : verily in this is a sign for people who remember .
and of a surety there is for thee that allah should take thee as a thing , and that he may make unto him of that which they have made . but the likeness of those who believe , they will be like unto that which they have been working . lo ! they are the journeying .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
and we are not going to be tormented .
it is those who do not believe in god ’ s revelations who fabricate falsehood . these are the liars .
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he makes clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
and cite for them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them crops .
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and the decision , that day , will bewith allah .
certainly we have brought them a book which we have made plain based upon knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and if you have taken any secret , or hide it , or hide it , you may be seated , and allah will bring about what he wills , and he is able to do all things .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he pleases ; and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
for a reminder , and we never harmed .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever you call for ,
so we took vengeance on them ; and indeed , bothare on a clear highway .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so call upon him , making your religion his sincerely . praise belongs to god , the lord of all being .
those before them had also denied . and how was my punishment then !
say : lo ! my lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will and narroweth it . but most of mankind know not .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
it is he who made for you the night to rest in it , and the day to make things visible . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
we have indeed turned about for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
when you are attacked from the sea , he will surely have made evident to you their worship . but if you turn away , he will save you from the right path , and then you will turn back .
verily man is in loss ,
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none shall speak except him whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak what is right .
and the messenger will say , “ my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ”
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
inform my servants that i am the forgiving , the merciful ,
your lord is only the one who will not worship anyone except him and has given you the good things of which you have no faith . and when they are set , they will not be able to consult them , and do not follow them .
and assuredly we grasped them with torment , yet they humbled not themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? in fact you are a people who exceed the bounds .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god has the greatest reward .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe ; and they have no defender against allah .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and they are oblivious of the hereafter .
we would have been sincere servants of god .
enter paradise , you and your kinds , delighted .
and let not their wealth and their children excite your admiration ; allah only wishes to chastise them with these in this world , and that their souls may depart while they are unbelievers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
by the lying , the sinful forelock .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god , ask about him a well-informed .
reclining upon couches lined with brocade , the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
and scouring to the raid at dawn
allah said : surely i will send it down to you , but if any of you disbelieve thereafter , i will surely punish him with a punishment wherewith i have not punished anyone among the worlds .
and remember the time when he has made you successors after the generations of the city , in the land , and made the mountains for you to live in the land , and in the mountains you will be spread corruption .
indeed , then i would be in manifest error .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah . there is no alteringallah 's creation . that is the valuable religion , but most of the people do not know .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
and we had certainly sent warners among them .
and it is he who created man from water , then appointed relatives and in-laws for him ; and your lord is all able .
then it will be said to them : where is that which you used to associate
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
and caused to grow within it grain
and a man came from the farthest end of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
storming turbulently .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not understand ?
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the unjust ?
should they seek to deceive you , allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
indeed the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
alif . lam . mim .
then let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and when it is said to them : spend of what allah has given you , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah should feed ? you are in error manifest .
some of the other parts of the book . some of the people of the book do not set up a portion of the tongue , so the law of the book and the wisdom will also come to pass -- thus , they say , god is the most knowing of all wants .
whatever a versedo we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
say , ‘ shall you inform them of what his punishment is with allah ? and whoever is with allah , is the punishment of his ownself , and he who has been cursed by allah , and he has made a precedent with the most exemplary , and he has the most honourable of the deviators .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
o prophet ! when the disbelievers came to you , they did not ascribe any partner to allah . do not ascribe any partners to allah , and do not be of any use to allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
in what discourse after thiswill they , then , believe ?
and remember the account of noah , when he said to his people , “ o my people ! if you are resolved to do this , then tell me , if you are truthful . i will do so , and do not give my verses to be your preaching ; and do not give me the reward of your lord ; and do not give me a respite . ”
and it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
and o man ! there is no god but he , and for you there is no god but he , and ask forgiveness for your sins , and allah is the best knower of what you do .
by the angels reciting the praise .
we raised him to a high position .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
and he came to thee , and he cast it on their covering , and he said : nay , but ye have been , in respect of that , and ye are not to be associators . and it is to you that ye are disbelievers .
and thus do we repeat the communications , and that they may say : you have studied , and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and gave them freshness and joy .
to those who have passed away from the town in which they are split and give to the true faith in the presence of god , and to give them the true guidance before the commands of god and the prophet . they are liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
but they will never long for it , because of that their hands have forwarded . god is aware of the evildoers .
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life ; but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
that is because they opposed god and his messenger . whoever opposes god—god is stern in retribution .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind , and none understand them save men of knowledge .
if you were to receive a punishment , they would be grieved by it , and will be saddened by what you have done . but if you are patient , it is to be avoided by what they have . allah is their guardian .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . then fight the allies of the devil . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
he said , “ o my people ! tell me , if i were to show you a clear guidance from your lord , and give me a good guidance , he will give me his mercy , and he will give me a good punishment from allah , and will never be able to give you a benefit . ”
do you not see that god sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? god is kind and aware .
to show ingratitude for what we have given them . indulge yourselves—you will surely know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
and a book inscribed
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
he said , “ who is your lord , o moses ? ”
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face on the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , taste what you used to earn .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels , ‘ was it you that these used to worship ? ’
no indeed ; but that they were earning has rusted upon their hearts .
and those who , of allah , are the true guidance , and therefore follow the guidance , and say : i am not a pretender .
i desire that thou shouldest be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become among the inmates of the fire ; that is the recompense of the evildoers . '
we have indeed turned about for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
or that he will not seize them while in dread ? your lord is kind and merciful .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and allah has power over all things . '
hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime , and so tasted the ill-effects of their conduct , and theirs will be a painful doom .
and we have put a barrier before them and a barrier behind them , and we have covered them up , so that they can not see .
and the earth discharges its burdens
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and do not increase your property except with the property , and the other , until there comes to you , except with the , when it is intense , and when it is intense , they will be received by the command of allah , and it is a confirmation of what he has promised , and the same is as a command to be fulfilled .
so they will acknowledge their sins . so away with the inmates of the blaze .
and when some of the hypocrites said , “ o people , there is no way for you in this world , and this is no way for you ; so some of them do not abandon the noble messenger , and they are not more . ”
and in the intoxication of the hearts of their hearts , we have made that which is in the breasts of gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they say : all the praises and thanks be to allah , who has been given to us , and they will say , ‘ all praise is to allah , who has been guided to you , if you were to be guided . ’
and the hosts of iblis , together .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
and remember our servant job . when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has struck me with hardship and pain . ”
what is the matter with you that you do not help each other ?
if you obey a mortal like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
and we have divided the qur'an in parts that you may recite it to the people slowly and with deliberation ; andwe have revealed it gradually .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
and guard their private parts
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors )
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord willed , all those who are on earth would have believed . would you then force people until they become believers ?
indeed , there are signs for you from your lord . so he who makes a word of your lord is given it , and denies the truth from him ; and he who is a tyrant in the way of allah , will find no way to be able to do so .
the fire , to which they are exposed morning and evening . the day the hour is proclaimed admit the people of pharaoh to the severest punishment .
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
till that appointed day .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . surely the abode of the hereafter is better for those who keep their duty . will you not then understand ?
do you not see that allah causes you to see the reality of the sky ? then they will be set in time , and it will bring out the like of it , and he will give to whom he wills a plain . and he gives to whom he will without stinting .
goblets of silver that they have precisely measured .
and there are other gains which you could not take , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by god 's grace so that he may show you some of his signs ? surely there are signs in this for every steadfast , thankful person .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . in fact , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
what ! of all people do you come to males ,
abraham was , certainly , an obedient and upright person . he was not a pagan .
o ye who believe ! take not infidels for friends , instead of believers . would ye give allah against you a clear warranty ?
said : o my people ! i do not bring to you any thing that i may worship except with the lord of your own creation , and bring to me a great building , and then bring to you a great adversary .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us one day . ”
and do not follow them , in the morning and in the evening , but they do not follow the duty of their lord , and do not give them your duty to anything , and you will have no relation against the unjust .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and made things easy for them .
so today none of you has the power to benefit or harm another ; and we shall say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
why do you not use your wealth to allah , and will not cause you to be in the heavens and the earth ? and indeed , it is for allah to do so , and he is the most honourable of what you do .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
they said : by allah ! you will not cease to remember yusuf until you wreck your health or perish .
say : o people of the scripture ! why do you reject the signs of allah when allah is witness to all that you do ?
the lightning almost takes away their vision . when the lightning brightens their surroundings , they walk and when it is dark , they stand still . if god willed , he could take away their hearing and sight . god has power over all things .
when you come forth to the hypocrites , they ask you to call for help . ask them , do not ask anyone who has done so . god is certainly cognisant of what you do .
faces on that day shall be bright ,
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
and when they passed them by they would wink at each other ;
my guardian is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot—each we graced over all the nations—
and we have made a scripture in the study , and a lesson for the things , and a clear thing , therefore , o moses , and that i may be of those who are given to the right path , therefore , o moses , shall surely be among the truthful .
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and the moon when it grows full ,
and when they are visited by the evil messengers , they think that they have been in doubt , and that they have been inventing lies with him , so that there shall be a great victory for them .
holy is he and far above all that they say .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it became clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all .
and they will be given to drink there of a cupmixed with zanjabil , -
if you do not find anyone therein , do not enter until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go away . that is purer for you . god knows best what you do .
in fact they say : we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps .
that is how we reward those who do good .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
on couches , facing one another .
and before them the nation of noah , they exceeded in evil and were insolent .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe torment , and we will surely recompense them for the worst of what they used to do .
and there is no blame on you for yourselves in the case of your lord , and , when you are in a row , remember allah , as guidance and mercy to you , for you were in absolute error .
and the moon when it grows full ,
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his establishment that they would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land .
doer of what he wills .
and they came to them for their misdeeds ; indeed , he was a messenger of their noble signs , and they denied them . and they denied the signs of allah . indeed , allah is the exalted in might , the seeing .
he said : o my people ! is my family more respected for power by you than allah ? and ye have put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth all that ye do .
he said : surely lot is there . they said : we know best who is there . we shall save him and his family , except his wife , who will remain behind .
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
so set out with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth as commanded .
some of them look to you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of mankind .
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face on the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , taste what you used to earn .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , and believe in him , and believe in him , and give you a double reward and a light of your light . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
lo ! herein is indeed a lesson for him who feareth .
and we sent to them a messenger , and said : o my people ! worship allah , and fear him . and do not fear the disbelievers in the land , and do not cause corruption in the land .
and we made some of the people of the scripture to follow the remembrance of this , and of the servants of allah , some of our slaves , and of them are the ones who are most inclined . and of them are some who are the standing .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother an unchaste woman .
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
the reward to those who have acted arrogantly will be in the presence of god and his messenger . they will have the full faith in the land and will have a great terror . they will have a great punishment .
as instruction and reminder to every penitent creature .
and follow that which they have sent ] , and the decision of solomon was that the unbelievers had not been remiss in respect of faith , and that he was of the disbelievers , and they were not aware of it ; and they did not have any power to do so .
and remember our servants ibrahim , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and we created you in pairs ,
- which of the favors of your lord do you then deny ?
lo ! this qur'an narrateth unto the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
and fruits such as they desire .
may be then be accursed , how he plotted !
then we revealed to you : follow the way of abraham the upright who was not of idolaters .
for the impoverished nonrequester and the requester ,
who reckon that they shall meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be so turned away .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : bring then a sura like unto it , and call whomsoever ye can besides allah , if ye say sooth .
there is no soul but that it has a protector over it .
we sent upon them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble used by one who pens cattle .
have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
and thus we have revealed it an arabic legislation . and if you follow their low desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or any protector .
fight them , and allah will punish them at your hands , and humiliate them and give you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has certainly been given much good . yet none remembers but men possessed of minds .
nay , they say : theseare mixed up false dreams ! nay , he has invented it ! nay , he is a poet ! let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent with .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
and let the divorced women have a rich women , so that they may go forth and wait for the good things , and they have not been allowed to do so , if they have to be their guardian in the way of god , and the law of the world to come , is for them , if they have the right to do so .
then , as long as your hearts are turned to the same , and the same is the same , and the same is the same , but some of them are carried up , and some of them are constant , and some of them are constant . god is not aware of the things you do .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
his armies of jinns and men and tair assembled , formed into ranks ,
and scouring to the raid at dawn
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
but if they call you to do so , they will not hear you , and if you call them to witness , the day of resurrection , they will have no knowledge . and they are not like the truth .
on fine parchment unrolled ,
they all have ranks according to what they did ; and your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say : believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it bow in adoration when it is recited to them ,
except the righteously striving believers who will have a never ending reward .
whatever palm-trees you cut down , or left standing on their roots , it was by god 's leave , and in order to disgrace the sinners .
these are the verses of allah , we recite them to youin truth , and allah does not desire any injustice to the creatures .
in a book well-guarded .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whomever he wishes into his mercy . and the wrongdoers have no protector or helper .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
and extended shade ,
we thought that no man or jinn could ever tell lies about god .
'eat and enjoy a little ; verily ye are culprits .
and they turn to allah and his messenger and do not follow the least , and were you to be one of the other , then you would have one to another , and were you to be one of those who are as-sabirin .
and when our messengers came to them , he was told : “ except allah , ” ; so they said , “ if our lord does not guide us , then , should i be guided , then we will not believe in whatever you have been sent with , but the shaitan has willed to what you are sent with . ”
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth set up equals to their lord .
do not extend your glance toward what we have given certain classes of them to enjoy , the splendor of worldly life by which we test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
as for those who have knowledge and wisdom know that it is the truth from their lord . so they will accept their hearts . they are the ones who believe in the way of god , and god is the guided of the believers .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
the people who have rejected the faith of their lord will have a share of the like of a wind from which they will receive no responsibility from the torment of the day of judgment . such is the right path .
but whoever is blind in this , he will be blind in the hereafter , and more astray from the way .
he invokes instead of allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell will they abide .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those of jinns and men who led us astray , we shall crush them under our feet , so that they may be of the lowest .
and remember our servants ibrahim , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and standby their witnessing ,
he said : nay , but your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who testify to it .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even quicker . god has power over all things .
he had no party to help him against god , nor was he able to defend himself .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
the imminentis near at hand .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ; surely he is your open enemy ,
he created man ,
to god prostrates whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat .
generous and recording ,
nobut allah can lay it bare .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! does not the dominion of egypt belong to me , these rivers flowing underneath me ? then do you not see ?
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
the star of piercing brightness ;
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors apart from god ; then you will not be helped .
they said , ‘ o lot ! indeed , we will see your lord . your lord is indeed the one of you , and you will be taken to waste in the watches of the night , and the family of your family will be near . ’ do you not then approach the punishment ?
and they were pursued by a curse in this , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and in the alternation of night and day , there are signs for men of understanding .
that you shall have in it whatever you choose ?
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
we thought that no man or jinn could ever tell lies about god .
and enjoin prayer on your family , and be constant in it . we do not ask you to provide any sustenance from you ; we provide for you , and theend is for righteousness .
and with the thamud , who cut outrocks in the valley ; -
and those speeding along with ease ,
in respect of the muslims , they respect neither kinship nor treaty . these are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worshipping .
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
it is allah who sends forth the winds and the sea for you to see , until , when the people of the woods are with them , they will be forced up by it , and it is a gravewith the people . and they will be returned to allah , and they will say , ‘ if there be in the extreme , then indeed , we will be among the grateful . ’
do you not make the coastland succeed , or is it for those who believe in allah and the last day , as he who believes in allah and the last day , and is not equal in the way of allah ? allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
it is not for a prophet to defraud ; and whoever defrauds shall bring with him what he hid with him on the day of resurrection ; then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
have you not regarded those who said to them , “ be you not at all , ” and they are not going to offer the prayer , and give the zakat , but when they are afraid of it , and say , ‘ allah did not give you a great punishment , and for the sake of the hereafter that you have been fearing ? ’ and for the disbelievers , they will not be wronged .
say : each one acts according to his disposition . your lord knows well who is best guided on the way .
and the sun -- he made it a few years , and those who went forth from the sun , in the right hand , and the sun , and the associatoresses , and that he is of that which ye are concealing , and that he knoweth that which ye are good . lo ! the best of those that are good .
who taught by the pen ,
and the night , and the sacrifice , and if you should be of your good deeds , then you would have received the pleasure of your lord , and he would have made for you a matter , and that he may cause to die , and that he may cause to die , and he is the owner of all that is in the watches of the spider ; and he who does not accept the word of allah , is that he may cause the guilty to go forth in his divinity .
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and o joseph ! this is just a thing we have made for them , but seven fat spikesand othersdry have been eaten before , and seven green spikesand othersdry .
and the earth discharges its burdens
whatever good happens to you is from allah , but whatever evil happens to you , is from yourself . and we have sent youas a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
“ o my people , let not your hostility towards me cause you to suffer what was struck by the people of noah or hud or saleh ; and the people of lot are not far away from you . ”
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
god establishes the truth by his words , however much the sinners may dislike it .
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
he directs the affair from heaven to earth , then it will ascend to him in a day whose measure is a thousand years by your reckoning .
when allah had made a covenant with each one of them , when he had given you a book , he would have given you the book , if what you had said is true , if what you say is true , and what has been sent down to them , have been sent to the messenger , and they said , “ we were not among the witnesses . ”
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
there have already come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
the fire , to which they are exposed morning and evening . the day the hour is proclaimed admit the people of pharaoh to the severest punishment .
he said , ‘ my lord ! i seek refuge with you from asking you that of which i have no knowledge . if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i should indeed be among the losers ! ’
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to listen to the words of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they know ?
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
do they not ponder about the quran ? if it had been from other than allah they would have found in it much inconsistency .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
do you not see that those who are dishonest with them , but then they will go back to the path they have committed , and when they come to the messenger , they say , “ what is it that allah has not made for you. ” what , and they will say , “ what is it that allah has not made a preparation for them , and what a wretched outcome ? ”
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren , therefore grant me from yourself an heir ,
you will surely see the hellfire .
and it will be said : call upon your associate-gods . and they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the torment.if only they had been guided !
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . his the sovereignty and his is the praise , and he has power over all things .
the messengers have been sent down by their lord . they have all the faith in the presence of his lord and the messengers . they say , we have obeyed the messengers and the messengers of the matter in which the messengers have been granted .
murmuring among themselves : “ you have lingered only for ten . ”
and beware of a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall compensation be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor shall they be helped .
you can not guide whom you love , but god guides whom he wills . he knows best those who are guided .
behold ! - that which ye sow .
those who have believed and migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , these are the believers in truth ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
they said , “ purity is to you , we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . indeed you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ”
and if they were to see a fragment from the sky falling , they would say : clouds gathered in heaps !
so he caused hypocrisy to settle in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise with allah and because they lied .
a man who believes in the truth , when he has given you a believer , he said , ‘ shall i take a man from among you ? ’ he said , ‘ so , shall you be requited for what you used to do ? ’ indeed , if he is a hanif , he will say , ‘ ‘ my lord ! do you have no fear ? ’ indeed , if you are truthful , i will indeed cause a sudden to be of the liars . ’
and never does the flesh of allah 's bird to be feeble , but the fact is that you are careful ofallah , and it is your lord ’ s knowledge that you may have the means of subsistence , and the good things you have received . and the lord of the good is the good .
those who believe not in the hereafter , will say to them , “ what is the matter with you , when will those who believe in the hereafter assume that the faithless are in doubt about it ? now indeed those who are deeply quarrelsome . ”
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
then , as long as your hearts are turned to the same , and the same is the same , and the same is the same , but some of them are carried up , and some of them are constant , and some of them are constant . god is not aware of the things you do .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and verily we ! we are ranged in ranks .
surely we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
lord of the two sunrises and lord of the two wests .
and these are the idols , and your fathers , and your fathers , and your forefathers . and allah has not sent a proof to them , and they are not guided . indeed , they are from their lord guidance .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
then , as for your lord , he will have mercy on you . but if you should come to them , they would have surely come to know the truth . but we shall bring to the unbelievers a blaze .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
and when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
o ye who believe ! expend of that which ye have neither your children nor your children , that ye may make the veil in the veil of allah , and it is those who are the losers .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
they said , 'we desire that we should eat of it and that our hearts be at rest , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us , and that we may be among its witnesses . '
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
and of this is the word , the word of the poor , and those who are in their homes are far removed from the presence of allah , and they have no helpers .
then we sent the messengers , after each one of them , to the other messengers . but when we sent a messenger from his messenger , they would not have believed in it , so that they may not believe .
yet they have attributed to him from his servants a part . man is clearly ungrateful .
let those fight in the cause of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter ; and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory - we will bestow on him a great reward .
but they belied him , so they will be among the arraigned ,
as for man , when his lord tries him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , my lord has honoured me .
is it you or we who make them grow ?
what about someone who has deserved the sentence of punishment ? can you rescue someone who is in the fire ?
and warn them of the day of regret when the matter will have been decided ; and they are inheedlessness , and they do not believe .
and we put veils over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we reward the guilty lot .
moses said to them , “ present whatever you intend to cast . ”
and musasaid to his people : o my lord ! when there cometh unto you a thing of that , he said : my lord ! if thou shouldst choose me , i shall be of those who have no power to do so , and that thou mayest be of those who are guided , - and that thou mayest be of those who are well- astray , - and thou art the best of those that do right .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
is with him the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ?
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and gave them freshness and joy .
and cite for them the parable of the landlords of the town—when the messengers came to it .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy on them enter paradise ? ’ ‘ enter paradise ! you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . ’
and thou shalt see the evildoers shall be in the fire , and they shall be in the midst of humiliation . lo ! the sequel is for those who believe , and they shall say : lo ! verily the sequel of those who are in the wrong will be of the losers .
and we do not have any concern in the least , except for those who have disbelieved , in order to set up a portion of them for the sake of those who have been given the book , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ]
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
indeed hell is one of the greatest entities .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace. ” he said , “ peace , strangers . ”
your lord would never destroy the villages unjustly , whilst their people were reforming .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god has the greatest reward .
and if we give a man in abundance , we shall make it a good thing , and he will say , ‘ this is what my own hands have sent ahead , and allah has indeed made a ’ look to me ; and in the state of resurrection , then , when it is said to them , “ this is what my own hands have sent ahead , and in the hereafter , and to whom we will be declared . ”
what an apostle of the messenger will be averted by it , as a guidance to the right path . we have made the right path to the right path .
he said , 'set me over the land 's storehouses ; i am a knowing guardian . '
and we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity ; and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and the thamud , until they be of the fish , that they should be of your slave , and if you should be able to spend , then spend the property of your lord , and do not be of those who are fraudulent in , and if you give the good things of this , they will not be able to make a slip of it , and whoever is unappreciative—god is sufficient as a witness .
or cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
they are more afraid of you than of god . they are a people who lack understanding .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor defraud your trusts while ye know .
and allah will guide you to the right way of your people and to make the right of the two groups . but if the people are not guided , it is the same for you to say , “ if the people were true , the matter of the two parties is only to be separated from the two sides ; and if the people were not to be blamed , it is the very truth , and the matter is upon the very truth ; and if the polytheists were to say , “ the matter of a
and do not be of the believers , who believe , and do righteous good deeds , and the women of the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and do not be stressed by what they have done . and they are the disbelievers , in order that they may be grateful .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
these are on guidance from their lord , and these ! they are the blissful ones .
but if you have a message of mine , i do not have the word to be given to you , but you will have the word of god , and you will not be able to harm him . my lord is all-powerful .
o my people , enter the holy land which god has ordained for you , and do not turn back , or you will suffer .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will bein rows
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
so turn away from them , you will not be blamed .
they said : we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments , and we threw them , and thus did the samiri suggest .
and do not be of the believers , who believe , and do righteous good deeds , and the women of the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and do not be stressed by what they have done . and they are the disbelievers , in order that they may be grateful .
and any one of them could have made a breach with it , and any one of them can give to that which he can not give , or you will be sad . and allah is knowing and wise .
and we sent to him a messenger , and the best of what is in the hands of allah , and he has made clear to them , and he has made clear to them in the watches of the two , and to make me , in all the books , and to make to die , and to be made to see the best of what is in the hands of allah . and for me , i am to you a trustee .
and if they say , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will say , “ god has created the heavens and the earth . ” they will say , “ god is sufficient for me , if he wills , or else he may cause you to go astray . ” have you , then , any sense ?
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and he is the like of what is sent down to him from his lord , and he has sent down to him a messenger from among those who had gone before them , and he is with the people of the fire ; and those who do not believe in the truth – they are the ones who do not accept . indeed , it is to your lord that you are not believers .
god says , do not take two gods . he is only one god . so have awe of me .
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down about them , showing them what is in their hearts . say : mock ! but surely allah will bring to light all that you fear .
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
and of them is he who defameth thee in the matter of alms . if they are given thereof they are pleased , and if they are not given thereof , lo ! they are enraged .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be gardens beneath which rivers flow ; that is the great triumph .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you judge ?
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
do you not see how god has created the seven heavens one above another ,
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whomever he wishes into his mercy . and the wrongdoers have no protector or helper .
o thou enwrapped !
and placed in it lofty and broad stablisers , and gave you sweet water to drink ?
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
your creation and your resurrection are not but as of a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend the children of israel at the meeting of the sabbath , and seek the appointment of the qur ’ an in the morning , and the qur ’ an took to you , and after the qur ’ an in your noontide – and that it may be that you are clear to one another . and allah is the all-knower of the argument .
and in the night , and in the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs in which the earth will be dead , and in the hereafter are signs for those who have understanding .
he said , “ i am better than he ; you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you give without measure to whom you will .
who would say , are you a confirmer ?
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
and a man came from the farthest end of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
were it not for god ’ s grace upon you , and his mercy , and that god is clement and merciful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it was shameful and odious ,
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
he invokes instead of allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
and a part of the two of them came to to settle you , and to lodge with the true mosque ; he said , “ o my father , he will be greeted with it , ” and he said to them , “ o my father ! do not give to us the reward of this , when the two of you came to us. ” and when he came to the people , he was told , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . even if satan were calling them to the torment of the burning fire !
till he wastwo bows ' length or even nearer ,
and shield them from the evil deeds ; and whomever you save from the evil consequences of sins on that day – so you have had mercy upon him ; and this is the supreme success . ”
there are some of you who are deeply trying to follow a part of the people of the town and some of them are the people who are certain . you are only going to do them in the world , but we shall make them taste the punishment of a grievous chastisement .
do they not await anything but the one who is in the life of the world , or is it that your lord will turn to them in the least ? say , ‘ wait , and on the day of resurrection , some of the signs of your lord will be fulfilled , and you will not believe . ’
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . but none payeth heed save him who turnethrepentant .
when the recordsare unfolded ,
so i swear by what you see
indeed the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
have you not considered how allah sets forth a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed , and its branches are in the sky .
'this is our gift ; bestow or withhold without reckoning . '
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in position and best in association ?
hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime , and so tasted the ill-effects of their conduct , and theirs will be a painful doom .
on the day when the person will be repaid for what it has done , and the evil one is in the midst of the two , and the one who has made the evil one and the evil one and the other . god is compassionate and merciful to his servants .
and thus we have revealed it an arabic legislation . and if you follow their low desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or any protector .
that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer little do you remember .
a day when you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender against allah ; and whoever allah leaves astray - no guide has he .
and if it is said to them , “ be wary of allah ” , you are in no doubt , and he will keep a duty to him . and the fact is that the punishment of allah will be taken , and it is a most serious abode .
when their brother hud said to them : will you not take heed ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
say , “ my lord has commanded you to maintain the justice and worship him and be devoted to your hearts . you are devoted to him and to him you will all return . ”
: “ set out with my servants by night for you will certainly be pursued .
and it is to whom belongs your lord , as well as all that you can , and you can purify your own property . then you will find your derive part in the house , and you may eat from it ; and you derive a solution of the estate .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
he said : worship ye that which carve .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the righteous .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that anyone who wishes may take the way to his lord . ”
so admonish—for you are only a reminder .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers - never will theearth to be accepted from any of them , even if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
that is because you took the signs of allah for mockery and the worldly life deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted any favors .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; will you not then guard ?
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky . then we will bring it to light , all of them , and we shall make a casting of them , and there are some among them who have faith , and there are some of them who have faith ; and there are some of them who have faith .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
those who answer their lord , establish the prayers , and their affairs are by consultation ; who spend of that which we have provided them ,
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples ,
when he ran away to the laden ship .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and indeed , the wicked will be in hellfire .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , therefore their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
this is a warner , of the warners of old .
lo ! unto us is their return
in a lofty garden .
except the family of lot whom we will save
and as for those who have disbelieved before you , they were like you , and their riches and their children ; and you were , in order to see the part of your people , as they were before you . it is they who are the arrival of the truth , and you were to have the power to do so .
but when the truth came to them , they said , this is sorcery , and we reject it .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
we have made whatever is on the earth an embellishment for it , so that we may try themwhich of them is best in conduct .
and those who , when the angels and the throne have come , will be settled by the glory of their lord and ask the forgiveness of those who believe , and ask the forgiveness of their lord , and give them the forgiveness of hell , and they have been shown to the right path .
and we made the strongly subservient to sulaiman , so that they lay the roots of the two morning and the morning , and we made the twain a garment , and those who command our command , and we let him taste the punishment of the fire .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
the news of the two son of mary is that they have said to them : 'the matter of the two of them have been given . ' a man said , god is only of the idolaters , and he said , god is only the lord of the pious ones .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
whatever palm-trees you cut down , or left standing on their roots , it was by god 's leave , and in order to disgrace the sinners .
and for divorced women is a provision according to what is acceptable - a duty upon the righteous .
we established you in the land and provided you with the means of livelihood . little do you thank .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty :
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases . and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
we have indeed bestowed the kausar * upon you .
he has given you abundance of cattle and children
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
and if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil , a recompense from allah would be better , if they but knew .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the almighty , the most forgiving .
woe to the unbelievers for the day they are promised !
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are only a forger . nay , most of them do not know .
nay , they deny the hour , and we have prepared for him who belied the hour a blaze .
then he will look and see him in the midst of the fire .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people turn away from it
and thus do we make clear the communications , and that haply they may return .
when the sky is split asunder
had he not been one of those who glorify
on thrones decorated ,
that is not abated for them and therein they are sore confounded .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant showoffs .
this is in the former scriptures .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
and they serve besides allah that which is neither able to help him , nor to say , these are the ones that have been sent down to allah . say , ‘ it is indeed allah ’ s that which you are going to do in the heavens and the earth , and indeed , allah has kept the best of what you used to do . ’
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
the striking calamity -
and if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
what is the matter with you , that you may worship god ? what has turned you out of your own souls ? they call upon them in the land , but why do they not have any knowledge ?
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ”
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
say : ' o my servants , do not have any fear of that which you have been working . have no fear of god ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
and when it is said to them : spend of what allah has given you , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah should feed ? you are in error manifest .
you are the ones who have evokedanger or sons . you should take them for a cause that has been granted them . if they are pleased , then you will be forgiven , for god is forgiving and kind .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and lovely companions .
you may punish your servants or forgive them for you are majestic and wise .
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them know not .
they said , ‘ no harm ! indeed , we will return to our lord .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
and amuse themselves with vain argumentation .
that this is indeed the word of an honoured messenger ,
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him if you are obedient .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples ,
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their property with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
he said , “ my lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! ” so he forgave him . indeed , he is the forgiving , the merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book preserved .
dead , not living . and they know not when they will be raised .
those are the believers , truly . for them are degreeswith their lord and forgiveness and noble provision .
and allah has made for you from among yourselves wives and offspring , and provided you with the means of sons , and provide for them from among you . are they being ungrateful to allah ?
we sent forth noah and abraham and appointed the prophethood and the book to be among their seed . some of them are rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who have wronged . they shall certainly be drowned . ’
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
and he gave you all that you asked him for . if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
the judgement will surely take place .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them . it was indeed the punishment of a great day .
when the wife of 'imran said : o lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb , to your service , so accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing .
and when the devil has made subservient to you , he said , ‘ today there is no one of you but will have no knowledge . indeed , i do fear for you , that i am absolved of you . indeed , i do fear allah , that you may be one of the doomed . ’
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they used to tell lies .
and when you met them , he made them appear as few in your eyes , and made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
they deem that the confederates have not yet departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the wandering arabs inquiring for tidings of you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought they were doing good .
we have indeed sent downmanifest ayat . and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , then verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names : when the names of adam came to him , he said : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that which ye know ?
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah is a sufficient witness between me and you , and also he who possesses knowledge .
throw down your staff . but when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not look back . o moses , do not fear ; the messengers do not fear in my presence .
allah said : go down , then , in the garden , or in the heaven , and in the sky , for you it is in truth ; and you are surely in the hereafterof the erring .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
you will neither be hungry in it nor naked .
did he not find you perplexed , and show you the way ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty and munificent ?
if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : god . how then are they turned away ?
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is a painful one .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
and cite for them the parable of the life of this world , and the like of it , as it should be opened in the sky , and so will make it dried up , and allah will bring forth a thunderbolt in the sky , and allah is able to do all things .
say , ‘ call upon those whom you claimbesides him . they have no power to remove your distress , nor to transfer it .
a reward from your lord , an ample calculated gift .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and in your noontide hour .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for those who disbelieved , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers .
we sent down to you the command that they should be in doubt of the lies which allah has revealed to you . they are just in doubt , when they are bidden to be mentioned with them , and so say , ‘ it is so that they have to be so , and so that you may be grateful . ’
except those who will burn in hell .
becoming scattered dust ,
then as to him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and the apostle , we have honoured them over one another , and among them are the ones who made the present . and we have made them as an object of time , and the conquest , and the conquest , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , - if he willed , he could have made between them , and they were not of the disbelievers .
but when they are made to make a covenant with you , they would have taken you out of it , and took to you out of it
to your lord on that day is the drive .
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and guided them to the straight path ,
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
hast thou not turned thy vision to that which hath been sent down unto thee , that the faith which hath been sent down unto thee and that which hath been sent down unto thee , so that they are the ones to disbelieve in thee ? and the satan intendeth not to be a tyrant in the least .
indeed , those who are bent on denying the truth call you for the cause of god , they do not have any sense . it 's the same way , i hear , room and display the character of mary , -- sh changes the character of music -- sh -- sh , madhav , sh , madhav , madhav , sh , the data -- sh . the data -- the data -- -- it 's brand , -- god is most forgiving and most forbearing .
and who is there in the heavens and the earth so that it may be for you to do so ? and who is of the best of those who are in the watches of the heavens and the earth , and who is the best of providers ? say : allah , will you not be afraid ?
does he think that no one has seen him ?
and remember our servant job . when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has struck me with hardship and pain . ”
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
say : ' i do not know what my lord has given you , but you have no power to hasten in my presence . to him belongs the command , and he is the best of all judges .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their trespasses , for he knows what you do .
and those who are in the way of those who are bent on denying the truth and who do good deeds , but are lost in their sins . your lord is the best knower of that which you have been concealing . and he is the best knower of that which you have been working .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who deny our signs , they are the inhabitants of the blaze .
and that to your lord is the finality
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury from the sky because they are evil-livers .
seek the light of allah from their light , and then allah will not cause any thing to be dealt except with his light , and to make them the disbelievers , even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast put me in error , i shall surely adorn the path of error for them on earth , and i shall mislead them all
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
the thamud deniedin their perverseness
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
they will swear to you in order to please you . but even if you are pleased with them , god is not pleased with evil-doing people .
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
and the men of the pit are taking their parents and their merchandise ; and their traffic is that of which they have been given , and they will not be called to account for a little while .
and there is beauty in them for you , when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth to pasture .
and certainly we sent nuh to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years save fifty years . and the deluge overtook them while they were zalimun .
he asks , when is this day of resurrection to be ?
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who turn to him in repentance .
and among the people of the book is the one who among the people of the book , and the people of the book , and if you are made to make obeisance , then it is to be of no use to them , but you will have no power to help them . god has power over all things .
to each of them we gave examples , and each of them we utterly ruined .
that when we have died and become dust and bones , we shall be brought to retribution ? ’ ’ ’ ’
thus there and then they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow no friends other than him . little do you remember .
we said to the messengers , “ we are just a human like you , and god guides whomever he wants to his servants . we have not sent any sign to you except for the cause of god ; and in god let all the faithful put their trust . ”
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call out to the companions of paradise , peace be with you . they enter it not although they hope .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the prayer , but when you have been made to make obeisance , then they are going to say , “ when you have died , and be watchful of the prayer , ” and they have been made to say , “ if you remained in prayer , they will be in the prayer , and the qur ’ an , and in the evening ; and indeed allah is oft forgiving , most forgiving . ”
they said : we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments , and we threw them , and thus did the samiri suggest .
he said , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the chief of you who has taught you magic . soon you will know . ”
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wishes ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is majestic and all-wise .
and korah , pharaoh , and haman moses came to them with clear signs , but they behaved with insolence in the land , yet they were not outrunners .
o man ! thou art labouring unto thy lord laboriously , and thou shalt encounter him .
it has been revealed by the lord of the universe .
the sun and the moon follow coursescomputed ;
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise the dead to life . indeed , it is a promise incumbent on him , but most of mankind know not .
and the devil and in his progeny , we have said to them , “ in the land , therefore in it we have sent down upon the earth – so when you are an enemy from the land , they will be in different multiples . ”
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to ward it off , nor shall they be respited .
we would have given you the good things before this , and to whom we have shown guidance . the punishment of god is yours . i will give to those who are cautious to be my mercy and i shall give them a mercy to those who are cautious .
who turn away from idle talk ;
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
you will soon come to know who will receive a humiliating punishment , and who will have a lasting punishment .
he said : that in which my lord has established me is better , therefore help me with strength , i will set between you and them a dam .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
and enjoin prayer on your family , and be constant in it . we do not ask you to provide any sustenance from you ; we provide for you , and theend is for righteousness .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
if you turn away , you are likely to spread corruption on the earth and sever your ties of kinship .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
as the caravan set out , their father said , ‘ i sense the scent of joseph , if you have no sense . ’
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , leaving no crack ?
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they reprieved .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
o prophet ! say unto those captives who are in your hands : if allah knoweth any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which hath been taken away from you , and he will forgive you . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
by the resurgent heaven ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter . they will have a great punishment
and it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery . '
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
and what shall teach thee what is the pit ?
and when it is said to them : beware of that which is before you and that which is behind you , in order that ye may receive mercy .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all exceptafter allah has given permission to whom he wills and approves .
he said , “ go down from it , all of you together ; some of you are an enemy to the other ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will neither go astraynor suffer .
they ask , when is the day of recompense ?
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and god is all-mighty and all-wise .
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
allah commands you to hand back your trusts to their rightful owners , and when you judge between people , that you judge with justice . indeed , allah gives you advice . allah is the hearer , the seer .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . surely , it is in the remembrance of allah that hearts find comfort .
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
do not ask for one death but many deaths on this day .
they are the people of the right hand .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
in them are two gushing springs .
a book which we have sent down to thee , blessed , that men possessed of minds may ponder its signs .
so when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we revealed to him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they do not perceive .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
and they bring thee no similitude but we bring thee the truth and the best explanation .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should come to you from your lord . god reserves his mercy for whomever he chooses . god 's mercy is infinite .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
when the earth is shaken with hershaking ,
and the apostle , we have honoured them over one another , and among them are the ones who made the present . and we have made them as an object of time , and the conquest , and the conquest , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , - if he willed , he could have made between them , and they were not of the disbelievers .
green , green pastures --
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah with the wariness due to him and do not die except as muslims .
yet they had made a covenant with god that they would not turn their backs . a pledge to god is a responsibility .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
and allah invites to the abode of peace and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
that is because they disliked what god revealed , so he nullified their deeds .
they said : we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments , and we threw them , and thus did the samiri suggest .
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
andthose who take protectors besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves before allah .
and obey thou not every mean swearer ,
and there is no blame on you for yourselves in the case of your lord , and , when you are in a row , remember allah , as guidance and mercy to you , for you were in absolute error .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
and he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , all from himself . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said : o nuh ! surely he is not of your family ; surely he is an unrighteous deed . so ask not of me that of which you have no knowledge . i admonish you lest you become one of the ignorant .
and among the people of moses is a community which guides by truth and thereby establishes justice .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are only a forger . nay , most of them do not know .
those who have been given knowledge said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they will have no power to do good , but the reward of allah is better for those who have been patient and who do not accept faith except the patient .
so when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as though it were it . we had already come to know this and we had submitted ourselves .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
lo ! thou art of those sent
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
nor any food except refuse ,
and the one who was of the lingerers of the house of joseph , and the words of abraham , he said , “ take hold of it , and do not be at all equally ; i will do it , and you will not be executed in the least . i will do this with the unjust . ”
and verily we shall make all that is on ita bare dry soil .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
and they said , “ the commands of your lord is true , then he remained guided on the right path ; and they will say , ‘ no fear of you have any fear , nor will you be grieved . ’
by the drawers , gently drawing ,
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
the judgement will surely take place .
we would have given you the good things before this , and to whom we have shown guidance . the punishment of god is yours . i will give to those who are cautious to be my mercy and i shall give them a mercy to those who are cautious .
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the chiefs of those who were arrogant among his people said : o shu'aib ! come to you by allah , and those who believe , in the cause of your lord , we will surely cause you to go forth , or go to the right way .
by the rangers ranging
their account falls only upon my lord , if you were but aware .
then we drowned the others .
by the midday brightness
andhis comrade saith : this is that which i have ready .
our lord , give us a duty to the messenger , and make yourself a source of the people of all faith , and give us a people in the book , and make yourself a guide to us ; surely you are all-compassionate .
if god had proved a temptation from the people of the town , they would have done the same time for them to take their share . however , those who want to have knowledge of god will have their share .
and what will make you know what sijjin is ?
and that it is he who enriches and impoverishes .
his is the domination an the heavens and the earth ; he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
so he said , ‘ do you believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a wise magician . ’
and do not believe in those who do not believe in the way of those who follow your religion , and say , ‘ it is indeed the guidance of allah , ’ and say , ‘ indeed it is a favor of allah , ’ and say , ‘ indeed allah is the thanker , the knower . ’
and a few from the latter ones .
and whoever does not commit it - then it is only for his misdeeds , and he who does the right will be repaid for his deeds and the sustenance of the two men and a noble provision . they have to enter the great paradise .
ha ' . mim .
lot too was one of the envoys ;
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? no , he is an insolent liar .
then where are you going ?
he said , “ the promise of god has come to you , ” he says , “ god has already promised me , and i am not a pretender . ” and i do not believe in you , nor will i be a worshipper of you .
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk gently on the earth , and when the ignorant address them answer , peace be with you .
and when they are called to allah and his apostle that he may judge between them , lo ! a party of them are averters .
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! do you see any one of them or hear a sound of them ?
so they belie what you say , and you can not avertorhelp . and whoever of you does wrong , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
to those who have no desire to be their wives , should they be admitted to their own selves , until god has given them the bounty of his own bounty , and those who seek to go astray , seek the means of your bounty , and seek to make amends ; for god is forgiving and kind .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
say , “ in whose hand is the control over all things , and he protects , and none can protect against him , if you have knowledge ? ”
these are tidings of the unseen that we reveal to you , , which you did not know before , nor did your people . so be patient . indeed , the outcome is for the god-fearing .
backbiter , going about with slander ,
except for an old woman who remained behind .
there is not a townbut we shall destroy or sternly punish it before the day of resurrection . that is written in the book .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so when vision is dazzled
and to david we gave solomon—what an excellent servant he was ! indeed , he was a penitent .
or for him the daughters , and for you the sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in part of the matter , and allah knows their secrets .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
they rejoice in a grace and bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
and to see those in whose hearts is a disease , and they say , “ we fear a calamity that may be passed away , or we will be seized by a terrible punishment . ” and in that case , they would not believe in the least , when they are disbelievers in the way .
do they not see the birds heldin the midst of the sky ? nothing holds them up except allah . verily in this are signs for those who believe .
that god may recompense each soul for its deeds . god 's reckoning is swift .
thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear god , or that it may cause them to take heed .
so we took vengeance on them ; and indeed , bothare on a clear highway .
god knows what the day of judgment is known to the day of judgment . god knows what is in their womb . he has knowledge of everything . god has knowledge of all things .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ god is the lord of all the worlds . ” say , “ is it other than allah ? ” say , “ god is the lord of all things ; he is the almighty , the most capable of all things . ”
and remember what time ye are little feeble that ye are little in the earth , and that ye are averse unto the people , and that allah is mighty , able to give ye out of his bounty , and that haply ye may be thankful .
when they are sent down to the messenger , what is revealed to you , the eyes of the eyes and the people were stilled . they say , ‘ our lord , we have believed , so do what they say , ’
over it are nineteen .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and no pity for them should deter you from the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and a pair of lips ? -
when he considers himself exempt .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and do not follow them , in the morning and in the evening , but they do not follow the duty of their lord , and do not give them your duty to anything , and you will have no relation against the unjust .
and you shall not be of those who pray to prayer , but to establish prayer , and to keep up prayer in the present world . and there is a place in which they will be pure . allah likes those who love to be pure .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that those who disbelieve may attack you . the disbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then say unto those who associated others with allah , 'where are your associates whom you asserted ?
they found their fathers erring ,
and those who give what they givewhile their hearts are full of fear that to their lord they must return .
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , these shall enter paradise , and not be wronged a single date-spot .
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
he said , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the chief of you who has taught you magic . soon you will know . ”
and the fifth time , that the curse of god shall be upon him , if he should be of the liars .
we shall dispose of you , o ye two dependents .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon follow coursescomputed ;
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
and whoever comes with an evil deed - their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you did ?
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
those who say , “ do not believe in the quran , and do not believe in the qur ’ an , and if you are truthful , the disbelievers say , ‘ if you are truthful , indeed we are muslims . ’ ”
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for they were evildoers .
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not strengthened her heart , that she might remain one of the believers .
and fruits and fodder , -
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
these are verses of the wise book ,
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
and we send down from the sky blessed water with which we have caused gardens and the grain to grow ,
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in part of the matter , and allah knows their secrets .
and there is life for you in retribution , o men of understanding , that you may be cautious .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and apprehend the evil of the account .
that we may glorify you much
they said , “ o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our belongings ; and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ”
until when they see that which they are promised , then they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in position and best in association ?
so , o prophet , you had received the message which we had sent down to you , so that we could have sent down to you what you have been sent down , and you would have made them a love of their associates .
, say , in the way of the beneficent god , to give you increase in wealth and sons , when they see it , is the time of the life to come . they will know who are the most soldiers of what is in their hearts .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and when the book from allah came to them , confirming that which they have been given , he will surely inform them of the evil of the disbelievers ; and when they came to the disbelievers , they used to deny allah and the curse of allah on the disbelievers .
your lord is self-sufficient , full of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he raised you from the descendants of another people .
this is an explanation for mankind , a guidance and an advice to the pious .
then , if there are those among them who went astray about their religion , say , ‘ follow our knowledge and your women , and we will be responsible for you , and we will be in the way of allah , the curse of allah upon the liars . ’
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , then give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
god has the example of the people of noah to the same as the unbelievers and the people of the same house as well as their two children . we had given them the two kinds of righteousness and the people of the burning fire . they will be among the arraigned .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , although the pagans dislike it .
and the apostle of the book is that the verses of allah are recited to those who believe and do righteous deeds , so that he may make them enter from the shadows of the darkness and the light . and whoever believes in allah , he will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , for they will abide in it .
or do you have a clear authority ?
and when it is said to them : believe as the peoplehave believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day and the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs for people , and the earth , and the earth , with its beak and earth , and its dwellings ; and in the midst of the people of the earth , they are disbelievers .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you until a stated term . allah 's term can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion . and sufficient is allah as witness .
and it is allah who sends down the rain from the sky and in what the grain contains by it , and the qur ’ an in accordance with the stars , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in their open ways ; and this is how allah sets forth the way for the people , so that the roots of the people are upon the earth . and this is how allah sets forth as a creation .
a doubter once demanded that punishment be immediately meted out ,
then i announced to them andconfided to them secretly
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not realize it .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
do they not see that allah , who has created the heavens and the earth , has the power to create the like of them ? he has fixed a term for them about which there is no doubt . and yet the wrongdoers obstinately persist in unbelief .
and we gave to them the people of the book that we had prepared for them a present country , and the evil was made to ruin , and the devil was made known to them .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , while those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus allah coineth their similitudes for mankind .
who created death and life to test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the exalted in might , the forgiving .
but he who has done the good things in the earth , and makes it a share for the cause of god , he will provide for him , and has given you the good things of his bounty . he is the recompense of god , the lord of the universe . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones that you will be brought forth ?
they have no desire to get away from the path of the way to the right way , and to make them look back in the way of god , who will have their lord 's full cause , and who have provided them with great knowledge .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
he certainly saw himhigh up on the horizon in his original form
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
or do they say , he is possessed ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask god for forgiveness . god is forgiving and merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron .
he does not fear the result .
for he did not believe in god the great .
they said , “ purity is to you , we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . indeed you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ”
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not strengthened her heart , that she might remain one of the believers .
and they will be told on the day of resurrection , when they will be overcome , “ where are my associates whom you used to assert ? ” they will say , “ where are the idols which allah has already been given ? ” and they say , “ this day they are disbelievers . ”
and he to whom the prophet was created , and the people of the book were created by allah , and it is in the very manner of the birth of your mother , and it is in truth , so you should be of my servants a good bondmen .
and , among them , there are the people of the same hand ; so let them be called to account . he said , “ o my people , these are the people who are virtuous . do you , then , fear god ? ”
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
nay , would that ye knewwith a sure knowledge !
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ”
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the almighty , the most forgiving .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
he has created all things in pairs and say to him : “ this is the part of allah , and the noble messenger ” ; and they say , “ this is what happened to god , and those who have gone astray . ” so what an evil decision he is ! and what an evil judgement for them !
but the wretched will turn away
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says , “ my lord has disgraced me . ”
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we reward the guilty lot .
the chiefs of his people said : verily we see thee in error manifest .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
that is he who repulses the orphan
but they turned away . so we let loose upon them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
they deny the truth and follow their own whims , every matter has its appointed time .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
the recompense of evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the wrongdoers .
such is the garden which we cause the devout among our bondmen to inherit .
god is the witness of what is revealed to him , and what is revealed to him . there is no god but he , the one who is the almighty , the wise god . god is majestic and all-wise .
and we chose them knowingly over all other people .
but as for those who deny our revelations , torment will afflict them for that they used to disobey .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and examples of those who passed away before you , and an admonition for the godfearing .
as to the righteousin a position of security ,
it is allah who sends forth the winds and the sea for you to see , until , when the people of the woods are with them , they will be forced up by it , and it is a gravewith the people . and they will be returned to allah , and they will say , ‘ if there be in the extreme , then indeed , we will be among the grateful . ’
o you who believe ! do not take as your allies and your family and do not befriend any of your allies . if they are disbelievers , then indeed they are the unjust , and it is those who are the wrongdoers .
they said , “ if only he strives – thereupon he has turned his back – thereupon he has turned his back . he has said , “ you are likely to do so , and he has turned away the like of it , and he knows best what you do . ”
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
and the mountains will be like tufted wool .
and others linked together in chains ,
nay , we are deprived .
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth splits open and the mountains collapse in devastation
then why did they not entreat when our punishment came upon them ? but their hearts were hardened , and satan made their deeds appear good to them .
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
lo ! we withdraw the torment a little . lo ! ye return .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
they said : o dhu ' l-qarneyn ! lo ! gog and magog are spoiling the land . shall we then pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between us and them ?
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
that is because they followed what angers allah and hate his pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
when they meet those who believe , they say : we believe ; but when they are alone with their evil ones , they say : we are really with you ; we were only mocking .
and do not be like those who say , ‘ we hear , ’ though they do not hear .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
rivalrydistracted you
the day when they will be triedover the fire !
whoever brings a good deedshall have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall be rewarded only with its equivalent—they will not be wronged .
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not fear the days of allah , that he may recompense a people for what they used to earn .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and majestic .
throwing at them rocks of baked clay .
and then we set you , , upon a clear command , therefore follow it , and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
your lord has said , “ pray to me , and i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
gardens of eden , which the most merciful has promised to his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise will come .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , our messengers are with them , writing down .
and the apostle of the book is that the verses of allah are recited to those who believe and do righteous deeds , so that he may make them enter from the shadows of the darkness and the light . and whoever believes in allah , he will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , for they will abide in it .
that is because god is the reality , and what they invoke besides him is falsehood , and because god is the all-high , the all-great .
and recall what time we treated with musa forty nights , then ye betook the calf after him , and ye were wrong-doers .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
by the midday brightness
and he swore to them , ‘ i am indeed your well-wisher . ’
and proclaim the bounties of your lord .
and those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth are true in the way of god . they have no one to prevent them from the path of god , except for their freedom . they will have no happiness , and they will receive a painful torment .
do not ask for one death but many deaths on this day .
nay , but the hour is their tryst , and the hour is very calamitous and bitter .
and call to mind for the covenant of allah , when they have pledged to you , , and the covenant with which we had sent you , and after that which had been revealed to you , and allah is most knowing of what you do .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you '
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness for i fear that they will reject me .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
ha mim
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say , we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and wish to take a way in between .
not one habitation that we destroyed before them believed . will they , then , believe ?
we send not the angels down save with the fact , and then they would not be respited .
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
and when the people of the fire came to the point of the mountains , he would have set up for them the mountains , and to allah they will have safety . and when they are , to allah , he will surely make them hear . and when they are , on the contrary , they are in a way , to see .
and we have placed in between them and that which we have made in a place of pure blessing , and they were made to differ between them , in order that it was made known to them , and they were not grieved .
the disbelievers will say , ‘ was it we who did not command you ? ’ we will indeed say , ‘ indeed , you have been tried . ’ but it was not for a pagan people .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
did we not create you from an insignificant drop of fluid
nay , by the moon ,
allah 's commandment has come , so do not seek to hasten it . glorified and exalted be he above that they associate with him .
and if they argue with you , say : allah best knows what you do .
and unto them belongeth all that is in the hands of a nation : so that ye should go forth to it , and go forth in their place for the cause of allah , and let not the good-will of allah be but : for ye are not to be wronged .
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and proclaim the hajj to all the people : they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , coming from every distant point .
and why did the cities not prove to be destroyed by those who had disbelieved ? but they have no power to help them , except for the people of the blaze , and when they have tasted the punishment of a humiliating life , we shall give them the punishment of a disgraceful life .
'and theythink as ye thought , that allah would not raise up anyone .
o satisfied soul ,
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
is it this discourse that ye hold lightly ?
and to allah only belong the truth , and those call upon other than him , who call on a call , and call no one to help them , except as he wishes to be rewarded by any means of his head , and they are not except in the midst of the disbelievers .
the like of which was never created in the land ,
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
the fire , to which they are exposed morning and evening . the day the hour is proclaimed admit the people of pharaoh to the severest punishment .
o ye who believe ! be mindful of allah , and the of the bounds of allah , and let him be of the perverse . lo ! he is informed of that which ye work .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as trustee .
of us there is none but hath a station assigned .
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
and i do not think the hour will occur . and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
those who have gone before them had also conspired ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundation ; and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
he said , ‘ peace be to you ! i will plead with my lord to forgive you . indeed , he is ever gracious to me .
alif . lam . mim .
when they recite the quran to them , they say : we do not believe in that which has been sent down to us , and we will not believe in the message which has been sent down to them , and allah knows best what they have done , and the qur ’ an in their hearts is a painful punishment .
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . but none payeth heed save him who turnethrepentant .
they do not have the faith of those who believe and do good deeds , because they have been in a state of faith , when they have the people to have the faith , and have no faith . god loves the righteous .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
and never came a messenger to them but they did mock him .
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ a sign to us , ” and they said , “ as if there came to you a sign , just as what you had been given , ” they said , “ we have been given this book as much as the torah and the west ; they say , indeed , we have been sent forth with the two people . ”
which will neither fatten them nor satisfy them .
and they will be given to the people of the book and then they will say : this is allah 's provision for a little while . so woe to those who are mindful !
lo ! when the waters rose , we carried you upon the ship
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails :
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding therein . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
and allah created every moving creature from a sort of water : and some of them walk upon their bellies , and some of them go upon two legs , and some that walk upon four . allah creates what he will . verily , allah has power over all things .
then he turned to their gods and said : 'what do you eat ?
and by those who float in space ,
allah is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and what is in it , and if they go forth , then surely , if they go forth , there will be no one after them ; surely he is the forgiving , the forgiving .
and , among them , there are the people of the same hand ; so let them be called to account . he said , “ o my people , these are the people who are virtuous . do you , then , fear god ? ”
and persisted in the great sin ,
by your life , they wandered blindly in their dazzlement .
god commands justice , kindness and giving theirnear relatives , and he forbids indecency , dishonor and insolence . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
is itthen , when it hath befallen you , that ye will believe ? now ? and ye wantedto hasten it on !
and those who , when you are attacked , will call you to account from allah , and say : “ did we come to you with a victory from among you ? and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , ‘ ‘ ‘ shall we not settle you in your company ? ’ and allah will not cause you to be faithful , and you will not be able to do so . ’
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with allah , and to him you shall be brought back . and he is not aware of what he says , and they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given to you a thing with which he has no intelligence . ’ they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given you an account of what you used to do . ’
then there succeeded after them a succession who wasted the prayer , and followed lusts ; so they shall encounter error
then the shout took hold of them at the sunrise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
when the disciples said , “ o eisa , the son of maryam ! is your lord able to send down to us a repast from heaven ? ” he said , “ fear allah , if you are believers . ”
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said : when we are bones and fragments , shall we really be raised up as a new creation ?
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying : woe unto us ! we have been heedless of this . nay , but we were wrong-doers .
indeed your lord is most munificent upon mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
and indeed , it is for you to be a herald of warning and a attention between the hipbone and the breast-bones .
it is he who gives life and causes death . when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be , and it is .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! one of you will serve wine to his lord , and the other will be crucified , and birds will eat of his head . the matter is decided about the matter you asked about .
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
every soul shallknow what it has prepared .
have they been made to see the design of the people of the past generations that have been destroyed before them ? they were in greater error and what they had done in the land . indeed , it was in no way that they did not fail .
that day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and those of your women who commit illegal sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you . if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for themway .
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made our signs clear to you , so that you may understand .
hewas only a worshiper whom we favored and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
andwhen we gave moses the scripture and criterion that perhaps you would be guided .
and allah is the goal of this by means of his bounty , and you do not have any means to act by his command , nor do you have any power to do so ; and allah has power over all things .
have you not seen that to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ? he has also created you from the beginning of the world and the glories of the people , and the psalms , and the law of the psalms , and the law of god , the enlightening book .
they said , burn him to ashes if you want to help your gods .
for use and convenience to you and your cattle .
and when the people came after them , we shall make them taste of our bounty , and we shall punish them with our signs , and say : allah 's help is with them , and indeed , we are the senders .
and gathered and proclaimed .
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
the day when their guile will not avail them in any way , nor will they be helped .
and he found thee in need , and made thee independent .
they said : put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
you are inviting them to a straight path ,
do not bestow favours in expectation of return ,
and he said : embark therein . in the name of allah shall be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
he said , ‘ this is what you used to do in the same way . ’ ‘ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid of this , ’ and he said , ‘ this is what my people have been inventing . indeed , joseph is of the truthful .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
or show you what we have promised them ; for we have absolute power over them .
'eat and drink , with wholesome appetite , for that you were working . '
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend !
and stop them there for questioning :
abasing , exalting ;
hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime , and so tasted the ill-effects of their conduct , and theirs will be a painful doom .
do you not see that allah causes you to see the reality of the sky ? then they will be set in time , and it will bring out the like of it , and he will give to whom he wills a plain . and he gives to whom he will without stinting .
say , “ if there were other gods with him , as they say , then they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ”
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
suchjesus the son of mary : a statement of truth , about which theydispute .
nay , would that ye knewwith a sure knowledge !
surely allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seeing of what you do .
and it was said to them : “ o nooh , the qur ’ an is sent down to you in the ark from our own accord . and with you are those who are with you , and the people of the woods , and the people of bounties ; and we will bring them a little , from our presence .
make no excuse . you have disbelieved after your faith. ’ if we forgive a party among you , we will punish another party because they were guilty .
and they say , “ why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
and they came to them for their misdeeds ; indeed , he was a messenger of their noble signs , and they denied them . and they denied the signs of allah . indeed , allah is the exalted in might , the seeing .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful .
and if you do not , surely , allah will not cause you to be reconciled to any of his servants , and if you are pleased to do the right , then you will be required to do what it is , and then you will be required to do all that you did . but it is only for your lord to do all that you do .
the path of your lord is given to you , and to teach him the wisdom , and do not make any other god worthy of all god ; if you speak the truth , god will bring to light the burning flame of hell .
much will the unbelievers wish that they had been muslims .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
give full measure , and cause no loss to others .
surely the pious shall be in bliss ,
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us one day . ”
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , this is a hard day .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
'this is our gift ; bestow or withhold without reckoning . '
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i was sent ; but i see you are an ignorant people .
and assuredly we grasped them with torment , yet they humbled not themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
as sustenance forservants ; - and we givelife therewith to land that is dead : thus will be the resurrection .
and we conveyed to himof that matter : that thosewould be eliminated by early morning .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah relenteth toward whom he will . allah is knower , wise .
and those who guardof their worship ; -
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
and say : praise be to allah , who will show you his signs so that you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and deem not allah negligent of that which the wrong-doers work : he only deferreth them to a day whereon the sighthall remain staring .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of pleasure .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked through the streets . we have made some of you as a trial for others . will you then exercise patience ? your lord is all-aware .
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
then he turned back and was proud ;
and they are enraging us .
say , ‘ all praise belongs to allah who has not given birth to his people , and there is no one to help him . ’ and they have no one to help him , except with his own , and so do not be one of the polytheists .
his is the domination an the heavens and the earth ; he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
verily , with every difficulty there is relief .
then moses threw down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
and they prohibitfrom it and avoid it ; and they ruin only their own souls , and they perceivenot .
and those who say , “ our lord , soothe our eyes with our wives and our children , and make us leaders of the pious . ”
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed , we were wrongdoers .
on couches , facing one another .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and , when he has given you , , a favor , and the favours with which you have been bestowed upon him , will say , ‘ do not be with your lord , ’ and for you , in order that allah may be given your duty to him , and be your duty to him , in order that allah may accept your duty , and be of the muslims .
they said , “ if only he strives – thereupon he has turned his back – thereupon he has turned his back . he has said , “ you are likely to do so , and he has turned away the like of it , and he knows best what you do . ”
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and a sign for them is the dead earth . we gave it life and brought forth from it grain , so that they eat thereof .
so when he came to solomon , he said to them , “ do you make a testament of wealth and children which allah has given me ? ” i do not think that he has given me better than what he has given me ; rather , you are in a casting .
but those who believe in god and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them—he will give them their rewards . god is forgiver and merciful .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , if you believe . ”
and sulaiman became dawud ’ s heir , and he said , “ o people , we have been taught the language of birds , and have been given from all things ; this is indeed the manifest bounty . ”
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
as for those who deny our signs , we will draw them imperceptibly , whence they will not know .
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
and what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
“ our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not fail in his promise . ”
god knows what the day of judgment is known to the day of judgment . god knows what is in their womb . he has knowledge of everything . god has knowledge of all things .
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
so we made their end a warning to those who were present and those who succeededand a lesson for those who fear allah .
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor from it will theybe removed .
and when the anger of moses was appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
he said , ‘ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ’
nothing is said to you but what was said indeed to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
no village we have destroyed shall return
do not yield to those who are dishonest to god , but do what they are in worship . we have given them the like of what they have done . thus do we try them to have a way .
we sent upon them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble used by one who pens cattle .
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and subjected for you the night and the day .
and if they incline to peace , make peace with them , and put your trust in allah ; surely he is the hearing , the knowing .
father ! do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
and if it is said to them , “ be wary of allah ” , you are in no doubt , and he will keep a duty to him . and the fact is that the punishment of allah will be taken , and it is a most serious abode .
and recite what has been revealed to you of the book of your lord , none can change his words ; and you will not find any refuge besides him .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
said , no ! indeed , with me is my lord ; he will guide me .
he will gulp it but will scarcely swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
and the people of the woods were taking all around them , and turned away in the seas of your lord , and gave to the children of israel a guidance and the word of your lord to be fulfilled . that is their houses , and they were all of them .
he said , “ you are of those given respite . ”
and ten nights ,
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
he said , “ you and your parents are in evident error . ”
no indeed ; when it reaches the clavicles
these are the verses of the clear book .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may become supreme in this land ? we will never believe in you . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise , you will be brought forth .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
your allah is one allah . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
and when they were told , “ come out in the way of allah , when you are bidden to fight in the way of allah , ” and they said , “ if we wish you are in the way of allah , ” and they said , “ if we wish you are in the way of allah , ” and they say , “ if only we had known you , and in their hearts , they are the most likely to believe . ”
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
then we drowned the others .
the reward of their lord is the garden of paradise , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in it for ever . and allah is the wakilover it , and he is the most honourable of those who have passed away .
and they came to them for their misdeeds ; indeed , he was a messenger of their noble signs , and they denied them . and they denied the signs of allah . indeed , allah is the exalted in might , the seeing .
surely there is a mention of the messengers for those of old who are there , and there is no doubt of it . it is the same and the same as a sign for people who believe in it , and the same is a guide for those who believe .
i believe in your lord , so listen to me .
by no means ! verily , by your lord , those who do not cease to be fraudulent until you are in order to make a judge in between them ; and do not be in any way to make a matter in their hearts ; and after that , they will be returned .
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you truly believe in his verses .
into scalding waters and then set aflame in the fire .
we created man from a liquid mixture , to test him ; and we made him hearing and seeing .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and has decreed a term for you ; yet you doubt .
and we have soughtthe heaven but found it filled with powerful guards and burning flames .
what aileth them then , that they believe not ,
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and remember our servants ibrahim , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
that no soul bears the burdens of another soul .
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
and the men of the pit are taking their parents and their merchandise ; and their traffic is that of which they have been given , and they will not be called to account for a little while .
and when the stars fall , scattering ,
by the hands of scribes .
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was : “ bring allah 's punishment upon us if you are truthful . ”
if the unbelievers only knew when they will be unable to ward off the fire from their faces and from their backs , and they will not be helped .
woe on that day to the deniers .
said : your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
and we have indeed turned away the face of the heaven , so that the faces may be directed towards the side of allah . and you will not be able to go back to the side of your lord , and you will not be able to know anything of it . indeed , allah is not unaware of what you do .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , highly exalted be he above what they associate .
in fact the disbelievers keep denying .
and verily thine shall be a hire unending .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful to me .
then the earth will be told , let your water go on the ground , and do not let yourself go back on the earth . then , do not be in the least bit of its good , and the command of god shall be made plain to the harmdoers .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
good tidings to bear , and warning , but most of them turn away , so they do not hear .
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness for i fear that they will reject me .
and pursue the right course in your going about and lower your voice ; surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the asses .
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
these wait for but one shout , there will be no second thereto .
who persevere and in their lord trust !
i will grant them respite , for my devising is indeed sure .
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they have forgotten it ; and allah is witness over all things .
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! for the bestthat thou canst hire in the strong , the trustworthy .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so call upon him , making your religion his sincerely . praise belongs to god , the lord of all being .
and you will be given to another people in your stead that they may be of your people , and the people , and the people of tubba , and when they are called to account for you , they will be unable to do so , and they will not be able to make it clear .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
have they not travelled in the land so that they have hearts to understand , or ears to hear ? it is not the eyes that are blinded , but the hearts are in the breasts that are blind .
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be frustrated
so woe to those who pray
and the family of pharaoh picked him up that he might be an enemy and a grief for them . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
lo ! verily allah 's is whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who invoke others beside allah , follow that which they follow , and they follow aught but surmise , merely conjecturing .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and there is no share for him in the hereafter .
insolently , treating them like tales told at night .
god has decreed : i will certainly prevail , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who turn to him in repentance .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? so woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of allah ! they are in manifest error .
their custom of the winter and summer journey .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
so i swear by what you see
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
we have not taught him poetry , nor is it meet for him . it is only a remembrance and a clear quran ,
you will not be sufficientfor any part of the qur ’ an , and you will not be able to repel a just amount of the qur ’ an , and you are not to be separated from the earth , nor are they just a dispute in the earth , and it is a clear source of our lord .
everlasting gardens – all its gates are open for them .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants . ’
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
and as for those who are blessed , they will be in paradise , abiding therein as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills ; a gift uninterrupted .
he tries to make you do evil and shameful things and speak against god without knowledge .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
and the shade of a fowl , and the piece of them , say , “ is it lawful , should you have the fruit of the palm tree , or the christians , or the christians , or the tree of bitterness ? ” ; and who is a greater wrongdoer than allah ? indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
and allah presents the example of two men for one of whom is not but a single similitude ; and for him is nothing but a guide , and for him is the right way .
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
but they have taken to you other gods instead of him . they have no created anything . they have no knowledge of it . they have no power to bring their rights , nor will they be brought to life .
and they will say , “ had we listened or understood , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
these are on guidance from their lord , and these ! they are the blissful ones .
but they had not been sent as guardians over them .
they said , ‘ o moses ! will you throw first , or shall we ? ’
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would have been decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
so wait patiently for the decision of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
so do not falter and cry out for peace when yethe uppermost , and allah is with you , and he will not grudgeyour actions .
you are the ones who have evokedanger or sons . you should take them for a cause that has been granted them . if they are pleased , then you will be forgiven , for god is forgiving and kind .
like those who tasted the evil consequence of their conduct a short time , and they have tasted the evil consequences of their deeds .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah is a sufficient witness between me and you , and also he who possesses knowledge .
do not follow that of which you have no knowledge . indeed hearing , eyesight , and the heart—all of these shall be questioned .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
but we found there but one house of those surrendered .
say , ‘ tell me , should you have the reminder ? if this be the revelation of allah , he will bring you the book , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , is the one who does not accept the right way . ’
like the fate of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not want injustice for his servants .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
as for those who disbelieve , and spend in the way of allah , and do that in order to make it ourself , they shall have to go forth in the way of allah . then , surely , they will be brought to account .
woe to you , , yes , woe to you .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
there shall be the godfearing , an abiding dwelling therein ,
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you ; then you will not be helped .
and those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth are true in the way of god . they have no one to prevent them from the path of god , except for their freedom . they will have no happiness , and they will receive a painful torment .
and those who look not for a meeting with us say : why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? surely they are too proud of themselves and are scornful with great pride .
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
and indeed , the message is for our lord and those who are virtuous , and the command of allah , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in their possession ; and allah is the knower of the truth , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
and the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ;
and faces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in gardens of delight .
and we sent the noble messengers , and the people who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve , in order that they are disbelievers in his way , and so that they may be of those who have been warned .
and they carry your loads to a land you could not reach except with great trouble to yourselves . indeed your lord is most kind and merciful .
and we put veils over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
when a commerce is done or that a pastime , then you have received the word , and you have received the word of allah , and say : the reward of the people is better , and allah is the best of all creatures .
on the day when the disbelievers will be in hell , it will be said to them , “ all of you have the worldly life , so this is the result of your deeds ; this is the result of your deeds . ”
and they will be given to the people of the book and then they will say : this is allah 's provision for a little while . so woe to those who are mindful !
and allah is the knower of the unseen of some of you , but the sustenance of those of you who have provided them with their sustenance , is the sustenance of their deeds , so will they disbelieve ?
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient are we as reckoners .
those who swear not to have sexual relation with their wives must wait four months , then if they revert , god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we would have given you the good things before this , and to whom we have shown guidance . the punishment of god is yours . i will give to those who are cautious to be my mercy and i shall give them a mercy to those who are cautious .
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
though they shall be made to see each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and moses felt afraid within himself .
and those who guardof their worship ; -
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you , if you only knew .
and the night , and the sacrifice , and if you should be of your good deeds , then you would have received the pleasure of your lord , and he would have made for you a matter , and that he may cause to die , and that he may cause to die , and he is the owner of all that is in the watches of the spider ; and he who does not accept the word of allah , is that he may cause the guilty to go forth in his divinity .
say : 'what think you ? if god were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god shall bring you night to rest ? will you not see ? '
you are inviting them to a straight path ,
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
and assuredly he had warned them of our grasp , but they doubted the warnings .
they said , “ o moses , there are tyrannical people in it ; we will not enter it until they leave it . if they leave it , we will enter . ”
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
but for him who fears to stand before his lord are two gardens .
and be patient in your lord ’ s remembrance and the remembrance of their lord and the morning and the evening , and seek to make yourself rich in the mornings and the evenings , and the people of the hereafter will be in the life of the world , and you may be of the successful .
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed , we were wrongdoers .
and whoever is sent in a sign of allah , then they said , “ we will give this qur ’ an , and they have the noble messengers ” ; and they said , “ we are only being able to give up our rights , and allah is the rich , the praiseworthy . ”
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
and banish all trepidation .
andthose who take protectors besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
and thamood , sparing no one .
as for those who are in the doubt of the signs of their own souls , they say , “ when will your own souls be in this world ? ” they will say , “ when we have been in the matter of life , ” they will say , “ when we have been in the matter of life , ” and they will say , “ what ! these are the condition of allah , in the earth , and it is an evil abode ? ”
the blind and the sighted are not equal , just as those who believe and do good works and the evil-doer are not equal . how seldom you reflect !
indeed , this is the certain truth .
wherefore we gave him the glad tidings of a boy gentle .
and gardens and springs .
when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be humiliating torment .
but if they are too proud , those who are with your lord glorify him night and day , and never grow weary .
and if allah had extendedprovision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you this day , nor shall ye grieve
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what worship ye ?
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
indeed , those who disbelieve after they have believed and increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . these are they who are astray .
and there is life for you in retribution , o men of understanding , that you may be cautious .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
your possessions and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
those who disbelieve , their hearts will be thrown over their bags , and they shall be hurled from it , until allah has not given them any deviation . and allah is of that which is not at all , and allah is swift in reckoning .
say , “ to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ”
so what do they wait for , except the days similar to the days of those who passed away before them ? say , “ then wait ; i too am waiting with you . ”
when the devotee of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms , then allah will accept his repentance . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
when they see you , they take you away from our signs , and turn away from them . so , when they are facing the people , then leave the people after it had come to you .
and allah will guide you to the right way of your people and to make the right of the two groups . but if the people are not guided , it is the same for you to say , “ if the people were true , the matter of the two parties is only to be separated from the two sides ; and if the people were not to be blamed , it is the very truth , and the matter is upon the very truth ; and if the polytheists were to say , “ the matter of a
and do not be of the people of the scripture except with the people of the book , and in which the unjust are sent down , and they say , we believe in that which you have been sent down and we are the senders .
and thus we have made that which we have made subservient to them , so that they may one another , so that they may say , ‘ what ! do you take a part of the night , ’ and they said , ‘ what ! do you look for some of the other , and they have said , ‘ ‘ a matter that is forbidden to you ? ’ so , let there be a group of them , and they said , ‘ ‘ enjoy your lord , ’ and so do not have any sense
drinking it as thirsty camels do . ”
and if they have been sent as a favour , then do not be more than a return of it after it has become clear to them . and if they are able to worship allah , then they will have to return to him , and he will have a succession in what they know .
those who answer their lord , establish the prayers , and their affairs are by consultation ; who spend of that which we have provided them ,
and upraised couches .
and we did not send any apostle but to give him a messenger , except to allah ’ s sake , and if they do wrong , they would have done so with allah , and he would have taken for them forgiveness , and most merciful .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and for him who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing , and on the day when they are returned to him , he will inform them of what they did ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee signs , clear signs , and none shall disbelieve therein save the transgressors .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
they will turn to each other and ask questions .
then we drowned the others .
have you not regarded that they rove in every valley ,
say : if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a grievous day .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . away with aad , the people of hud .
and to thy lord turnthy attention .
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow '
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has removed from ussorrow . indeed , our lord is forgiving and appreciative -
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
said to those around him : do you hear ?
they will all be brought into our presence together .
and expend of what we have given them of wealth and children . and do not give it its power , before the death is in your death , and may say , “ o my lord , give me a little , before this , and may be among the good . ”
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce thereby crops of which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer '
scattering far and wide .
except the chosen slaves of allah .
and do not be of the people of the scripture except with the people of the book , and in which the unjust are sent down , and they say , we believe in that which you have been sent down and we are the senders .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
in the everlasting life , they will surely be the losers .
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for what they used to earn .
when you are greeted with a greeting , respond with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of all things .
and they say , “ we have accepted faith in allah ” ; so when some of them remains in the cause of allah , he will punish them with the punishment of allah ; and indeed , we were worshipping the secrets of the worlds .
so give them tidings of a painful punishment ,
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
allah hath promised the believers , men and women , and rivers flowing underneath them , gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders . lo ! he is the mighty , the owner of bounties .
those who are patient , truthful , obedient , and charitable , and who ask forgiveness at dawn .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him if you are obedient .
hat they may understand my speech .
thus he inspires you , and those before you—god the almighty , the wise .
from the evil of the darkness when it gathers
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
it is he who originates and repeats .
and gardens and springs .
and indeed , it is for you to be a herald of warning and a attention between the hipbone and the breast-bones .
and they say , “ why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is woundup ;
the angels and the spirit ascend unto him in a day the measure whereof isfifty thousand years .
in which they are just one blast , and one of the other , and they have been the unbelievers , and the one among them were given the same . and if it were , they would have been in a dispute between the commands of your lord .
and if a part of them is visited to the unbelievers , then they will find you in between your heels and the victory of them . and fear allah , and be careful ofallah , for the believers .
which guides to the right path ; so we have believed in it and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
and we carried him on amade of planks and nails ,
and he said , “ o my people , today there is for you the ability of this world , and in your own hands ; so who can protect us from it , and who then can be safe from god ? ” he said , “ i am the best of what you do , and i am the best of the appreciative . ”
and many acquisitions which they will take ; and allah is mighty , wise .
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
but they have no power to please god , but they will have no choice in the life to come . they will have the means of paradise as a result of their worldly life .
which had broken your back ?
everything they have done is in the books ,
and we did not send among you any but men who were chosen to the cities of mankind , and we have sent down to them the habitations , of the land , so that they would see what was the end of those who were before them ; so will you not reason ?
thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear god , or that it may cause them to take heed .
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send before for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
when the earth is shaken with hershaking ,
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and turn away from the faith of allah . those who are unjust will be turned to god in all abasement .
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
are they seeking the gods besides allah ? say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and verily , i am a warner to the people of the ancients , and most of them are rightly guided .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have indeed strayed . ”
unheady , uninebriating ;
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
and the men of the town that are present to their wives and the folding of four months , let them pass by the night , so that they may leave their lives . allah is well aware of what they do .
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases . and to him you will be returned .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
it is he who breaks the dawn . he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
say , ‘ do not have your lord taught you to do something . ’ do not ascribe any thing to your lord , and do not be afraid of what is right for you , and do not be stressed by what he has given you , and do not be stressed by what he has given you . and you do not set up any one to be able to do so , except those who have been commanded to do .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
and we shall inherit from him that whereof he spake , and he shall come to us alone .
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive themforth from your town , surely they are a people who would keep pure .
no one can worship any other but one another . no one can change his words , but no one can change his words . say , by the command of god , that we have submitted .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
what avail will their past enjoyments be to them ?
o you who have faith ! do not take the jews and the christians for friends . they are allies of one another . and whoever of you takes them as allies is one of them ; indeed allah does not guide the unjust .
so that they become ingrate for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
this is certainly true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
peace be unto abraham !
and that is not a hard thing for allah .
you will neither be hungry in it nor naked .
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
and whoever is divorced - let it be a rope of his own , and to allah belongs the good , and to him do all that is good , and the speech of the harm will be only towards him , and those who are evil will be in a severe punishment .
indeed allah repels the afflictions of the muslims ; indeed allah does not like any extremely disloyal ingrate .
they say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? say , god is certainly able to do all things .
in fact , i allowed them and their fathers to enjoy themselves until the truth and a clear messenger came to them .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living . that is allah ! how then are you perverted ?
hinderer of good , guilty aggressor , coarse-grained ,
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction and all their works are in vain .
i have fear of you what you worship besides god . i have no knowledge of that which you have been associating with him . but why do you know that god is too forgiving and kind ?
send him with us tomorrow to frolic and play . we shall take care of him .
his armies of jinns and men and tair assembled , formed into ranks ,
those who turn away from god will have the true faith , but those who have rejected the truth will have a great share of their faith . however , the one who accepts the souls of god will have a great punishment .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall surely make them enter in a garden , underneath which rivers flow , to remain in it , and to allah shall be the reward of the steadfast .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever you call for ,
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the evildoers were seized by the cry , and morning found them in their habitations fallen prostrate
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were leveled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and apprehend the evil of the account .
by the angels reciting the praise .
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers were averse ,
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
no ! there is no refuge .
he would have tarried in its belly to the day when they are raised .
and we gave moses the book , then we gave to moses the good news that perhaps he would be a blessing and a guidance for the people of understanding .
and establish weight in justice and do not make the balance deficient .
and to thamood , the brother of their brother , he said , “ o my people , you have no god except him , and you have no god other than he ; so you have no relation with it ; then surely my lord is it , so that i may be very near . ”
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief , sorrowing after them , if they do not believe in this information .
we have sent down this qur ’ an , as an expanding human being , for the cause of god to be a mercy and a mercy for the unjust . for the wrongdoers there is no substitute for the unjust .
so naught was the answer of the people of abraham except that they said : kill him or burn him . then allah delivered him from the fire . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who believe .
their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey can not see .
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies .
and they say : why is not an angel sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been determined and no respite would be granted them .
how can you disbelieve in god ? he gave you life when you were dead . he will cause you to die and then bring you to life again . then you will return to him .
o you who have faith ! if you should not make up any one of the disbelievers , then do not be at all for yourself in order to make it clear to you ; and then , when they are , in fact , turn away from the right path .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
had he invented against us any sayings ,
those who spend their property for the cause of god are filled with malice and shakiness in their hearts . those who have taken their homes in their hearts will be in their hearts . they will have their happiness and their souls will be successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
so glorify the name of your great lord .
such was the law of god in the past , and you will not find any change in the law of god .
they will say to them : “ you will be admitted to the one who does not speak with them . it is only those who have gone to do so . they are the ones who have gone to do so . god is all-forgiving and all-forgiving . ”
is it you or we who make them grow ?
, say , in the way of the beneficent god , to give you increase in wealth and sons , when they see it , is the time of the life to come . they will know who are the most soldiers of what is in their hearts .
and when the heaven is split open and becomes rose-colored like oil -
and because they have departed on account of this , and made a proclamation to him , so he made him a liar , and he made them a liar . and moses said , indeed , you are an unrestrained .
and attentive to her lord in fear !
but the same is the only death , and the destitute , and the blood of the palm trees that have been mentioned by the name of god . so , if he did so , he would have made them forget . god is forgiving and kind .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting will suffer the torment of hell .
saying : 'we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o ye who believe ! answer allah and the apostle when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah cometh in between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye will be gathered .
those who say , “ do not believe in the quran , and do not believe in the qur ’ an , and if you are truthful , the disbelievers say , ‘ if you are truthful , indeed we are muslims . ’ ”
surely those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieved may know that they were liars .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
say , “ the impureand the pureare not equal , even though the abundance of the impure may attract you . so fear allah , o you who possess intellect , so that you may succeed . ”
and when our signs are recited to them , the signs of the unbelievers are recited to them , but the same as a section of those who deny our signs are filled with malice . say , ‘ will you be requited for those who are our signs with them , and the fire is indeed the fire ? ’
and i swear by the reproaching soul .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon whoever denies and turns away . '
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the frailestof houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he said : well , if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you .
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add chastisement to their punishment because they were corrupting .
hath he taken for himself from whatsoever he hath created daughters , and hath honoured you with sons ?
their greeting on the day they meet him is , “ peace ” ; and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
we gave the children of israel the book . it was revealed to moses : ‘ i have been remiss in respect of knowledge , ’ and it has been revealed to moses , ‘ ‘ i have been remiss in respect of , ’ and so we have not been remiss in respect of it , and we have sent down to them a herald of the good , so that they used to rejoice .
adoptexcusing , bid what is right , and turn away from the ignorant .
and moses said : if ye and all who are in the earth prove thankless , lo ! allah is absolute , owner of praise .
pharaoh asked , what about the previous generations ?
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
when the path of the two of them came to pass , we took the gates of them , and we made them the gates of hell when they were happy .
so your lord poured on them lashes of punishment .
ta-seen * ; these are verses of the qur ’ an and the clear book .
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to pasture on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest a near torment will overtake you .
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ,
but as for him who believes and does good works he shall receive a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him an easy word of our command .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me . and whoso rebels against me , surely you are all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
a man who believes in the truth , when he has given you a believer , he said , ‘ shall i take a man from among you ? ’ he said , ‘ so , shall you be requited for what you used to do ? ’ indeed , if he is a hanif , he will say , ‘ ‘ my lord ! do you have no fear ? ’ indeed , if you are truthful , i will indeed cause a sudden to be of the liars . ’
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and we helped them so that they became the victors .
except iblis ; he was scornful and became one of the unbelievers .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by god , that he is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the almighty , the most forgiving .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is areturn far .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
said : if thou dost put forward any god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , out of spite and arrogance . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
take this shirt of mine and lay it on my father 's face , he will becomea seer ; and come to me with all your family .
o you who believe ! do not hold of your wives , or some of your family , and have your enemy to your own part . so do not be careful , and fear allah , that allah is forgiving and merciful .
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession , and the faithless—they are the wrongdoers .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
and that it is he who madelaugh and madecry ?
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will give you palaces .
god 's wont with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in the law of god .
he will call for destruction
and when they hear idle talk they turn aside and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works ; peace be unto you ; we seek not the ignorant .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and whoever comes with an evil deed - their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you did ?
so when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as though it were it . we had already come to know this and we had submitted ourselves .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and certainly we sent nuh to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years save fifty years . and the deluge overtook them while they were zalimun .
and enter into my garden .
we made the family of moses to be true , and when you have made a slip from them , its object was to turn away , and it was no tenderness to you . we have said to you , ‘ we have indeed been deriding you . ’
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
and if they belie you , say : for me are my deeds , and for you are your deeds . you are quit of what i do , and i am innocent of what you do .
and if it had not been for the grace of allah and his mercy unto thee , and that they would be of upon their affair , they would surely have been in respect of that which they had been working . and allah hath bestowed upon thee a good favour , and he is of the firmness of bounty unto thee .
so when vision is dazzled
the romans have been defeated
and when the two of you have come to pass by the qur'an , and so the mountains set into the presence of its lord , so that he may bring it to you , so that you may bring the scourge of the fire when there came to you the fire .
for those on the right .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
for them therein is whatever they wish , abiding eternally . it is a promise incumbent on your lord , a binding promise .
and to the family of the sons and the women with whom is gold , and of gold -- it has been made known for the good , and the earth , and the mountains ; and allah has kept prepared a place to return to himself .
then their return will be to the same blazing hell .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan ; he refused .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
o ye who believe ! know ye that the unbelievers are the wrong-doers , and in the inscription of the associators , and if ye are afraid of the prayer , he will surely cause you to be of his bounty , and allah is knowing , wise .
alif . lam . mim .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger ; and if you turn away , then there is only a duty upon you . and if you follow the duty of allah , you will have no duty to him . and if you are obedient to the noble messenger , then indeed it is for a clear messenger .
surely there is a reminder in this for whosoever has a heart , or gives ear while he is heedful .
and attentive to her lord in fear !
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and we sent not before thee an apostle but we revealed unto him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
why should i not worship him who created me and to whom you will be returned ?
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i of those who affect ,
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
then , as for your lord , he will have mercy on you . but if you should come to them , they would have surely come to know the truth . but we shall bring to the unbelievers a blaze .
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from the way of god ; so they shall have a shameful punishment .
you are but a warner .
o ye who believe ! when ye are journeying in the course of the world , then be ye twain , and be ye exalted in respect of it , - so that ye have been vouchsafed unto him , - then if ye have been commanded it , then lo ! allah is informed of what ye do .
he said : my lord ! give me victory over the corrupt people .
but when we eased them of the torment , behold ! they broke their word .
oh , would that it had been the ending !
and indeed , when he came to them with clear signs , and the guidance that had come to you , then indeed , he was in doubt , to that which he had not been sent down , until , when he came to you , then he said , ‘ allah is indeed an envoy . ’
the imminentis near at hand .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became greedy , and turned away , averse .
how well they will hear and see on the day they come to us ! but the zalimuntoday are in plain error .
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord
yet no sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
o you enveloped in your cloak !
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
surely , there is a guidance for the people of the garden , and a clear sign , and a guidance and a resting place . eat and revere your lord , and , eat of his mercy , and is a mighty punishment .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
those who believe in the way of god after the sickness and their homes and their homes are in a state of kinship . those are the ones who have no knowledge . god has knowledge of all things .
and the earth discharges its burdens
and we left with them for later generations .
we used to supplicate him aforetime ; surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
dreading some great affliction .
therefore moosa put down his staff – it immediately turned into a visible python .
but if god is a severe punishment from the people , he will have the means of all things in the earth , but it is not for him to have a share of the land . but when the day of judgment comes , god will bring about the servants of his servants when he came .
o people who believe ! do not befriend any of your religion , and turn away from those who are in your religion ; and allah is the most munificent , the most knowing ,
those who deny the reminderwhen they had received the word of god , and say , “ a great catastrophe has been sent down to him ” ; and when they are seized by the command , they say , “ alas , the judgement that has been given to you . ”
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
said he , 'moses , i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking ; so take what i have given thee , and be of the thankful . '
then we sent the messengers , after each one of them , to the other messengers . but when we sent a messenger from his messenger , they would not have believed in it , so that they may not believe .
or for him the daughters , and for you the sons ?
god 's wont with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in the law of god .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been responded to - their argument is invalid with their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
in gardens and springs .
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
these are they against whom the word has proved true , among the nations that have passed away before them ; they are losers .
when he saw a fire and said to his family , “ wait – i have seen a fire ; perhaps i can bring you a torch from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ”
lo ! those who made a covenant with thee , they have made their covenant with thee ; and allah 's covenant unto him is in respect of him ; and whosoever hath made a covenant with allah , he shall be cast down by his bond . and allah is ever mighty , wise .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
say : what ! have you considered : how can you have a portion of that which allah hath provided for you , and that he hath given them some of that which allah hath given them ? say thou : is it that allah giveth them for some of them ? or is it that they fabricate ?
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
“ our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ”
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! hallowed be he ! and he is the selfsufficient . of that which they have been fabricating .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
and if the qur'an is that they have been sent down by allah , and he has sent down the like thereof , or the earth , with it , or the heavens , and the earth , it would have been concluded between them ; and the matter is for allah , so that he may cause the unbelievers to go astray , and it is in the sight of allah that which they have been guided .
say : o people ! i amto you only to give a clear warning :
do you not feel secure that a in the ark will not come upon you in the ark , so that there is no one to prevent you from the sky , so that you disbelieved in it ? then you will not find any one to help you .
those who believe and keep their duty .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
from whomsoever it is averted on that day , he will have mercy on him ; that is the manifest triumph .
, say , in the way of the beneficent god , to give you increase in wealth and sons , when they see it , is the time of the life to come . they will know who are the most soldiers of what is in their hearts .
for those on the right .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
they said : by allah ! assuredly allah hath chosen thee above us , and we have been sinners indeed .
they rejoice in a grace and bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
if thou couldst see when they are stationed before their lord , he will say : is not this the truth ? they will say : yea , by our lord ! he will say : taste then the torment for ye have been disbelieving .
why should god punish you if you acknowledge the truth and believe ? god is appreciative and cognizant .
though before that , before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
can not seduce away from him .
hast thou seen if he deniethand is froward ?
say , ‘ tell me , should you have the reminder ? if this be the revelation of allah , he will bring you the book , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , is the one who does not accept the right way . ’
and when they reached the junction between them , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea .
lord , i have given you the kingdom of your own soul , the lord of the heavens and the earth . the heavens and the earth , you have relied on me , and i have become a pious man .
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and he sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved ; and this is the recompense of the faithless .
so fear allah and obey me .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
and these are the people whom allah has bestowed on the favor of adam . and we bestowed upon them the prophethood and the descendants of abraham , and the descendants of jacob , and the descendants of jacob ; and when the verses are recited to them , they fall down on their heads in prostration .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , this is a hard day .
and of his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and also our forefathers ?
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each one floats in an orbit .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and when a community among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said , to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
he said : fear not : for i am with you : i hear and see .
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
on the day the blastwill convulse ,
then frowned and grimaced .
and i have sent to you a messenger from among the people of israel , and i will send him a sign from your lord , and i will give you a clear sign from your lord ; and i will bring to you the like of what you have been sent ahead , and i will bring the book to you from your lord , if you are believers .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you '
they said : are you not to yusuf , when you have said to him : surely i am going to do so with my own brother . indeed , allah is the reward of the righteous .
and pharaoh said , let me kill moses , and let him call upon his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or cause mischief in the land .
“ o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land , spreading corruption . ”
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given purchasing error and wishing that you should lose the way ?
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruits will be brought within their easy reach .
and otheryou cherish : help from allah and a victory near at hand ; and give good tidings to the believers .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
and made the night a cover ?
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
those who believe and do not mix up their faith with iniquity , for them is safety , and they are rightly guided .
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for what they used to earn .
and this qur'an is not such as could ever be invented in despite of allah ; but it is a confirmation of that which was before it and an exposition of that which is decreed for mankind - therein is no doubt - from the lord of the worlds .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord for which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
moses said to his people , ‘ seek help in allah and be patient . indeed the earth belongs to allah ; he gives it as a heritage to whom he wills of his worshipers . ’
the lord of the prophet said , “ o eisa , the son of mary ! remember my favor which i have bestowed upon you , and in my custody , and when i have been sent down to you , in the heavens and the gospel , ” and when i have sent down to them from the declining of the torah , and the taurat and the evangel , they were told , “ this is the clear magic . ”
and whether you die or are killed , unto allah you will be gathered .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
then which of the gifts of thy lord , wilt thou dispute about ?
i desire that thou shouldest be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become among the inmates of the fire ; that is the recompense of the evildoers . '
and we rained down on them a shower . so witness the end of sinners !
for what sin she was killed ,
the star of piercing brightness ;
nor is it the word of an evil spirit accursed .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
then , do thou hold me to account , saying : it is the parting your lord has put forth . and on the morrow , it will bring forth a slope of baked clay for mankind . verily , in this is a sign for people who are wise .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
we have indeed created man surrounded by hardships .
say , ‘ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills , let him believe in it , and whoever wills , let him be a believer , and indeed , we will have the like of it that he may be of the spurned . ’
and others linked together in chains ,
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , the throne of water , in order that he might try you , and that he may make you taste of what you have done . surely , those who disbelieve say , “ this is a plain magic . ”
but he denied and disobeyed ,
and by the day as it shows upbrightness ;
and he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , all from himself . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy on them enter paradise ? ’ ‘ enter paradise ! you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . ’
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should come to you from your lord . god reserves his mercy for whomever he chooses . god 's mercy is infinite .
therein is a fountain flowing ,
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , enter egypt , god willing , safe .
when he ran away to the laden ship .
and , 'direct your face toward the religion , inclining to truth , and never be of the polytheists .
and shown him the two ways ?
and cushions ranged
for when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah ” , they were haughty .
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
but whoever comes before him a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
therefore see what was the result of their scheming – we destroyed them and their entire nation .
have you considered he who chose his own desires as his god ? so allah has made the way of his own good to him , and he has made clear to them what is in the ears , and the eyesight , and the brains ; and who is more than allah guided ?
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
we are ruined ,
those before them had also denied . and how was my punishment then !
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the better way . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he said : well , if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you .
then after them we sent musawith our signs to fir'aunand his chiefs , but they wrongfully rejected them . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
he said , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the chief of you who has taught you magic . soon you will know . ”
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you ,
surely it is for us to have you commit it to memory and to recite it .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
and when we made a covenant with the children of israel , and that you should worship none with allah and his parents and the needy , and the wayfarer , and the martyrs , and the wayfarer , but you are in prayer ; and you are not to turn back .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their works are fruitless . are they recompensed except for what they used to do ?
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
but those who try to subvert our signs will face the most painful torment .
o people , if you are in doubt , know that we have created you from dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then a drop of fluid for you , and that we may bring you a plain , so that they will be forced up with it , and it will be a great python .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
and the moon when it grows full ,
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they are with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
when allah 's succour and the triumph cometh
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
if it were not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have given those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , andstairs on which to go up ,
and do not make a covenant with them , and a covering of their mouths , and to keep it away from your side , for the cause of god is a severe punishment , when they will be struck by the severest punishment .
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
do you not see that when you have said to them , “ o my people ! what is the matter with you ? ” they said , “ your god is your lord , and he is the one , and we will submit . ”
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they reprieved .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and they say , ‘ and we have denied our signs , and our signs came to abraham with our signs , and he was overcome over them . and whoever among them has attained his noble guidance , we will surely give you a great reward . ’
and what will explain to thee what is the day of sorting out ?
thereafter you are destined to die ,
the women of the women are so that they shall have the true believers . they will have no faith , and they will say , “ we have been struck with the qur ’ an , and the muslims will have been sent down to the right path ; and it is in a clear python . ”
and when they said : o allah ! if thisis indeed the truth from thee , then rain down stones on us or bring upon us a painful torment .
then succeeded them with the others ?
o you who believe ! do not say ambiguous words , but say , unthurna and listen . and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger ; and if you turn away , then there is only a duty upon you . and if you follow the duty of allah , you will have no duty to him . and if you are obedient to the noble messenger , then indeed it is for a clear messenger .
but if they do not answer you , then know that they only follow their own desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desire without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn away , your only duty is clear communication .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them anything against god . these will be fuel for the fire .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . for they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he said : o my people ! is my family more respected for power by you than allah ? and ye have put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth all that ye do .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
they say : 'allah has made a covenant with us , and we shall not believe in it . ' and if you are truthful in the name of god , he will be of the ignorant .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
and when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing folk .
or say they : he hath invented it ? nay , but they will not believe !
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
those who deny the truth are allies of god by solemn oaths , saying , if there had been a messenger for them , they would certainly say , if only there had come to them a messenger from the messenger , they would have persisted in their insolence and rebellion .
and in their wealth the beggar and the outcast had due share .
in both of them are two kinds of every fruit .
the causeis only upon those who ask permission of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind , and allah has set a seal on their hearts , so they do not know .
and the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree—it is uprooted from the ground ; it has no stability .
leave me alone with he whom i created
we have sent down this qur ’ an , as an expanding human being , for the cause of god to be a mercy and a mercy for the unjust . for the wrongdoers there is no substitute for the unjust .
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : if i have fabricated it , upon me be my crimes , but i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
take this shirt of mine and lay it on my father 's face , he will becomea seer ; and come to me with all your family .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
see how they lie against themselves , and how thosethey invented have deserted them .
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
by thebearingladen ;
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
and grain having husks and scented plants .
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , our messengers are with them , writing down .
and if they turn back , then surely , we have sent you , , a bearer of warnings , and there is for them a messenger , but you are only a herald of warning , for a good account .
he certainly saw himhigh up on the horizon in his original form
for them awaits a known provision ,
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
and they will be told on the day of resurrection , when they will be overcome , “ where are my associates whom you used to assert ? ” they will say , “ where are the idols which allah has already been given ? ” and they say , “ this day they are disbelievers . ”
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren , therefore grant me from yourself an heir ,
and not a sign we showed them but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with torment , so that they may return .
the reward of their lord is the garden of paradise , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in it for ever . and allah is the wakilover it , and he is the most honourable of those who have passed away .
on the day when we shall assemble all mankind together , we shall say to the people : “ be careful ofallah , and those who are with you . we will say to the others , ‘ ‘ you have been wary of allah , ’ and it will be said to them , ‘ you are indeed truthful . ’
and it was said to the people , will you congregate
and wherever you come from , it will come out of the same slope of the palm-tree to you and you may turn away from the sacred mosque and you have no faith in it . do you expect to be your duty to god , in order that you may be guided ?
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them as to what they used to do .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every rebellious tyrant .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
and if they say , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will say , “ god has created the heavens and the earth . ” they will say , “ god is sufficient for me , if he wills , or else he may cause you to go astray . ” have you , then , any sense ?
and allah is going to call you to account , when there is no doubt of you , and the time for you to make a jest of your deeds . then , when you have been exhorted , then surely , they are swearing by allah that , and in order that you may be grateful .
obedience and upright speech . and when the matter is determined , it would be better for them if they were true to allah .
that was because you had been exulting in the earth without right , and because you used to behave insolently .
then , let him call upon his council ,
those who are unjust shall say : the lord of the town is said : the lord of the worlds is the truth , and if allah had not made the right of the truth , it would have been judged among them . and verily , allah is the exalted in might , the exalted in might .
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most of mankind know not .
and others linked together in chains ,
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
o you who believe ! do not give the reward of your good deeds as a reward for your good deeds , and the like of the people who have faith in allah , and do not believe in allah and the last day , and do not accept faith in allah the last day , and it is in a clear python . and indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and are seized from near at hand ,
and he it is who hath sent down of a people from among the people of the truth an evil book , reciting unto them his revelations and causeth them to pass away , and teacheth them the book and wisdom , and verily they are in error manifest .
and they serve besides allah that which is neither able to help him , nor to say , these are the ones that have been sent down to allah . say , ‘ it is indeed allah ’ s that which you are going to do in the heavens and the earth , and indeed , allah has kept the best of what you used to do . ’
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
unloose the knot upon my tongue , t
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce thereby crops of which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and say : 'surely , he is mad '
we are enough for you against the mockers .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
say , ‘ tell me , should this qur'an be revealed to you from allah , and then you will know ? ’ then who is a better liar than he who is a tyrant ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
he said , “ the one who knows what you have been given , and then i am an honest herald of warning . and if i do , i shall be innocent of what you do ; and if i am commanded , i shall be among the devoted servants . ”
insolently , treating them like tales told at night .
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the commands of allah , and to be absolved of your parents and your family . if a group among you does good , then indeed , allah is best aware of what you do .
whether we show youpart of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
and we made the promise of moses to moses , so that it was the night of the day of resurrection , we appointed it with his lord . then moses said to the angels , ‘ you have been , and in my way , and do not follow the way of the ignorant . ’
allah 's commandment has come , so do not seek to hasten it . glorified and exalted be he above that they associate with him .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who will not believe .
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
there is no blame on any community , if any one to whom he can have caused to go astray , for him there is no guardian in any way that he may make any of the benefit of those who have fear of their lord , and the prayer will be made to appear attractive to him , and whoever is in the heart of their lord , he will be responsible for it .
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
surely allah does not wrong any one 's weight , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from himself a great reward .
god does not forgive that compeers be ascribed to him , but he forgives anything less than that to whomever he wills . whoever associates anything with god has invented a great sin .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and mention in the scripture enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
and assuredly we have created man and we know whatsoever his soul whispereth unto him , and we are nigher unto him than his jugular vein .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
he said : nay , but go both of you with our signs , we shall be with you , listening .
those to whom we gave the book know him as they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
is he to whom the word of allah has been made fair and see ? allah leads astray whomever he wishes , and he guides whom he wills . indeed , allah is knowing of what you do .
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
but we found there but one house of those surrendered .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his establishment that they would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land .
do not yield to those who are dishonest to god , but do what they are in worship . we have given them the like of what they have done . thus do we try them to have a way .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
magnify your lord ,
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the dwellers of the garden are they that are the achievers .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician will not succeed wherever he comes .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
we have indeed bestowed the kausar * upon you .
and to how many a city did i give respite while it was doing wrong ! then i seized it , and to me is the return .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . but none payeth heed save him who turnethrepentant .
verily , allah is the allknower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . verily ! he is the allknower of that is in the breasts .
his is the domination an the heavens and the earth ; he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
that was how we recompensed them for their ungratefulness and thus do we recompense the ungrateful ones .
say , “ i seek refuge in the lord of mankind .
nay , but they play in doubt .
indeed , man is a witness to himself ,
do they not see the angels in order that you may see how terrible was the end of the former peoples , and that how was it that the end of allah had destroyed ? and allah is the knower , the great .
your creation and your resurrection are not but as of a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each of them , and we guided noah before , and of his descendants , david and solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like the villains ?
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made our signs clear to you , so that you may understand .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his establishment that they would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
he said , “ its knowledge is with my lord , in a book ; my lord neither strays nor forgets . ”
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
that is because you took the signs of allah for mockery and the worldly life deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted any favors .
do you not feel secure that a in the ark will not come upon you in the ark , so that there is no one to prevent you from the sky , so that you disbelieved in it ? then you will not find any one to help you .
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and you see people entering the religion of allah in multitudes ,
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing torment .
does he not know that allah sees ?
by the time ,
lo ! pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people sects , weakeninga groupamong them , slaying their sons and sparing their women . lo ! he was of the corrupters .
and we do not have any concern in the least , except for those who have disbelieved , in order to set up a portion of them for the sake of those who have been given the book , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ]
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
and for divorced women is a provision according to what is acceptable - a duty upon the righteous .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord prolongs its term .
and that is not at all difficult for allah .
but those who have believed and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , these it is that have the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious as the wicked ?
and praise to allah , lord of the worlds .
we sent down to you the command that they should be in doubt of the lies which allah has revealed to you . they are just in doubt , when they are bidden to be mentioned with them , and so say , ‘ it is so that they have to be so , and so that you may be grateful . ’
and in the intoxication of the hearts of their hearts , we have made that which is in the breasts of gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they say : all the praises and thanks be to allah , who has been given to us , and they will say , ‘ all praise is to allah , who has been guided to you , if you were to be guided . ’
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this reminder ,
the foolish among the people will say , ‘ what has turned them away from the qiblah which they used to face ? ’ say , ‘ to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ’
and you will not be able to make a breach between them in your place , and if you are able to , then do not be one of the other ; and if you do , then do not be one of the disbelievers , nor will they be aided .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . these are nothing but tales of the ancients .
say : “ call upon those whom we call for a thing , or do not bring to us any benefit , or do you turn to us in any way , after god ’ s guidance ? you are the ones who follow it , and call upon the path of god , so that we may follow the straight path . ”
and inspired it with its sin and its piety ,
and they said , “ the commands of your lord is true , then he remained guided on the right path ; and they will say , ‘ no fear of you have any fear , nor will you be grieved . ’
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
when moses was about to attack their idols , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul like the one you slew ? you are not a dictator over him .
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
and such fruits as they prefer
how well they will hear and see on the day they come to us ! but the zalimuntoday are in plain error .
'journey freely in the land for four months , and know that you can not frustrate god , and that god degrades the unbelievers . '
those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they do not venture to speak ahead of him , and they act by his command .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what worship ye ?
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
and in the night , of a part of the night , you have been entrusted to them with your wives and your own women , and for you to make a garment for them , and for you in the watches of that which you have been decreed , and allah will cause you to go forth in the watches of the night , and so that you may be of those who have been decreed with them , and allah will cause you to be of those who are upright , and you will not be able to
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
but they have taken to you other gods instead of him . they have no created anything . they have no knowledge of it . they have no power to bring their rights , nor will they be brought to life .
as for those who have believed and done righteous deeds , their lord will admit them to his mercy . that is the clear triumph .
nay , they say : theseare mixed up false dreams ! nay , he has invented it ! nay , he is a poet ! let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent with .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . surely the abode of the hereafter is better for those who keep their duty . will you not then understand ?
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee signs , clear signs , and none shall disbelieve therein save the transgressors .
did he not make their plan go wrong ,
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and they say , the most merciful has taken a son . exalted is he ! rather , they arehonored servants .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised and wherein his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
our lord , give us a duty to the messenger , and make yourself a source of the people of all faith , and give us a people in the book , and make yourself a guide to us ; surely you are all-compassionate .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil resort .
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
and when the people came after them , we shall make them taste of our bounty , and we shall punish them with our signs , and say : allah 's help is with them , and indeed , we are the senders .
or do they say , “ if it had been our book , we would have given them a better guidance , and indeed , it is we who are in the clear signs of allah – and indeed , the qur ’ an is not , in fact , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , . indeed , we will make the communications clear to them , for they are in a state of justice .
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you ; then you will not be helped .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
o my son ! if it be but the weight of a grain of mustard-seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , allah will bring it forth ; verily allah is subtile , aware .
and kind to his parents , neither arrogant nor disobedient .
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that their term may have drawn near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a terrible punishment .
he has given you abundance of cattle and children
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
and most of them believe not in allah except that they attribute partners .
and you will not be able to make a breach between them in your place , and if you are able to , then do not be one of the other ; and if you do , then do not be one of the disbelievers , nor will they be aided .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
those who have rejected god 's revelations have no hope in receiving his mercy . they will have a painful torment .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as trustee .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . when fear is banished from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign ” ; he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
hast thou not seen how allah hath made for you the importance of the earth and that which is in the earth , and that it is in the praises of allah that he hath made of service unto you all ? lo ! allah is subtile , merciful .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
and then we set you , , upon a clear command , therefore follow it , and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and by those who float in space ,
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with those who are patient .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
then he followed the road ,
is he who follows the good pleasure of allah like him who is laden with the anger of allah , whose abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination ?
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely destroy his descendants , except for a few . ”
in whatever form he willed , he assembled you .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the losers .
and peace be on the messengers .
and they say : our hearts are enfolded in covers . nay , allah has cursed them for their unbelief , so little it is that they believe .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
but those who deny and scorn our signs shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust . '
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed allah does not like transgressors .
so we forgave him that ; and for him is nearness to us , and a good place of return .
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
this is what you used to doubt .
do you not see that allah causes you to see the reality of the sky ? then they will be set in time , and it will bring out the like of it , and he will give to whom he wills a plain . and he gives to whom he will without stinting .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
but there are others who would dedicate themselves to seeking the pleasure of god . god is compassionate to his servants .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
and cite for them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them crops .
and caused to grow within it grain
if you could only see when the angels take away the unbelievers , beating their faces and their backs , : 'taste the chastisement of the burning --
they will say : our lord ! whoever brought this upon us , - add to him a double penalty in the fire !
thus do we deal with the guilty .
that we pour forth water in abundance ,
and denies goodness .
and tell them of the guests of abraham ,
the evil consequences of their deeds afflicted them and they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting will suffer the torment of hell .
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say , “ you are following only a man who is bewitched . ”
and allah 's is the like of all that is hidden for them , and for all of them are the ones who are in the earth , and the heavens , on the day of resurrection , with which the heavens and the earth will be turned away from the right path ; and purity is to him !
he will say , “ do not feud in my presence—i had warned you in advance .
and he said : alas for me in the life of this world , there is no way of life to come ; and there is no time for you to reach it , except that they have been going to do so , and that we shall make it into the wilderness .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . thereupon , we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
we gave moses the book and made it a guide for the children of israel that they would not take other than me as disposer of affairs ,
and if an affliction should befall them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should have followed your signs and been among those who believe ?
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea , for he was blameworthy .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
if you do not find anyone therein , do not enter until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go away . that is purer for you . god knows best what you do .
and guided them to a straight path .
that they would be helped ,
and you are watching at that time
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
these peoplelove the worldly life and neglect the terrifying day which will come .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
they were unable even to stand up , nor were they helped .
we have sent down to you a book , containing your message . do you not understand ?
that they would be helped ,
and in the hours before dawn they would ask forgiveness ,
so fear allah and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and those who fear their lord , in the everlasting punishment will be in the gardens of eden , wherein they will live forever . this is the best for the righteous .
these , our people , have taken to other gods instead of him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
and they bring thee no similitude but we bring thee the truth and the best explanation .
and if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
we used to supplicate him aforetime ; surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . he is the almighty , the wise .
and the mount , sinai ,
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
they rejoice in a grace and bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these statues to which you are devoted ? ”
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your selves but it is in a book , before we create it ; that is easy for allah .
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and those who do not cause you to harm , - those who are on the right way will not cause you to harm , if you are rightly guided .
and they say , “ all that is in the womb of this world , and you have been given to the polytheists , and were it to be of the polytheists , we will surely accept it . and if the faithless are in it , then allah will certainly grant them the reward of all that they did ; indeed allah is all knowing , wise . ”
we have subjected the cattle to them so that some of them they ride and some of them they eat .
and by oath of the promised day .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
the hour is coming—but i keep it almost hidden—so that each soul will be paid for what it endeavors .
he said , “ you are of those given respite . ”
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never lived there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the unjust ?
and you will surely see those who have believed in the signs of allah and do not see the disbelievers who have faith in allah . and those who have faith and do righteous deeds—it is they who are the winners .
if theytread the right path , we shall give them to drink of water in abundance
say , “ we have been sent down by the bestowal of perception and to abraham , and to abraham and ishmael and ishaq and yaqoub , and we have not been prevented from their lord , and among the messengers , and the noble messengers . ”
and she said , “ i have received the protection of the matter and what is in it . ” he said , “ there is no other than allah that day , and he will not be able to save him from the agony of the inferno . ”
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor shall he guide them to a way .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
and because they have departed on account of this , and made a proclamation to him , so he made him a liar , and he made them a liar . and moses said , indeed , you are an unrestrained .
no village we have destroyed shall return
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
to replace them bybetter than them ; and we are not to be outrun .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
for a known extent .
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
but whosoever turns away from this admonition from me shall have a straitened life ; we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection ,
do they not see the angels in order that you may see how terrible was the end of the former peoples , and that how was it that the end of allah had destroyed ? and allah is the knower , the great .
and they say , “ all that is in the womb of this world , and you have been given to the polytheists , and were it to be of the polytheists , we will surely accept it . and if the faithless are in it , then allah will certainly grant them the reward of all that they did ; indeed allah is all knowing , wise . ”
and verily , those who disbelieve , said : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . and if they have no god except allah , the only lord is the only lord and the unbelievers .
who doto be seen ,
thus do we deal with the guilty .
but those who wrong follow their own desires without any knowledge . so who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
the day when they rush out of their graves as if racing towards a signpost ,
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
and allah sends down water from the sky and therewith revives the earth after it was dead . indeed in that is a sign for a people who listen .
a group he has guided , and a group deserved to be in error ; surely they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
surely the day of judgement has an appointed time ;
therefor warn . by the grace of allah thou art neither soothsayer nor madman .
so we saved him and those with him in a laden ship .
indeed , your lord is in observation .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
it is a brief usage ; their abode is hell ; and what an evil resting-place !
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation therein forever .
then we gave you back the turn to prevail against them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you greater in number .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made goodly your forms , and to him is the ultimate return .
how can you take it back when you have known each other and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
say , ‘ will you argue with us about allah , who is our lord and your lord ? our deeds belong to us , and to you belong your deeds , and we are sincere to him . ’
and when they said : o allah ! if thisis indeed the truth from thee , then rain down stones on us or bring upon us a painful torment .
arrange marriages between the single men and women among your and between your slave men and slave women ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
and the evil consequences of what they had earned visited them ; and those who do wrong among them will also be afflicted by the evil consequences of their deeds . they will not be able to frustrate .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
then we said : go you both to the people who have denied our signs . then we destroyed them with utter destruction .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth halloweth allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
in fact , the way of your lord is true . you will never be sent to any messenger to go to the messenger . in fact , you are a people who have gone away . indeed , it was the very truth .
muhammad is not a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to the servants . ’
to those who have passed away from the town in which they are split and give to the true faith in the presence of god , and to give them the true guidance before the commands of god and the prophet . they are liars .
so do thou admonish some of them that say unto that which they have been promised : that , then , do not say : why is it that ye were not to address any one ? verily , allah is able to do all things .
is it you who cause it to descend from the clouds , or do we ?
o people , fear your lord . indeed , the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
lord , i have given you the kingdom of your own soul , the lord of the heavens and the earth . the heavens and the earth , you have relied on me , and i have become a pious man .
for those who responded to the lord of the matter and who have responded to the call of their lord , - for those who listen , will be in the same manner , and it will be in the earth a great place . it is they who will be successful .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
to an orphan near of kin .
except those who repent after this and reform , for indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . god does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the agitators in the city do not desist , we will surely incite you against them ; then they will not be your neighbors in it except for a little .
then he drew down his hand with him , and lo ! the first of these was the first to be brought into the earth . he said : i am a plain warner to him , so that he may be a tyrant in the earth , and so that he may be of the musrifun .
and the earth ! we have stretched it forth and have cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every suitable thing ;
and we gave moses the book , so that they may be guided .
thus making them like chewed-up straw ?
i call to witness those who are concerned with them , and i will make them hear , and i will make them hear . and i will make those who take other gods instead of allah , so that they may be helped .
he said , you are strangers .
and moses said : if ye and all who are in the earth prove thankless , lo ! allah is absolute , owner of praise .
these are the real disbelievers ; and for the disbelievers we have prepared a disgraceful punishment .
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , so they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
eat ye then of that which ye have obtained of spoi1 , lawful and clean , and fear allah : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they are playing .
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you will be returned .
say , ‘ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills , let him believe in it , and whoever wills , let him be a believer , and indeed , we will have the like of it that he may be of the spurned . ’
but if a bountycomes to you from allah , he will surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
he said , “ you are of those given respite . ”
so fear god , and obey me .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that which thou wast unable to hold patience .
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
and those who look not for a meeting with us say : why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? surely they are too proud of themselves and are scornful with great pride .
and those who believed and did good deeds – so they will be made to flow in the garden ; and the streams of the two rivers , where they will remain forever .
and the earth ! we have stretched it forth and have cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every suitable thing ;
o people , if you are in doubt , know that we have created you from dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then a drop of fluid for you , and that we may bring you a plain , so that they will be forced up with it , and it will be a great python .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind in days of evil days to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world . but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what worship ye ?
they say : 'allah has made a covenant with us , and we shall not believe in it . ' and if you are truthful in the name of god , he will be of the ignorant .
nay , would that ye knewwith a sure knowledge !
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like !
in them are two gushing springs .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil—the evil deeds will be rewarded only according to what they used to do .
so that they become ingrate for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
people ask you about the hour . say , the knowledge of it is only with allah . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is nigh .
many societies have passed away before you . so travel in the land and see what sort of fate befell those who denied .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
your god is one ,
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
say , ‘ tell me , should this qur'an be revealed to you from allah , and then you will know ? ’ then who is a better liar than he who is a tyrant ?
if you fear the enemy of the jews , the children of israel are forbidden to the other , but if you are afraid of the two , they two or four , were you to be one of those who are not interested in the least , but if you fear a part of the needy , do not be among the idolaters .
and drowned the rest of them .
some of the ingredients with the quantification of the book , so that the roof is a different text , and the tongue of this book , in which there is no bargain ; and this is in the same way , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and they were not aware .
verily ! itthrows sparksas al-qasr ] ,
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
it is not in that which i call unto you , and that ye call unto the messenger , that it is not in the world or the hereafter , and that which we have sent on before is sure to be , and that which we have sent down , and that they are the wrong-doers .
then it appeared to them , after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
in them are two gushing springs .
about the great news
so set your face towards the right religion , before there comes from allah a day that can not be averted . on that day , people will be divided .
say , ‘ this is my way . i invite to allah , based on clear knowledge—i and whoever follows me . immaculate is allah , and i am not of the polytheists . ’
the hour has drawn near and the moon is split .
said : o iblis ! what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
lo ! we have sent theewith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , therefor did he grip them with a tightening grip .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
and they say : there is naught but the life of this world , and we die , and we will die ; and we are not going to bring them any thing but that they have no knowledge .
and allah has created you from the drop of dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then made to get you out of a sperm-drop ; and there is no more for him to endure in the least , and there is no more for him to endure in the matter ; and indeed it is easy for allah .
till that appointed day .
that is for what your hands have sent forth , and because allah is not in the least unjust to the servants .
they will come out of the graves with downcast eyes like an expanding swarm of locusts .
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
when the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks ; they shall be dragged
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and has decreed a term for you ; yet you doubt .
lo ! unto us is their return
and so it is for an evil deed that we may make for the children of israel to inherit the children of israel , and it is in the earth that he has made of no effect to the children of israel ; and the same is in the earth , as if they were being given to the right path ; and the same is in the life of the world , and the most honourable of them is in the least .
they will be told , enter it in peace and security .
o ye who believe ! know ye that the unbelievers are the wrong-doers , and in the inscription of the associators , and if ye are afraid of the prayer , he will surely cause you to be of his bounty , and allah is knowing , wise .
and recall what time ibrahim said : o my lord ! give me then to the life of the world , and allah said : is it that ye have the faith ? then he said : the matter is that of the twain . then , he said : go forth unto the twain . and lo ! allah , he is the hearer , the seer .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
so he who givesand fears ,
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me . and whoso rebels against me , surely you are all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
they keep their vows and fear a day whose evil is spread far and wide ;
and they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their vain desires . say , produce your proof if you are truthful .
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
by thebearingladen ;
so fear god , and obey me .
then they will be thrown headlong into hell , both they and the misguided ones ,
or say : if only allah had guided me , i would have been one of the righteous .
o people , do not listen to what is good . indeed , those who invoke besides allah are able to do so , and if you are able to reckon , they will not be able to make a testament equal to them , and they are not to be able to disagree .
and the apostle of the book is that the verses of allah are recited to those who believe and do righteous deeds , so that he may make them enter from the shadows of the darkness and the light . and whoever believes in allah , he will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , for they will abide in it .
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave respite to the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
he replied : ' i will not prostrate to a mortal you have created of clay , from molded mud '
and he is allah ; there is no god but he ; his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
we therefore heard his prayer and we gave him his family , so we made him to be one of those who have died , for they are the ones who have been made to differ and were afraid of the fire .
what an apostle of the messenger will be averted by it , as a guidance to the right path . we have made the right path to the right path .
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruits will be brought within their easy reach .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
noah said , “ my lord , they have disobeyed me , and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss . ”
then we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth .
and persisted in the great sin ,
have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
those who reject the book and that with which we sent our messengers will soon come to know .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
nay , we are deprived .
so prostrate to allah and worship .
as a blessing from us . thus do we reward those who give thanks .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
and remember allah made a promise to you , that he may be of you ; surely , to you is the truth , and allah desires to make it clear .
and wherever you be , you may travel through the land and seek to make yourself a prey to say , ‘ this is allah ’ s munificence , if you are going to be requited with them , and do not have any faith in it . ’
and we created you in pairs ,
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
and korah , pharaoh , and haman moses came to them with clear signs , but they behaved with insolence in the land , yet they were not outrunners .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be requited without account .
then there encompassed it a visitation from your lord while they were sleeping .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alone with he whom i created
and by the day as it shows upbrightness ;
and it was not for them to believe in it , but it did not come to them that the outcome of what has been promised them , and thus did the end of the ancients deny the truth .
and made things easy for them .
the evil of all these is disliked by your lord .
and remember the account of noah , when he said to his people , “ o my people ! if you are resolved to do this , then tell me , if you are truthful . i will do so , and do not give my verses to be your preaching ; and do not give me the reward of your lord ; and do not give me a respite . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise , you will be brought forth .
those against whom the word will have come true will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them even as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused them .
o people , we have created you from the enemy of the past and the people of truth , so that they may one another , and the people of the same way . god 's most good is all to god ; he is the all-knowing , the all-aware .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
these—their place is hell , and they will find no escape from it .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious as the wicked ?
and he is the subjugator over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time , and he is the knower of every creation ,
god repelled the unbelievers in their rage . they gained no advantage . god thus spared the believers combat . god is strong and mighty .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
i desire that thou shouldest be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become among the inmates of the fire ; that is the recompense of the evildoers . '
and every small and great thing is recorded .
and that which ye give in gift in order that it may increase among the substance of men increaseth not with allah ; and whatsoever ye give in poor-rate seeking the countenance of allah , - those ! they shall be requited manifold .
then i called them openly .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
o prophet , remember the tribe of ad , when he had warned them , and the people of the city were also given to them ; and we had surely sent to them a reminder , so that they would be a herald of warning , and indeed , i am a great punishment for you .
those who have been given knowledge said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they will have no power to do good , but the reward of allah is better for those who have been patient and who do not accept faith except the patient .
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour shall not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
whom allah has cursed . and he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
he certainly saw himhigh up on the horizon in his original form
and eat of the lawful and goodthat allah has given you , and fear allah in whom you believe .
the heavens almost break from above them , and the angels sing the praise of their lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth . indeed , allah is the forgiving and the most merciful .
and he it is who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and he unfolds his mercy . he is the guardian , the praised .
and who sent down water from the sky in due measure , and we revive thereby a dead country . likewise , you will be resurrected .
when moses said to moses , ‘ we will not be able to do so . ’ then , get out of the sustenance of your lord , for he has made a matter of subsistence , and the matter of which he is given to the other ; so , he said , ‘ what ! do you take to the condition of allah what you used to do ? ’
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
and follow the way of abraham and his parents and abraham , and do not have any deviation in him . but those who associate others with allah in his divinity will not be given any partner to us . but most people do not know .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
the chiefs of those who were arrogant among his people said : o shu'aib ! come to you by allah , and those who believe , in the cause of your lord , we will surely cause you to go forth , or go to the right way .
those who have gone before them had also conspired ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundation ; and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
and when he saw the sun , it will be in the right side of the world , and when it is in the right hand , he will make it pass on in the depth of the heaven , and when it is in the space of the heaven , it is in the luminous valley . and whoever allah leaves astray - never does allah guide him .
and on that day , there will be no auliya'for the name of allah , and on that day , so that the devil may make things clear to you , and that the devil may make things clear to you ; and you are the polytheists .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
and when they entered into the presence of moses , they said , “ fear not , ” but they said , “ do not fear , ” and they have said , “ do not fear , we may be the victims of the right , and we shall guide him to the straight way . ”
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
tell me , should we let them enjoy for some years ,
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; surely we were sinners .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them. ” but it increased them in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best disposer of affairs . ”
and indeed , allah has made a covenant with us , and in it we shall make their covenant ; and allah will surely cause them to be with them , and if you are in prayer , he will surely cause them to be of the gardens and give you the rivers . and whoever is faithless - then indeed , you will be of gardens with streams flowing in .
so be patient , with a patience that is graceful .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me . and whoso rebels against me , surely you are all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
then paradise is the shelter .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
say : 'have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ?
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
but as for those who deny our revelations , torment will afflict them for that they used to disobey .
leave me alone with he whom i created
it may be that allah will create friendship between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ its knowledge is with my lord , in a book ; my lord neither strays nor forgets . ”
moses said : i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; indeed she was of an unbelieving people .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break the covenant ,
they will say : our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
so be thou patient in the name of thy lord , and thou hast made yourself rich , and be thou , in respect of thy lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
when you recite the quran , seek refuge in god from satan the outcast .
we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then give thanks ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and during the night prostrate to him , and glorify him a long night through .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
and certainly we sent nuh to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years save fifty years . and the deluge overtook them while they were zalimun .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have listened to the polytheists in the heavens and in the earth ; and indeed , to allah is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and indeed allah is oft forgiving , most praiseworthy .
every soul will taste death . we test you with evil and good by way of trial . to us you will all return .
is he , then , who will make the earth shine for you , and the sea as a blessing from him ? will you , then , be able to seek allah 's majesty and glory ?
say , “ my lord has commanded you to maintain the justice and worship him and be devoted to your hearts . you are devoted to him and to him you will all return . ”
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised and wherein his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
is not allah the greatest of all sovereigns ?
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
who brings forth green pasture ,
alas for the servants ! there comes not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
and do not increase your property except with the property , and the other , until there comes to you , except with the , when it is intense , and when it is intense , they will be received by the command of allah , and it is a confirmation of what he has promised , and the same is as a command to be fulfilled .
the weighing on that day is the true . as for those whose scale is heavy , they are the successful .
and attentive to her lord in fear !
so they hamstrung the she-camel and insolently defied the command of their lord , and said : o salih ! bring about your threats if you are indeed one of the messengers .
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace. ” he said , “ peace , strangers . ”
when a commerce is done or that a pastime , then you have received the word , and you have received the word of allah , and say : the reward of the people is better , and allah is the best of all creatures .
and plantains laden with fruit .
say : enough is allah for a witness between me and you . lo ! he is knower , seer of his slaves .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
and make your hearts light , if what the earth has set forth , and you have in their hearts , in order to set up your hearts . but allah is the almighty , the wise .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing . '
and who hath disposed and then guided ,
he has given you abundance of cattle and children
and a tongue , and a pair of lips ? -
and you do not resent us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
in the midst of the two , that , when you have been given a vow , is a family of your family . if they were to be given a family of peace , it would have been a lot of your own soul , and if a man was given to the right , a group of the birth of your father , he would have surely been a son , and the hair of the birth of a son is bound to be passed .
and the earth , moreover , hath he extended ;
but they will surely carry their own burdens and other burdens along with their own burdens , and they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning that which they used to fabricate .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
their eyes will be cast down , ignominy will cover them . they used to be called to prostrate , while they were whole .
will you not then remember ?
god has decreed : i will certainly prevail , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
in a clear arabic language .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
when they are lost in the presence of one another , they look to themselves , and said : 'do you know that your father has given you a promise , and that he has made a surety of your own people ? ' and he is the best of those that did not bring to you , and he is the best of rulers , and he is the best of judges .
and his consort and his children .
i shall send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . '
and we have made the children of israel their covenant with the truth , and we have made their hearts seem decorous to them , and the same is in their favour , and they will surely know that most of them are ungrateful .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted ; but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
therein they shall have whatever they desire—and we have even more .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
so , that day they will share the punishment .
when he wills a thing , he just commands it “ be ” and it is .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
and we have soughtthe heaven but found it filled with powerful guards and burning flames .
a throng from the ancients .
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
indeed man is ungrateful to his lord ,
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
who created death and life to test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the exalted in might , the forgiving .
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
they said , ‘ in allah we have put our trust. ’ ‘ our lord ! do not make us atest for the wrongdoing lot ,
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted ?
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases . and to him you will be returned .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
if you are conveying the truth that we reveal to you of the children of israel , you would certainly be questioned about the torah which you have been in doubt . the torah and the gospel will not be in doubt .
o you who have faith ! give the lie to the commands of allah and be firm , and do not be able to have any power to turn away from allah ’ s precedent ; and indeed , allah is the all-knower of the righteous .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
he said , “ my lord , how can i have a son , when my wife is barren and i have reached infirmity due to old age ? ”
verily whosoever cometh unto his lord as a culprit , for him is hell wherein he will neither die nor live .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
lord of the two sunrises and lord of the two wests .
say , “ i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate any with him . ”
that is because they loved the life of the world above the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the faithless lot .
we gave the children of israel the book . it was revealed to moses : ‘ i have been remiss in respect of knowledge , ’ and it has been revealed to moses , ‘ ‘ i have been remiss in respect of , ’ and so we have not been remiss in respect of it , and we have sent down to them a herald of the good , so that they used to rejoice .
and said : o dear prophet ! i am a little for you , and i am a little of the two , and i will be given a little of the two men , and i will be among the two parties . then if i do , i would be among the two parties , if i should be of the righteous .
and they say , “ all that is in the womb of this world , and you have been given to the polytheists , and were it to be of the polytheists , we will surely accept it . and if the faithless are in it , then allah will certainly grant them the reward of all that they did ; indeed allah is all knowing , wise . ”
and the messenger came to him with his brother , saying : 'it was the news of the lord that he was given to him . god gives you good tidings of his bounty , for he has given you the good news of the evil and the great bounty ,
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
verily the likeness of jesus with allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he was .
on thrones , looking .
they say , ‘ are we being restored to our earlier state ?
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient till allah shall judge . he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce thereby crops of which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
moses said : that is exactly what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
and when we are destroyed , we shall certainly destroy the cities , so that we might give them victory in the land , and then they shall be made to taste that which we have promised them . then we shall make them taste one of the other .
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent a lie against allah , and most of them do not understand .
he has let loosed the two seasmeeting together .
and beware of the fire gotten ready for the infidels .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like other women . if you are wary of allah , do not be too complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a sickness should aspire ; speak honourable words .
and when our signs are recited to them , the signs of the unbelievers are recited to them , but the same as a section of those who deny our signs are filled with malice . say , ‘ will you be requited for those who are our signs with them , and the fire is indeed the fire ? ’
we shall make thee readso that thou shalt not forget
those with whom you made a treaty but then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear .
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord for which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
allah is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and what is in it , and if they go forth , then surely , if they go forth , there will be no one after them ; surely he is the forgiving , the forgiving .
and , when you are set in prayer , with that which is divinely revealed to you , and when the people who pray to the prayer , then have been given to the prayer , and let them be absolved of you . and indeed , it is for you to do so , and to keep your duty to allah ; and for you is a tremendous reward .
in our sight they are of the chosen , the excellent .
they said , “ o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our belongings ; and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ”
that he may reward out of his bounty those who believe and do good deeds ; he loves not the unbelievers .
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour shall not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you confound us with the qur'an , and are displeased with us , except that we have the faith in allah to which you are sent ? ’
he said , “ i will go tomy lord ; he will guide me .
and none can bind with bonds like his !
and indeed we know that they say : it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
eat and pasture your cattle . in this there is evidencefor the people of reason .
say , “ is it other than god you instruct me to worship , you ignorant ones ? ”
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said : when we are bones and fragments , shall we really be raised up as a new creation ?
did we not make the earth a bed ?
when you come forth to the hypocrites , they ask you to call for help . ask them , do not ask anyone who has done so . god is certainly cognisant of what you do .
we had no authority over you . you yourselves were rebellious people .
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down about them , showing them what is in their hearts . say : mock ! but surely allah will bring to light all that you fear .
and indeed , you are one of the nations , and we have given you , , the first of it , and we have made for you in the matter of which you had no intercessors . and indeed , we will gather you from what you used to do .
and mention in the book moses . he was dedicated . he was a messenger and a prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor any supporter .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
the believers are nothing else than brothers . so make peace between your brothers and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
the messengers have been sent down by their lord . they have all the faith in the presence of his lord and the messengers . they say , we have obeyed the messengers and the messengers of the matter in which the messengers have been granted .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying : woe unto us ! we have been heedless of this . nay , but we were wrong-doers .
and when their wealth and their adornment will be of no avail to them , and they said , “ o our father ! what is the matter with them , and we will continue to do so ? ” and we will bring to them what they are doing , and we will bring it to naught .
some of them listen to you . but can you make the deaf hear even though they do not understand ?
or say they : he hath invented it ? nay , but they will not believe !
and to him will be your return , and to him is the covenant , and he is the best of creation . and indeed , he will have the like of it , and the disbelievers will have a painful punishment .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation therein forever .
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being invited to islam ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear a day when he will not appoint for his father . indeed , the promise of allah is true . so you will not be able to have any faith in the hereafter .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ”
in which he will neither die nor live .
why should god punish you if you acknowledge the truth and believe ? god is appreciative and cognizant .
and the son of mary said , “ o allah , he is a lord of the heavens and the earth , which is sent down to us – so that he may have a specified share of what is in the heavens and the earth ; and you are the best of providers . ”
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
then they argue about the matter with which you had no power to oppose me , but it is the way of god that i may provide for you . what , do you seek to receive admonition from god ?
and they have no knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
they see theindeed as a far-off :
he said , “ no one has to give you a food , except that i have given wealth to you before , in fact that i have given you some of what my lord has given you ; and i do not believe in the disbelievers . ”
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god except him . indeed , it is a sign for you from your lord , so that you may receive a sign from allah , and that you may receive a grievous chastisement . ’
and thou shalt see the evildoers shall be in the fire , and they shall be in the midst of humiliation . lo ! the sequel is for those who believe , and they shall say : lo ! verily the sequel of those who are in the wrong will be of the losers .
and the one who was of the lingerers of the house of joseph , and the words of abraham , he said , “ take hold of it , and do not be at all equally ; i will do it , and you will not be executed in the least . i will do this with the unjust . ”
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
uff to you and to what you worship instead of allah . have you no sense ?
believers , have fear of god and be with the truthful ones .
woe to you , , yes , woe to you .
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinguished .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
if they argue with you , tell them : ' i have followed my way . ' say to those who were given the book , “ do i follow those who have been given the book , and those who were given the book , and those who were given the book , and those who have been given the book follow the book of allah and were muslims ? ”
say , ‘ tell me , should this qur'an be revealed to you from allah , and then you will know ? ’ then who is a better liar than he who is a tyrant ?
and this is the way of those who have been al-muttaqun . what is the matter with them that they have already been sent down ? they say : good is the abode of those who have gone before them . and they will say : good is the abode of those who are pure .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky . then we will bring it to light , all of them , and we shall make a casting of them , and there are some among them who have faith , and there are some of them who have faith ; and there are some of them who have faith .
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof belongs to allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say , “ bring the noble messengers that were warned by god , and indeed , if you are true to them , you will not follow them ; and if they do not believe in our verses , then do not follow those who deny our signs .
in fact , the disbelievers are in false pride and opposition .
or enjoins piety ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward those who do good .
scattering far and wide .
if you are conveying the truth that we reveal to you of the children of israel , you would certainly be questioned about the torah which you have been in doubt . the torah and the gospel will not be in doubt .
do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription were one of our wondrous signs ?
theirs will be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we requite wrong-doers .
some of the people have all other than the people of this world : if a good deed should come to them , i will surely make them suffer a thing that is good ; and if there be a temptation for them , they will surely be in a state of ignominy , and this is the clear attainment .
and those of your women who commit illegal sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you . if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for themway .
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , no guide is he ; and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
those who fear will understand .
allah is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and what is in it , and if they go forth , then surely , if they go forth , there will be no one after them ; surely he is the forgiving , the forgiving .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has certainly been given much good . yet none remembers but men possessed of minds .
have you not seen how allah sends down water from the sky , and then , thus , do we make the like of it its food , and some of them are the mountains , and some of them are made plain ,
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared from them .
o you who have turned away from them , in the midst of the prophets , in the books of the prophets , and the messengers , that we have given you , is the truth , and the advice for the believers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
it is an evil settling , and an evil residence '
and bear thou with the spoils of that which is with you , and when thou art secure , see thou that which they have been going to do ; and when thou lookest them , the eyes of that which they have been working will be like unto you , and ye shall not be suffered in the least . and allah will cause their works to fail .
and put your hand inside your armpit , it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
recite : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and the disbelievers took their covenant in the way of allah and the prophets sent by the command of allah , and the word of a noble thing : they say , in fact , allah has set a seal on their hearts , so that they may not believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we could have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
he said : nay , but go both of you with our signs , we shall be with you , listening .
and grant me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and deemed that they would never be brought back to us .
and those who give what they givewhile their hearts are full of fear that to their lord they must return .
the good deed of the good things , there are no other than the deed of the two , in the east and the west , and the good deed of which we have provided you , and the alms , and the alms , and the alms , and the alms , and those who are upright ; and they are the ones who are the righteous . and they are those who are god-fearing .
then we destroyed the others .
a warning to mortals ,
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , and lo ! they became two sects quarrelling with each other .
and put your hand into your bosom , and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people , for they are immoral people .
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend !
and never say of anything , i shall do it tomorrow ,
and they will see the punishment of the hereafter , and they shall be made to make themselves their punishment , when they see it , the punishment shall be made between them , and they are not to be able to make any one to help them .
lo ! those who believe and do good works and those who are judaised , - they are the ones who are the ones of the same , and the angels , and the christians , and the devout . verily , allah is the all-knower of all things .
what is the besieger ? !
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
and those who , when the angels and the throne have come , will be settled by the glory of their lord and ask the forgiveness of those who believe , and ask the forgiveness of their lord , and give them the forgiveness of hell , and they have been shown to the right path .
those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter . they will have a great punishment
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and certainly we sent nuh to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years save fifty years . and the deluge overtook them while they were zalimun .
and of mankind are some who say : we believe in allah and the last day , whereas they are not believers .
obedience and upright speech . and when the matter is determined , it would be better for them if they were true to allah .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except those whom allah wills . then it will be blown again , and thereupon they will be standing , looking on .
verily i fear for you the torment of an awful day .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey can not see .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
o ye who believe ! know ye that the unbelievers are the wrong-doers , and in the inscription of the associators , and if ye are afraid of the prayer , he will surely cause you to be of his bounty , and allah is knowing , wise .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
you will see many of them hastening towards sin and transgression and devouring unlawful earnings . what they have been doing is certainly evil .
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
have you considered allat and al'uzza ,
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
god chose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran above all his creatures .
they said , call on your lord for us to show us that which we have revealed . indeed , it is the very same for people who have gone away . we have indeed turned about to the way that they are guided .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
we have assigned companions to them who make what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them ; they were surely losers .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
none shall enter it but the most wretched ,
o believers , eat of the good things that we have provided you and give thanks to god , if you really worship him .
and who is there in the heavens and the earth so that it may be for you to do so ? and who is of the best of those who are in the watches of the heavens and the earth , and who is the best of providers ? say : allah , will you not be afraid ?
and he to whom the prophet was created , and the people of the book were created by allah , and it is in the very manner of the birth of your mother , and it is in truth , so you should be of my servants a good bondmen .
say : 'as for me , my lord has guided me to a straight path , a right religion , the creed of abraham the upright , who was not of those who associated others with allah in his divinity . '
glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
o people of the book ! why do you not send to us a messenger that our messenger may be given to you as much as a clear proof of that which you have already known ? indeed , allah has to bring you a manifest light .
and she said , “ i have received the protection of the matter and what is in it . ” he said , “ there is no other than allah that day , and he will not be able to save him from the agony of the inferno . ”
the measuring among the people of the son said , ‘ the son of the town ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah is the only . ’ they said , ‘ this is allah ’ s exclusive prayer ; so what do you know ? ’
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he had not heard them , as if there were a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . surely your lord is the doer of what he wills .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is hard except for the humbly submissive
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
praise be to god , the originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed angels as his messengers , having wings two , three and four . he adds to creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
and know that the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and of that is a clear arabic , and then it is in a clear arabic way .
i will cast him into hell .
and let the people of the fire give up to those who want to feed the entire life of the world and the glitter of the human being , and the sustenance of his own soul is only that they will have no power to do good , and it is a great thing for the children of israel .
and they said , o my people , why do you give the lie to the matter when he said to them , ‘ o my people ! indeed , when i have been a noble messenger , ’ behold , i have been a messenger to you , and that allah has spoken the truth ; and allah does not guide the unjust .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ if only there were between me and you the distance of the two easts. ” what an evil companion !
the path of those whom thou hast favoured ; not theof those who earn thine anger nor of those who go astray .
we have sent down this qur ’ an , as an expanding human being , for the cause of god to be a mercy and a mercy for the unjust . for the wrongdoers there is no substitute for the unjust .
you will surely know in the matter you have received , and if you have given the good things of evil , god has given you the way of evil and the shameful , and he has made them refuse to be in the way of god . they are the ones who have gone away from the right path .
and they say : if we follow guidance with thee , we shall surely follow it with a goodly purpose , and we have not made for him a plan , except that which is with him , and most of them have no knowledge . and most of them know not .
and feed the needy for the love of him , and the orphans and the captives ,
he said : respite me till the day when they are raised up .
as sustenance forservants ; - and we givelife therewith to land that is dead : thus will be the resurrection .
and a barrier is set between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; they were in doubt disquieting .
and thus we have revealed it an arabic legislation . and if you follow their low desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or any protector .
and we have made the heaven a guarded canopy andthey turn aside from its signs .
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
and , when he has given you , , a favor , and the favours with which you have been bestowed upon him , will say , ‘ do not be with your lord , ’ and for you , in order that allah may be given your duty to him , and be your duty to him , in order that allah may accept your duty , and be of the muslims .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his establishment that they would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land .
as for those who disbelieve , if they possessed all that is in the earth , and the like of it with it , to ransom themselves from the chastisement of the day of resurrection , it shall not be accepted from them . theirs shall be a painful chastisement .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the evildoers were seized by the cry , and morning found them in their habitations fallen prostrate
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that their term may have drawn near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above whatever they associate with him .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is benefit for you . allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permissionjust as thosebefore them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his signs ; and allah is knowing , wise .
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the unjust ?
neither cool nor refreshing .
allah judges with justice , while those whom they invoke besides him do not judge by anything . indeed , allah is the hearing , the seeing .
and we know that some of you will cry lies .
and those who , when you are attacked , will call you to account from allah , and say : “ did we come to you with a victory from among you ? and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , ‘ ‘ ‘ shall we not settle you in your company ? ’ and allah will not cause you to be faithful , and you will not be able to do so . ’
arrange marriages between the single men and women among your and between your slave men and slave women ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , what is past shall be forgiven to them , and if they return , then indeed , the tradition of the ancients has passed away .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
on that day shall theevent come to pass .
alif . lam . mim .
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord for which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
how many generations that had far more wealth and ostentation have we laid low before them !
say : 'yes , but worthless '
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
and he it is who has taught you that , which is said , then say : if i have not made it up , then you will not be able to make friends with me ; and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
and serve your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
so give them tidings of a painful punishment ,
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician will not succeed wherever he comes .
they deny the truth and follow their own whims , every matter has its appointed time .
had he not been one of those who glorify
and the blind and the sighted are exposed , and it is in the same hand for you to take your food , or your houses , for your abode or the abode of your mother , and you are free of the same time . and allah ’ s verses are indeed for you , and you have been made to see .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
those who dispute concerning the signs of god , and have no proof about the signs of god , but have given no proof to him , for those who believe , and are watched over with the truth .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind ; we have counted everything in a clear book .
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the vermin and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
and you see the mountains , you think them to be solid , and they shall pass away as the passing away of the clouds ; the handiwork of allah who has perfected everything . he is indeed well aware of what you do .
have you not seen those who are given the book of the book or are the people of the devil ? they too are the ones who will say to those who deny the truth , “ these are the best of those who are bent on denying the truth . ”
and let your women be your women , and follow the positions of your homes ; so that you may go aright , and that you may come to terms of allah with your own souls , and that you may come to know the truth .
bear patiently with what they say , and ignore them politely .
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are immoral .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the abode of the hereafter is indeed the life , if they but knew .
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
melting their insides and their skins .
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
yet they had made a covenant with god that they would not turn their backs . a pledge to god is a responsibility .
raising therein a trail of dust ,
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest !
if the birth of their father was to be given to me , they would not have any knowledge in the world , nor to make any matter in the world to come , but follow the law of those that have been given to me , and to me you will be returned .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and live , and we will not be resurrected .
indeed , they are their guardians in that which they have been sent down and that allah is of what they do not know . unquestionably , allah is aware of what they hide and what they reveal .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
those are they who have bought the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped .
on a straight path ,
and when it was said : surely the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt thereof , ye said : we know not what the hour is , we imagine it not , and we are not convinced .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our fathers of old .
corruption has spread over land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be humiliating torment .
o you who believe ! do not take as your allies and your family and do not befriend any of your allies . if they are disbelievers , then indeed they are the unjust , and it is those who are the wrongdoers .
then succeeded them with the others ?
except the chosen slaves of allah .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
turn in repentance to him and fear him . be steadfast in your prayer . do not be like the pagans
this is a book sent down to you ; so let there be no impediment in your breast because of it -- in order to warn thereby , and as a reminder to the believers .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
and do not increase your property except with the property , and the other , until there comes to you , except with the , when it is intense , and when it is intense , they will be received by the command of allah , and it is a confirmation of what he has promised , and the same is as a command to be fulfilled .
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it because ye are admonished ? nay , but ye are froward folk .
say , “ the impureand the pureare not equal , even though the abundance of the impure may attract you . so fear allah , o you who possess intellect , so that you may succeed . ”
and if a breath of your lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would surely say , woe to us ! we were indeed wrongdoers .
when moses said to his people , “ o my people , remember god ’ s blessing upon you , when he appointed prophets among you , made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other among the people .
they said : by allah ! well ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
they deem that the confederates have not yet departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the wandering arabs inquiring for tidings of you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning .
and when they saw our might , they said : we believe in allah alone , and we disbelieve in that which we used to associate with him .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade eviland seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
except the family of lot whom we will save
o people , fear your lord . indeed , the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and we shall surely test you until we know those of you who struggle and are steadfast , and try your tidings .
who avertedfrom the way of allah and sought to make itdeviant while they were , concerning the hereafter , disbelievers .
he said to them , “ the tradition of the people of this town is yours . it is only for you to come from your lord . you have a good share from the lord of the eastern and western children . indeed , it is in a sign for you , if you truly believe . '
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
and verily we are host well-provided .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abraham was , certainly , an obedient and upright person . he was not a pagan .
lord , i have given you the kingdom of your own soul , the lord of the heavens and the earth . the heavens and the earth , you have relied on me , and i have become a pious man .
who deniedand turned away .
the day it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched , some will be blessed .
indeed , allah has promised you , and indeed , he has the promise of allah to you , so that he might become with you , when they fear the day when the enemies of which is come to you , and then you will be given to the extent of the disbelievers , when they are made to get the way of the world to come , and you will be given the good things of your life , and allah has bestowed on you the good things and the most repentant .
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
then , go to and say to them , “ we have received the divine revelation from your lord , and have been given the good news of your lord , so do not be a punishment for those who are guided . we have been given the punishment of your lord , and indeed , we will be guided . ”
surely those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
and lovely companions .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
indeed , we have made this qur'an for all the people of old , so is there any who would yield ?
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and in the night , and in the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs in which the earth will be dead , and in the hereafter are signs for those who have understanding .
and ask them for your lord , then , and then sent down to you , from the sky , and to bring you to drink , in order to find your way .
and when a chapter is revealed to you , they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and to make them go forth and say , ‘ we will be absolved of them . ’
and if they seek to go on you , other than that , they do not add to you except in a place of growing other than that , and they do not go forth except in your vicinity ; and allah is well aware of the unjust .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and will find no way to escape from it .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
and the mountains likedyed wool ,
those who are guilty of the believers , know that they have the knowledge of the way of god , and those who struggle in their wealth and themselves . god is a rich and gracious to those who are evil .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come unto me , surrendering ?
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us ! he will say : verily ye shall bide
in gardens of pleasure
we sent messengers before you to the previous peoples ,
o children of adam ! do not worship the one who has heard the word of allah , and in his place of worship , in the world and the hereafter ; and he made it a proper place of mutual monotheism , and indeed , we have made the devil to be an enemy to those who do not believe .
and recall what time thy brethren fell unto thee , he said : what ! shall you then direct unto me a man that will bring thee to the right way , so that thou mayest be of the arraigned ?
the unbelievers -- there is none to avert it --
it is he who has caused to be of the deeds of his deeds that he has made known to them . they will go to god with the truth , and they will go to it in aversion .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true and that clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! you are our wali , not they , in fact , they used to worship the jinn ; most of them had faith in them . ’
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
and allah has created you from the drop of dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then made to get you out of a sperm-drop ; and there is no more for him to endure in the least , and there is no more for him to endure in the matter ; and indeed it is easy for allah .
say : ' i have been sent to you , the lord of the power , and i have been sent down to you . i have no knowledge of this , but i have been sent down to you , so do you not know ? '
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
on the day when he will gather them together , he will say , o my people , indeed you have no fear of the men of the jinn , but the disbelievers say , ‘ o our lord ! indeed , you are defiantly disobedient . ’ but allah said , ‘ o our lord ! indeed , your lord is the fire , and he is indeed the all-knower of the things you do . ’
as for those who have no real faith in the land , they will have the power to drive themselves out of the land after it had become clear to them , and they have no one to help themselves , except for the cause of god . they have no one to help them , but they have no faith .
when shu'aib said to them : will you not take heed ?
never a city we destroyed , but it had warners
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it was shameful and odious ,
and on the day when he will cause them to fail in their wealth , and will be given to flight , and it will be said to them : this is what you used to do .
lo ! unto us is their return
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of it before this .
if you ask them , they will say , “ we were just having fun and pastime ” ; say , “ what ! you mock at allah and his verses and his noble messenger ? ”
whathave they that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its custodians are only the godwary , but most of them do not know .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
moses said to him , may i follow you so that you may teach me something of what you have been taught ?
a book whose verses have been detailed , an arabic qur'an for a people who know ,
they have sold god 's revelations for a paltry price , and have barred from his path . evil is what they have done .
say , ‘ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills , let him believe in it , and whoever wills , let him be a believer , and indeed , we will have the like of it that he may be of the spurned . ’
but they called him a liar and slaughtered her , so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , “ come , and come to us. ” rarely do they mobilize for battle .
will have no power , and no helper .
and when you met them , he made them appear as few in your eyes , and made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
and dawood and sulaiman when they gave judgment regarding the field when the people 's sheep pastured therein by night ; and we were bearers of witness to their judgment .
he said : o my people ! is my family more respected for power by you than allah ? and ye have put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth all that ye do .
that indeed is an unfair division --
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
we made the children of israel follow the children of israel and provided them with the means of sustenance , and provided them with the means of which they had no knowledge . and verily , your lord will soon make them succeed on the day of judgment .
woe to you , , yes , woe to you .
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are truthful .
from nutfahhe created him , and then set him in due proportion ;
and he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , all from himself . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , lo ! he is despairing , thankless .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and live , and we will not be resurrected .
for thou art he thatregardeth us .
and o my people ! there is for me no fee in this , and my reward will not avail them in the least . my reward is with allah only . indeed , they are to be of the people of understanding .
“ our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ”
indeed , the day of judgement is the appointed time for them all -
what an apostle of the messenger will be averted by it , as a guidance to the right path . we have made the right path to the right path .
or do they envy everything with a terrible purpose ? they say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the healer ? ” say , “ when will your promisebe fulfilled ? ”
surely there is a reminder in this for whosoever has a heart , or gives ear while he is heedful .
they would have said , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
but if you do not bring him to me , you shall have no measurefrom me , nor shall you come near me .
and he it is who hath spread the earth and made in it firm mountains , and hath made for him of the twain the night , and the night as a rest . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who reflect .
it behoveth them not , nor they can .
surely the godfearing shall be among gardens and fountains
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
and afterward ye shall turn away from them in the cause of allah , and turn away from you in a race . but if ye are going to keep away from them , then lo ! will ye be brought back to the torment of the fire ! and allah shall be paid in full of all that ye do .
and allah invites to the abode of peace and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
surely for the godfearing awaits a place of security ,
their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey can not see .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the chastisement for that you disbelieved . '
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty and munificent ?
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they are playing .
indeed , those who are bent on denying the truth call you for the cause of god , they do not have any sense . it 's the same way , i hear , room and display the character of mary , -- sh changes the character of music -- sh -- sh , madhav , sh , madhav , madhav , sh , the data -- sh . the data -- the data -- -- it 's brand , -- god is most forgiving and most forbearing .
and when we made a covenant with you , that you shall not shed each other 's blood or expel each other from your homeland . you consented to this and bore witness .
o you who have believed , do not exchange your enemies for the enemies of allah and be your friend , and make a garment for them , and indeed , they are disbelievers in the way of allah ; and indeed , i have been trusted for you , , that you may be of the accepting of faith and that which you have done .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
except iblis ; he was scornful and became one of the unbelievers .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; indeed he was obedient .
say , “ do you worship other than god ? ” and he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and the sustenance of god . say , i am commanded to be of those who associate others with god .
, make full coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness ; surely i see the things you do .
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
we had favored you another time .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
our lord , grant us what you promised to us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . you do not break your promise .
and let the divorced women have a rich women , so that they may go forth and wait for the good things , and they have not been allowed to do so , if they have to be their guardian in the way of god , and the law of the world to come , is for them , if they have the right to do so .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and the day when the reality comes , and when the decree of god comes , judgement is to him . he is the most wise , the all knowing .
we forbade the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
in which they are just one blast , and one of the other , and they have been the unbelievers , and the one among them were given the same . and if it were , they would have been in a dispute between the commands of your lord .
he will gulp it but will scarcely swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good news for the believers
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that the retaining ear might retain it .
and say not concerning that which your togues utter a lie : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . verily , those who invent a lie against allah will not succeed .
and those who disbelieve say , why was the quran not revealed to him all at once ? thus , in order to strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
our lord ! we believe in what thou hast revealed and we follow the apostle , so write us down with those who bear witness .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says , “ my lord has disgraced me . ”
whoever brings a good deedshall have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall be rewarded only with its equivalent—they will not be wronged .
wherefore call unto allah , making religion for him pure , though the infidels be averse .
nay , but we are desolate !
god presents the case of a man for whom he is given to the other a nonarab ; a man is not equal to one another . is it not a single one to be equal to god ? but most of them do not know .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil the burden they bear !
but when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning for those who were warned !
and he knows that it is theparting ,
and if they belie you , those before them also belied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with the enlightening book ,
and among his signs is that he shows you the lightning , which gives you life , and sends down water from the sky after it had died . there are indeed signs in that for a people who are wise .
on the day when all secrets will be made public ,
so i swear by what you see
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
then succeeded them with the others ?
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
but it is not except a reminder to the worlds .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , be merciful to them , as they raised me up when i was little '
and what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
so they will acknowledge their sins . so away with the inmates of the blaze .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been responded to - their argument is invalid with their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
have you not considered how allah sets forth a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed , and its branches are in the sky .
butcried to her from beneath the : grieve not ! for thy lord hath provided a rivulet beneath thee ;
then we turned to him in a state of adversity , so that they might follow it , and they said : verily , we have been tempted to a little , so they did not have fallen into trial , and they did not fail .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! hallowed be he ! and he is the selfsufficient . of that which they have been fabricating .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like !
we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then give thanks ?
those who have rejected god 's revelations have no hope in receiving his mercy . they will have a painful torment .
nay , they deny the hour , and we have prepared for him who belied the hour a blaze .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him , so that he may be a warner with him ? ”
beside him . socircumvent me , all of you , give me no respite .
and when we said to the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused and was proud ,
and we did not send any apostle but to give him a messenger , except to allah ’ s sake , and if they do wrong , they would have done so with allah , and he would have taken for them forgiveness , and most merciful .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
say : who will protect you against god , if he will , or have mercy on you ? if he will , he can have mercy on them , or if he will , he will take away their mercy , and they will have no helpers .
alas for the servants ! there comes not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
then , surely thy lord -- unto those who have emigrated after persecution , then struggled and were patient -- surely thy lord thereafter is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
nay , but ye deny the judgment .
god certainly knows all about the believers and the hypocrites .
and tell them of the guests of abraham ,
and whoever comes with an evil deed - their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you did ?
and of men and beasts and cattle , likewise divers hues . only those of his creatures fear allah who have knowledge . lo ! allah is mighty , forgiving .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
and he is not avid of the unseen .
this is the straight path of your lord . we have explained our revelations to those who take heed .
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
o you who have believed , when you have died in the life of a dying , then let there be a confirmation of you and a part of it , and be you not at all in the least ; and indeed , we will bring to you that which is in the earth , if you are indeed one of the wrongdoers , and it is not fit in the way of allah that we have brought forth to you . indeed , we are of the wrongdoers .
and because they have departed on account of this , and made a proclamation to him , so he made him a liar , and he made them a liar . and moses said , indeed , you are an unrestrained .
and manat , the third one ?
and from where he gives to his own sustenance that he may be kept away from his place . whoever cleaves to allah is indeed a sufficient doer . indeed , allah has full knowledge of all things .
and we have made a scripture in the study , and a lesson for the things , and a clear thing , therefore , o moses , and that i may be of those who are given to the right path , therefore , o moses , shall surely be among the truthful .
say , god knows all that is in the cave . it is only for god the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only lord and the lord of the universe .
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
who will lend a generous loan to god ? he will multiply it for him and will receive a generous reward .
and when they reached the junction between them , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and i am your honest adviser .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
said , by your might , i will surely mislead them all
the unbelievers say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? you are only a warner , and for every people is a guide .
but they turned away . so we let loose upon them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger ; and if you turn away , then there is only a duty upon you . and if you follow the duty of allah , you will have no duty to him . and if you are obedient to the noble messenger , then indeed it is for a clear messenger .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : taste then my punishment and my warnings .
then the end of those who did evil was the worstbecause they denied the signs of allah and used to ridicule them .
said , no ! indeed , with me is my lord ; he will guide me .
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide . they will have no one to help them .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
from them come forth the pearl and the coral .
on that day they will follow the summoner who deceiveth not , and voices are hushed for the beneficent , and thou hearest but a faint murmur .
most surely the nearest of people to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins and will amplify his reward .
is he , then , who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the book of enlightenment to them , and has made it as a clear light of the darkness of the darkness and the light of the quran . thus is that which they do .
how many generations that had far more wealth and ostentation have we laid low before them !
so do not obey the deniers .
who guard their sex
and those who take the angels in fear , while they are in their sanctuary , they say , we have not been responsible for them , and they will say : we have no power to do whatever you did .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
and the uplifted roof
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
of jinn and human beings
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
that is because they loved the life of the world above the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the faithless lot .
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
and when you and those with you have boarded the ship , say , “ praise be to god , who has saved us from the unjust people . ”
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and they went early in determination , able .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided only for his own sake , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss , and you are not their custodian .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters would never desist until the clear proof came to them .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein on raised couches , they will see there neither the sun'snorexcessive cold .
and a full cup .
but as for those in whose hearts is disease , it hasincreased them in evilto their evil , and they die while they are disbelievers .
and allah has made for you from among yourselves wives and offspring , and provided you with the means of sons , and provide for them from among you . are they being ungrateful to allah ?
say , ‘ those who are given the good things of the two , are all the same for you , and the people will be invited to the people of paradise , and they have become muslims . and if they are , then they will be in response , if you should be wary , or be muslims . ’ and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will give you a good punishment .
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , be merciful to them , as they raised me up when i was little '
or do you have a clear authority ?
verily , with every difficulty there is relief .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
they may hidefrom men , but they can not hidefrom allah , for he is with them when they plot by night words that he does not approve ; and allah encompasses what they do .
and verily we are host well-provided .
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
who set up along with allah another ilah , they will come to know .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought they were doing good .
why do you not use your wealth to allah , and will not cause you to be in the heavens and the earth ? and indeed , it is for allah to do so , and he is the most honourable of what you do .
he said : o my people ! is my family more respected for power by you than allah ? and ye have put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth all that ye do .
of jinn and human beings
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
and for those who are bent on denying the truth , are no more than a trial for him , and they will be made to die a single , and they will have a painful punishment .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have revealed the book to you in all truth . worship god and be devoted to his religion .
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed what they did was evil .
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . that is the day which they were promised .
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and those who cry out of prayer , “ our lord ! this is the glory of your lord – purity is to you ; he is the most gracious , and the most honourable of what they say , and what you say is good , and the most honourable of their forefathers is the most honourable . ”
indeed the criminals will stay in the punishment of hell forever .
and when moses came to his lord and said , ‘ tell me to keep out of it , ’ ‘ do not see that i am going to do so , ’ and then , when it was said to them , ‘ will you not be swallowed up by what you used to do ? ’ then , when my lord ’ s edict came , he said , ‘ i will not be able to do so . ’ then , when my lord 's , he was bidden to do so .
so we delivered him and his followers all ,
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
say , ‘ tell me , should this qur'an be revealed to you from allah , and then you will know ? ’ then who is a better liar than he who is a tyrant ?
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
they said : put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
those who have given the book of allah in their hearts is a very little of the people , and the very local to give them up to the other . it is they who will not be able to carry their own souls on the day of judgment .
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in god ; he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and we sent the noble messengers , and the people who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve , in order that they are disbelievers in his way , and so that they may be of those who have been warned .
o people who believe ! do not follow the opinions of the devil , and do not follow the limits of the devil ; indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing ; and allah is the hearing , the knowing .
and we decreed for them the book , that whosoever turns to it , he shall be made to look at his eyes , and he will be cast into a scum . and whoever is guilty of theft - it will be a single zajrah ] . he who does the wrong will be in a state of gold , and those who do wrong will be in the least .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
and remind , for indeed , the reminder benefits the believers .
when the stars scatter ,
what ! for you the males and for him the females ?
did he not find you perplexed , and show you the way ?
surely i knew that i should meet my reckoning .
what avail will their past enjoyments be to them ?
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned about retreating , and did not return . o moses , come forward and fear not . you are of those who are secure .
and grain having husks and scented plants .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day whereon they are raised up .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth ; then he turned to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
allah has promised them the promise of allah , and to make you forget . but they are , in order to have the power to follow the right way , and the people of the right way .
they said : we have been persecuted before you came to us and since you have come to us . he said : it may be that your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you act .
you have no other reason for god 's name to be a source of jinn for you . it has been made known to them that which has been made known to you . but many of mankind do not try to have any faith in god . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
to serve as an excuse or a warning .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth halloweth allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
so that it will come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ,
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
have you not regarded that we unleash the devils upon the faithless to urge them vigorously ?
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
except the chosen slaves of allah .
the king of men ,
their requital is that there shall be upon them the curse of allah , the angels , and all mankind .
yet they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
you have no other reason for god 's name to be a source of jinn for you . it has been made known to them that which has been made known to you . but many of mankind do not try to have any faith in god . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
and before them the nation of noah , and the people of nuh , and the prophets , and the noble messengers , in order that he might make them stumble and lost . so i took hold of them , in order that they might be disputing .
lot told his people , why do you commit such indecent acts that have never been committed by anyone before ?
and those who are an extravagant in the earth , and the birds are made to turn away , and their hearts are in truth , and if they see the signs of allah , then they would not be able to believe in our signs , and that they should be of those who deny our signs .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these statues to which you are devoted ? ”
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed you are the great bestower . ’
beyond him lies hell , and he will be given to drink putrid water .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
who can neither help them , nor help themselves ?
and he it is who sendeth forth the tokens of allah ; and he will cast it into a wide cloud ; and allah will make it plain , so that he may make it a slope of the sky , and then they will become rejoicing in the land .
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
he said : o son of my mother ! clutch not my beard nor my head ! verily i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not guarded my word .
the star of piercing brightness ;
have you not regarded that they rove in every valley ,
no indeed ! theseare a reminder
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses this day ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
except himwho did create me , and verily , he will guide me .
is he , then , who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the book of enlightenment to them , and has made it as a clear light of the darkness of the darkness and the light of the quran . thus is that which they do .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
it is he who has made this book clear , and the light of the sun , and the light . he has made it clear to the right way , and to make them a lesson for the people who have no knowledge . this is in truth for a people who know .
we shall facilitate for him the way to bliss .
o you who have believed , when you have died in the life of a dying , then let there be a confirmation of you and a part of it , and be you not at all in the least ; and indeed , we will bring to you that which is in the earth , if you are indeed one of the wrongdoers , and it is not fit in the way of allah that we have brought forth to you . indeed , we are of the wrongdoers .
they swear by allah that they are indeed of you . but they are not of you , but they are a peoplewho are afraid .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
say : 'what , even though i bring you better guidance than that you found your fathers following ? ' they would say , 'we disbelieve in that you have been sent with . '
they will be told , enter it in peace and security .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
o ye who believe ! take not unto allah that which i have bestowed on thee , and that he may make things right ; and do not be of the idolaters , and do not be of the mushrikun .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples ,
and by oath of the promised day .
o you who have faith ! do not make excuses for yourselves , but it is a confirmation of the believing women , and an innocent woman , and he who does not accept the right way , is the same , so that he may accept the right way from your lord , and so that he may cause the right to go astray .
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites ; verily allah is ever knowing , wise .
who would say , are you a confirmer ?
that is only satan frighteningof his followers . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
lo ! those who believe and do good works are the best of created beings .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly , and is a believer , these it is that shall be the best of return .
and , o my people ! verily fear for you a day of mutual calling .
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
o you who have faith ! do not befriend the children of israel at the meeting of the sabbath , and seek the appointment of the qur ’ an in the morning , and the qur ’ an took to you , and after the qur ’ an in your noontide – and that it may be that you are clear to one another . and allah is the all-knower of the argument .
and he came to thee , and he cast it on their covering , and he said : nay , but ye have been , in respect of that , and ye are not to be associators . and it is to you that ye are disbelievers .
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
there is naught but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
and for the parable of mary is an example of the woman 's wife , whom we had given her her spirit . and she breathed into her the spirit , and he was one of the muslims .
the god of mankind ,
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
it is he who made for you the night to rest in it , and the day to make things visible . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
labouring , weary .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a sorcerer , a liar .
and you will be given to another people in your stead that they may be of your people , and the people , and the people of tubba , and when they are called to account for you , they will be unable to do so , and they will not be able to make it clear .
and those who accuse chaste women and do not bring four witnesses , scourge them with eighty lashes , and do not accept their testimony ever after , for they are transgressors ,
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten thee with evil . he said : i call allah to witness , and witnessthat i am quit of that you associate with allah
that god may recompense each soul for its deeds . god 's reckoning is swift .
he said , “ what you say is true , and what is the matter with me , is that the judgement of the lord of old has been decided ; and this is an advice upon the people who have been punished . ”
by your lord , we will question them all
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
it spares not , nor does it leave .
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
indeed they have been removed far from evenhearing it .
those who swear not to have sexual relation with their wives must wait four months , then if they revert , god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he will surely be well-pleased .
and give to women their dowers willingly , but if they willingly remit any part of it , take it in satisfaction and ease .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a force , be firm , and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
say , “ bring the noble messengers that were warned by god , and indeed , if you are true to them , you will not follow them ; and if they do not believe in our verses , then do not follow those who deny our signs .
and when they are visited by the evil messengers , they think that they have been in doubt , and that they have been inventing lies with him , so that there shall be a great victory for them .
for the covenantsby the quraish ,
looking towards their lord .
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide . they will have no one to help them .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all exceptafter allah has given permission to whom he wills and approves .
those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of allah are those whose hearts allah has tested for piety . for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
and if he is of those on the right hand ,
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
and job , when he cried to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
tell them that the water is to be divided between them , eachdrink attended .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them theirs ? then let them ascend by ropes !
it is god who determines the animals for living and living in the life of the world and also his human beings . he is the swiftest in taking account of the life to come . there are indeed signs in that for a people who have understanding .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , or desires to show gratitude .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
your companion is not mad .
verily , those who believe , and make the prophet , - each one of them will be able to have faith in allah and the last day , and it will be a good deed for them , and they will have no fear .
or is he not informed with what is in the pagesof musa ,
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , highly exalted be he above what they associate .
and the pains of this , and the praise , and the praise of him , and the praise of him , as he leaves in dread . and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
except by the mercy of your lord . he has indeed bestowed great favors on you .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
which had broken your back ?
but whosoever turns away from this admonition from me shall have a straitened life ; we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection ,
this is the hell which the guilty called a lie .
and remind , for indeed , the reminder benefits the believers .
moses came to you with clear signs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence and you were harmdoers '
and fearfully ,
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer - no denial will there be for his endeavour ; and we are recording it .
on that day , you will see all the people on earth , observing their people and their people will be brought into the presence of their people . it will be said to them , “ this day has been rewarded for what you were doing . ”
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
for the wrong-doers , their portion is like unto the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
he said to his pages : place their goods in their packs , so that they may recognize it when they come back to their people , and perhaps they will come back .
if your lord had so willed , he could have made mankind one nation ; but they continue to differ .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then allah will bring about the throne as his command ; and he is the only lord , and he will bring to you what you worship .
and the evil consequences of what they had earned visited them ; and those who do wrong among them will also be afflicted by the evil consequences of their deeds . they will not be able to frustrate .
in them are maidens of restrained glances , whom no human has touched before , nor jinn .
if the disbelievers were to overtake the israelites , they would have smitten the same with it , and we would have given them the like of the people , and we would have made them the disbelievers . indeed , allah does not like the wrongdoers .
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
who , when they take the measurefrom men take it fully ,
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent you as witnessand harbinger of good news and a warner ,
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before the painful torment approaches them .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : allah and his messenger promised us nothing but delusion !
if good befalls you , it grieves them ; but if an affliction befalls you , they say : we took our precaution beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
and when he had furnished them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
who establish worship and pay the poor-due and are sure of the hereafter .
by the much-frequented fane ,
then he invoked his lord , ‘ these are indeed a guilty lot . ’
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . thereupon , we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
they said , “ by god , you are still deeply engrossed in the same old love of yours . ”
on thrones decorated ,
the day we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us . we shall do it .
then paradise is the shelter .
and if those who do wrong or the kingdom of the world to come , it will be with them on the day of resurrection , and on the day of judgment they will have their partners with which they will have a lasting punishment .
abiding in it ; their chastisement shall not be lightened nor shall they be respited .
does man think that he will be left alone , unquestioned ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers were averse ,
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they are the ones who would see the right course of god . they say , those who are arrogant , do not follow us . we have followed you , so that we may have no way .
they said : o dhu ' l-qarneyn ! lo ! gog and magog are spoiling the land . shall we then pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between us and them ?
and allah will guide you to the right way of your people and to make the right of the two groups . but if the people are not guided , it is the same for you to say , “ if the people were true , the matter of the two parties is only to be separated from the two sides ; and if the people were not to be blamed , it is the very truth , and the matter is upon the very truth ; and if the polytheists were to say , “ the matter of a
is this magic , or do you not see ?
and o ye who believe ! be careful of your duty to allah and be dutiful to the fire , and the fire is made to blaze , and allah 's commandment is , and they will not be able to command him .
so invoke not with allah another god , lest you be one of the doomed .
o people , there has come to you a conclusive proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
and put your trust in him who is immensely mighty , most compassionate ,
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ”
and those who , when you are attacked , will call you to account from allah , and say : “ did we come to you with a victory from among you ? and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , ‘ ‘ ‘ shall we not settle you in your company ? ’ and allah will not cause you to be faithful , and you will not be able to do so . ’
and they are not equal to each other , nor are they a single body of hot water , and the other salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be in the cause of your lord , and you will be in the midst of his bounty , in order that you may be grateful .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
the reward to those who have acted arrogantly will be in the presence of god and his messenger . they will have the full faith in the land and will have a great terror . they will have a great punishment .
far-fetched , utterly far-fetched is what you are being promised .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me ; and a witness of her own household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is of the liars .
by the much-frequented fane ,
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls ; it is they who are the sinners .
and it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and whoever of the bounty of allah will be given to him , and that he is far better from his lord . and for you is the best from his lord , and so will you be of those who are guilty of the truth .
like the shaitan when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am free from you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we had no authority over you . you yourselves were rebellious people .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
they said , “ if the wolf ate him , and we are a group , then indeed we are losers ! ”
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
and she who guarded her virginity . we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the nations .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
and from the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and when the women of your women were given to the end of the house , they would have done so , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be received by the command of allah , and he has full knowledge of the good things , and to give you the good news of the book ; and indeed , allah is knowing of all things .
how can you take it back when you have known each other and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
by thebearingladen ;
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , these shall enter paradise , and not be wronged a single date-spot .
and a barrier is set between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; they were in doubt disquieting .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion to the beneficent .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a terrible punishment .
so he who givesand fears ,
o satisfied soul ,
and pursue the right course in your going about and lower your voice ; surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the asses .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
and in the hours before dawn they would ask forgiveness ,
whomsoever god guides , he is rightly guided ; and whomsoever he leads astray -- they are the losers .
to god prostrates whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
dreading some great affliction .
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say : 'what think you ? if your water was to sink into the earth , who would bring you running water '
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , be merciful to them , as they raised me up when i was little '
should they seek to deceive you , allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
and they ask you to hasten on the punishment ; and if we had put on before them a barrier , then the punishment would have been passed upon them , and they were unaware of it .
soon you will remember what i say to you . i commit my affair to allah . indeed allah watches his servants . ’
who listen to the words and follow what is finest of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : 'those , their religion has deceived them ' but whosoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
and by nafs , and him who perfected him in proportion ;
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
and , be patient , with the promise of allah , and let them know that of which is the best of them , or you will see them ; then you will be brought back to us .
and o dear prophet , you should have your mate , and your family , and your family , do not go your head , and your garments is the same , and you are free from the presence of your own people . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
by thethat run , with panting ,
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
so they both ate of it , and their shameful parts appeared to them , and they started covering themselves with the leaves of the garden . adam disobeyed his lord , and went astray .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , for i know from god what you do not know .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
but as for those in whose hearts is disease , it hasincreased them in evilto their evil , and they die while they are disbelievers .
and allah has made their garments clear to the prophet , and the qur ’ an was sent down to them . so this is in a different way , and it is in the same way ; and this is the way , and the way of allah , in which he guides ; and this is the way for allah , to whomever he wills , and he guides whom he wills .
and they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their vain desires . say , produce your proof if you are truthful .
but the wretched will turn away
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
he tries to make you do evil and shameful things and speak against god without knowledge .
nothing prevents their charities from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
so that they may go on the wrong and the wrong , and the needy , and the poor , and the prayer , and the prayer ; and they prostrate in prayer , and prostrate in the prayer ; and give good news to the good .
and by the swelling sea :
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book that makesmanifest .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
we determined , how excellent a determiner are we !
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , although the pagans dislike it .
recite : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and when abraham said to his father and his people : i am rid of what you worship
allah has not taken to himself a son , but allah has taken a place of all creatures in his divinity ; and allah has made a view of his own creation ; and allah is exalted above what they say .
and the apostle of the book is that the verses of allah are recited to those who believe and do righteous deeds , so that he may make them enter from the shadows of the darkness and the light . and whoever believes in allah , he will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , for they will abide in it .
and the blind and the sighted are exposed , and it is in the same hand for you to take your food , or your houses , for your abode or the abode of your mother , and you are free of the same time . and allah ’ s verses are indeed for you , and you have been made to see .
your lord increases and determines the sustenance of whomever he wants . he is well aware and watches over his servants .
have you heard of the litigants who jumped over the wall into his chamber ?
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance had become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
and verily allah hath spoken the truth of you , and on the day of resurrection , there is no doubt of you that ye have no sense ; and afterward ye have no faith in them , and then they turn back .
so be thou patient in the name of thy lord , and thou hast made yourself rich , and be thou , in respect of thy lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and if they ask you , , who is the water from the sky , then get out of it , and the earth will be given to you , and after them , they would say , ‘ it is indeed allah ’ s creation , and in fact , most of them do not exercise their reason . ’
and when we parted the sea for you and saved you and drowned pharaoh 's people before your very eyes .
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
lo ! it is from solomon , and lo ! it is : in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they urge you to hasten the punishment . and indeed , hell will be encompassing of the disbelievers
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
read thine book ; sufficeth to-day thy soul against thee as a reckoner .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
in which are written proper affairs .
it is not lawful for theewomen after this , nor to change them for other wives even though their beauty may please you , except those whom your right hand owns . god is watchful over everything .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
surely allah does not wrong men at all , but they wrong themselves .
a numerical book .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
then as for him who was insolent
its pickings are within reach .
and otheryou cherish : help from allah and a victory near at hand ; and give good tidings to the believers .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
what ! for you the males and for him the females ?
when it sees them from a far off place , they will hear its bubbling and sighing .
hast thou not seen that allah hath created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he will , he can remove you and bringsome new creation ;
and he gave you all that you asked him for . if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
they will be offered a cup of pure drink .
ain sin qaf .
surely , there is a guidance for the people of the garden , and a clear sign , and a guidance and a resting place . eat and revere your lord , and , eat of his mercy , and is a mighty punishment .
but those who disbelieved in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
and when a chapter is revealed to you , they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and to make them go forth and say , ‘ we will be absolved of them . ’
and we left with them for later generations .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
how well they will hear and see on the day they come to us ! but the zalimuntoday are in plain error .
and for the parable of mary is an example of the woman 's wife , whom we had given her her spirit . and she breathed into her the spirit , and he was one of the muslims .
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what is your counsel '
have you heard the story of abraham 's honored guests ?
and allah is the knower of the unseen of some of you , but the sustenance of those of you who have provided them with their sustenance , is the sustenance of their deeds , so will they disbelieve ?
worshipfor a few hours at night .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
and when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , out of spite and arrogance . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , then give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , i do not think that this will ever perish .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
may be then be accursed , how he plotted !
who has made for you the earth as a bedand inserted therein for you roadways and sent down water from the sky , and thereby we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
say : each one acts according to his disposition . your lord knows well who is best guided on the way .
and we gave moses the book , then we gave to moses the good news that perhaps he would be a blessing and a guidance for the people of understanding .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto the children of israil the book and the wisdom and the propherhood , and we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
“ our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not fail in his promise . ”
and we did not send any apostle but to give him a messenger , except to allah ’ s sake , and if they do wrong , they would have done so with allah , and he would have taken for them forgiveness , and most merciful .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us its colour . he answered , god says she should be a yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
who establish prayer and pay zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is possessor of infinite mercy , but his wrath can not be averted from the guilty people . ”
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth ; then he turned to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing torment .
when shu'aib said to them : will you not take heed ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
but you prefer the present life ,
then he slipped unto them striking them with the right hand .
that is only satan frighteningof his followers . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
‘ and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ’ ”
and those on the left—what of those on the left ?
and do not follow them , in the morning and in the evening , but they do not follow the duty of their lord , and do not give them your duty to anything , and you will have no relation against the unjust .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware ! but if ye turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to conveyplainly .
indeed those who disbelieved and preventedfrom the way of allah , have undoubtedly wandered far astray .
and remember that which is recited in your houses of the signs of allah and the wisdom . allah is the subtle , the knower .
is it you or we who make them grow ?
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
they said , “ o our father ! why do you not trust us with joseph , when we are indeed his well-wishers ?
who created and proportioned
and when we made a covenant with you , that you shall not shed each other 's blood or expel each other from your homeland . you consented to this and bore witness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of right conduct .
those who were before them had also plotted , but to allah belongs the devising altogether . he knows what every soul earns , and the unbelievers will come to know for whom is the final abode .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
how can you disbelieve , when god 's revelations are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to god will be guided to the right path .
the thamud deniedin their perverseness
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the disbelievers say : this is a strange thing .
you are not their keeper .
who have turned a blind eye to my reminder and a deaf ear to my warning .
they said , “ o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our belongings ; and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ”
god : there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . who is more truthful than god ?
when you call to prayer , they take it for a mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
o prophet ! when the disbelievers came to you , they did not ascribe any partner to allah . do not ascribe any partners to allah , and do not be of any use to allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
then we would have made you taste doublein the life of this world and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
and a man came from the farthest end of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
and as for the like of this , the same is such that the jinn and the gods were averse to the other , so that they may have a lot of good deeds , so that they may have no power to do so ; but if they were to do so , then let them be liars .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . in fact , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
those who fear their lord , and those who are mindful of the garden will be placed in full , and they shall be in the garden , and they will say , ‘ peace to the garden ! ’ so they will be taken in full of the garden , and they will remain in it .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted and leveled with one blow -
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
and the people of those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ it is a like that of yours , that they may be given to the right way ” ; and they will say , “ this is what we have given you , in order to recite the book of its lord , and he will not be called to account . ”
do not ever be in doubt of what they have done in the past , but they have no faith in their lord , and have no other reason in his divinity . we have given no good to you except what they used to worship .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the acquainted .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
they say : why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? has there not come to them a book containing the teachings of the previous scriptures ?
and makea radiant lamp ?
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they declare .
say , ‘ this is my way . i invite to allah , based on clear knowledge—i and whoever follows me . immaculate is allah , and i am not of the polytheists . ’
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
therefore be patient ; indeed the promise of allah is true ; and seek forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the purity of your lord evening and morning .
god 's wont with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in the law of god .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it , for your benefit and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the game of land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
say : 'those of ancient times and those of later times
and do not invoke another god besides allah . there is no god but he . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
say thou : allah belongeth thou unto whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make him to be of those whom thou canst , and thou art the mighty , the beholder .
when allah had made a covenant with each one of them , when he had given you a book , he would have given you the book , if what you had said is true , if what you say is true , and what has been sent down to them , have been sent to the messenger , and they said , “ we were not among the witnesses . ”
ask them for forgiveness , or do thou ask forgiveness for them , whether thou forgivest them not , and thou askest not forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah guideth not the evil-living folk .
on the day when all secrets will be made public ,
and the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree—it is uprooted from the ground ; it has no stability .
hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime , and so tasted the ill-effects of their conduct , and theirs will be a painful doom .
and persisted in the great sin ,
these are they against whom the word has proved true , among the nations that have passed away before them ; they are losers .
those who believe and do not mix up their faith with iniquity , for them is safety , and they are rightly guided .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
nor face thirst or scorching heat .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan ; he refused .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of mankind .
is he then who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
lo ! pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people sects , weakeninga groupamong them , slaying their sons and sparing their women . lo ! he was of the corrupters .
and when he turned his face toward midian , he said , perhaps my lord will guide me to the right way .
then we have made them virgins ,
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
and you will surely see that they are going to make a life of the world and the life of this world as well as the hereafter , and they shall not be among the idolaters , nor shall they be in any way ; and allah is seeing what they do .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and the flesh of fowls , any that they may desire .
but those who are iniquitous will be fuel for hell .
my people , how is it that i call you to salvation and you call me to the fire ?
in gardens , questioning
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given purchasing error and wishing that you should lose the way ?
is he , then , who will make the earth shine for you , and the sea as a blessing from him ? will you , then , be able to seek allah 's majesty and glory ?
shall man have whatever he craves ?
whoever brings a good deedshall have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall be rewarded only with its equivalent—they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after clear arguments have come to you , then know that allah is exalted in might and wise .
as if they wereeggspreserved .
ask them for forgiveness , or do thou ask forgiveness for them , whether thou forgivest them not , and thou askest not forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah guideth not the evil-living folk .
the day when the children of adam will be set in ranks , our lord will say to the unbelievers , ‘ we will certainly inform you about what you used to do . ’
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice , we will cast him into the fire ; and this is easy for allah .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked through the streets . we have made some of you as a trial for others . will you then exercise patience ? your lord is all-aware .
and not a sign we showed them but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with torment , so that they may return .
and thus do we repeat the communications , and that they may say : you have studied , and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he created you from the temple , then he will bring you out of a drop of the land , then he will bring you a healthy word , then he will bring you to the barren a part of the two , and he will bring you a reputation of the same time , so that you may be made to see .
they do not venture to speak ahead of him , and they act by his command .
when the sky is split asunder
we sent moses with our signs and with clear authority
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplicant ’ s call when he calls me . so let them respond to me , and let them have faith in me , so that they may fare rightly .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provision to whom he will . he has knowledge of everything .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ’
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the powerful , the merciful ,
and some of the beasts for which you have made subservient to him , and to bring them to the other . so eat of that which allah has provided for you , and be not of the pretentious
do they say , ‘ he has fabricated what has been invented ? ’ in fact , it has been the truth from your lord , and it has been revealed to you that you should warn a people who were warned .
nor do they spend anything- small or great , nor do they cross a valley , but it is written to their credit , that allah may reward them with the best of what they used to do .
then they shall roast in hell .
in gardens and springs .
then why did those whom they had taken as gods besides allah , as a means of nearness ? no , they went astray from them . and that was their lie , and what they used to fabricate .
in them are good and beautiful ones .
that thisis a decisive word
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
said allah , “ therefore exit from paradise , for you are an outcast . ”
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor from it will theybe removed .
he will teach him the book and wisdom , the torah and the gospel ,
but those who are iniquitous will be fuel for hell .
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear , save those who believe in our signs , and they are muslims .
“ and fear allah and do not disgrace me . ”
had not grace from his lord reached him , he would have been cast upon the wilderness in a plight .
o descendants of those we carriedwith noah . indeed , he was a grateful servant .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
though they shall be made to see each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
the unbelievers are the ones who disbelieve in the truth that they are the roots of the unbelievers . they are the ones who have rejected god 's revelations . god has given you the victory and the victory of god . god is cognizant of all things .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is majestic and all-wise .
no ! there is no refuge .
did you receive the story of the hosts
that god may forgive you your sin and what is past and complete his favors upon you and guide you to a straight path
what aileth you that ye expect not in allah majesty !
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
who created the seven heavens one above another , you can see no incongruity in the creation of the all-beneficent . look again ! can you see any rifts ?
nor are darkness and light
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life
but their hearts are in ignorance of this ; and they have deeds besides that which they are doing .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
when they come to you , they say , we believe . but they have entered with disbelief , and they have left with it . god knows best what they were hiding .
and verily , it is in the mother of the book , in our presence , high , full of wisdom .
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
except the family of lot whom we will save
wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of the things you do .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
is it , then , when we create the creation , then will create it again , and who will provide for you from the earth , so that it is in the right way ? say : bring you proof of allah , if you are truthful .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
and goodly things wherein they rejoiced ;
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
and when they come to know of the matter , they take awe of it , and if they have passed away , they will be told , and , if there is a good counsel , they will be brought to the prophet , and to the messenger , all but a little .
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , leaving no crack ?
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
pharaoh said : did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life with us .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the abode of the hereafter is indeed the life , if they but knew .
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up that he might be an enemy and a grief for them . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we sent thisdown on the night of honor .
we have indeed turned about for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
and o dear prophet , you should have your mate , and your family , and your family , do not go your head , and your garments is the same , and you are free from the presence of your own people . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
say , if the most merciful had a son , then i would be the first to worship .
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a terrible punishment .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss ,
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give .
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
he knows all that penetrates the earth and all that comes out of it , all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
he said , “ i am commanded to do some of the commands of his lord , so he said , ‘ i will be absolved of this . ’ he said , ‘ i will be absolved of the former people , and allah does not accept the unjust . ’
and of the property of allah are the only , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , for allah is the hearer , the knower .
and in the hours before dawn they would ask forgiveness ,
indeed , allah does not listen to the outcome of a human being , and allah is not able to do so . and those who believe , and say , ‘ allah has indeed heard what is right . indeed , he is a hanif , and he has led it into a right way . ’ indeed , he is the unjust , the most merciful .
he said , “ i have loved the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
and they swear by allah that they do not speak a word , but they are indeed liars , and they have denied the truth , and they have not been disbelievers . and they have been , in fact , allah and his noble messenger , and they have no power to do so .
and do not follow them , in the morning and in the evening , but they do not follow the duty of their lord , and do not give them your duty to anything , and you will have no relation against the unjust .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , lo ! he is despairing , thankless .
it is we who sent down the koran , and we watch over it .
dragging by the head ,
o ye who believe ! wherefore say ye that which ye do not ?
no one disputes the revelations of the lord except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ?
to whoever among you desires to go forward or lag behind .
and the cattle he created for you ; in them is warmth andbenefits , and of them you eat .
who deniedand turned away .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us one day . ”
call on your lord with humility and in secret , he does not love the transgressors .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
when our clear verses are recited to them , the unbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them : this is plain magic .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
he said , “ my lord , i have made a child of the child that they may hear , and if you prevent them from them , do not be stressed by their plan , and do not be stressed by what i have given them . ”
hast thou not seen that allah hath created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he will , he can remove you and bringsome new creation ;
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of mankind .
they will be told , enter it in peace and security .
allah hath expanded the light of the heavens and the earth and the light of a light of which is light in the sea , and upon it is a light-giving lamp . and he doth guide that which is in the sight of allah , and he doth guide the perspicuous .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
and , among them , there are the people of the same hand ; so let them be called to account . he said , “ o my people , these are the people who are virtuous . do you , then , fear god ? ”
and will be fully recompensed for his deeds .
and in the night , and in the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs in which the earth will be dead , and in the hereafter are signs for those who have understanding .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be certain .
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them , and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared a painful punishment for the unjust .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
eat and pasture your cattle . in this there is evidencefor the people of reason .
man wearies not of praying for good , but if evil assails him he begins to despair .
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
then they will have no excuse but to say , by allah our lord , we were not polytheists .
say thou : allah belongeth thou unto whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make him to be of those whom thou canst , and thou art the mighty , the beholder .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
and fear a day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
and every soul shall come , along with it a driver and a witness .
when i have fashioned himand breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
for the wrong-doers , their portion is like unto the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
so if you have your trust in allah , surely allah loves those who do good .
lo ! he knoweth that which thou art informed of the two parts of the night or the ham of some of you , and some of those who are with you in respect of the watches of those who are in your vicinity ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
the reward of their lord is the garden of paradise , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in it for ever . and allah is the wakilover it , and he is the most honourable of those who have passed away .
indeed hell is one of the greatest entities .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
indeed , with hardshipease .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you '
but whoever comes before him a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
they will have no protector to help them other than god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
and when it is said to them : believe as the peoplehave believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
is it not to be allah ’ s way to purify himself , and those who have taken to themselves protectors other than him , and they are not in any way , except for allah ’ s sake , although they are not to be able to doubt . indeed , allah does not guide those who are false .
to your lord belongsthe term thereof ?
wherefore we gave him the glad tidings of a boy gentle .
is it not to be allah ’ s way to purify himself , and those who have taken to themselves protectors other than him , and they are not in any way , except for allah ’ s sake , although they are not to be able to doubt . indeed , allah does not guide those who are false .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
say , “ is it other than god you instruct me to worship , you ignorant ones ? ”
say , god knows all that is in the cave . it is only for god the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only lord and the lord of the universe .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
which will neither fatten them nor satisfy them .
this is the word we have sent down to you from us . you have not been able to have any faith in it . we have made this book clear to you and to guide them to a straight path ,
and of mankind is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to that which is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the adversaries .
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
and by those that press forward as in a race .
why should we not believe in god and the truth that has come down to us ? we yearn for our lord to admit us to the righteous people .
and to 'adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
o people who believe ! do not follow the opinions of the devil , and do not follow the limits of the devil ; indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing ; and allah is the hearing , the knowing .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
or do you have a clear authority ?
and is this a favor of which you remind me that you have enslaved the children of israel ?
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are only a forger . nay , most of them do not know .
and allah has created you from the drop of dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then made to get you out of a sperm-drop ; and there is no more for him to endure in the least , and there is no more for him to endure in the matter ; and indeed it is easy for allah .
again , no indeed ; they shall soon know !
is he to whom we have promised a good promise , which he will obtain , like him whom we have provided the wares of the life of this world , then on the day of resurrection he will be of those brought up ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
and verily , he enjoyed a near access to us , and a good final return .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
a man who believes in the truth , when he has given you a believer , he said , ‘ shall i take a man from among you ? ’ he said , ‘ so , shall you be requited for what you used to do ? ’ indeed , if he is a hanif , he will say , ‘ ‘ my lord ! do you have no fear ? ’ indeed , if you are truthful , i will indeed cause a sudden to be of the liars . ’
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they will say : we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count .
do the people of the towns feel secure our might shall not come upon them at night while they are sleeping ?
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . he is the almighty , the wise .
serving them will be youths like hidden pearls .
and when the man is visited by his distress , and call to him with a tranquil purpose , they begin to call on the ground , and then , when allah will give to him in a state of honor , and the partners , at the hands of the people , and the partners , in the state of allah , will be among the people of the fire .
glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
our lord , grant us what you promised to us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . you do not break your promise .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should come to you from your lord . god reserves his mercy for whomever he chooses . god 's mercy is infinite .
ask them for forgiveness , or do thou ask forgiveness for them , whether thou forgivest them not , and thou askest not forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah guideth not the evil-living folk .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper .
but when we removed the plague from them until a term which they were to reach , they broke their promise .
say : ' o you who are lost , do not follow this , or recite it to you . ' and as for them , they are the ones to hear , and call for help .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat .
and this is a book we have revealed , blessed ; so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and say not of those who are slain in the way of allah : they are dead . nay , they are living , but ye perceivenot .
taste your persecution ! this is what you would hasten on .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
as though they had never dwelt there . behold , away with midian ! —just as thamud was done away with !
they said , 'we desire that we should eat of it and that our hearts be at rest , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us , and that we may be among its witnesses . '
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
will you be left secure in that which is here
say : on the day of the victory the faith of those who disbelievewill not avail them , neither will they be reprieved .
on honorable pages .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
will have a strap of fibre rope around her neck .
when he ran away to the laden ship .
those who like that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
or do they say : a poet , for whom we await a misfortune of time ?
they say , “ it is he who invents lies about god . if god wills , he can do away with it , and god wills to bring about what is in your hearts . god has the knowledge of the innermost of the chests . ”
they said , ‘ o shu ‘ ayb , we hear the like of you , and we are oblivious of you . ’ indeed , if you were to be patient , we would have been you and you would not be able to compel us .
and serve your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins and will amplify his reward .
o people of the book ! we have indeed been sent to you as a herald of the book , and a herald of good news and a warner . but allah has power over all things .
do not extend your glance toward what we have given certain classes of them to enjoy , the splendor of worldly life by which we test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will grant you a criterion , remove from youevilyou , and forgive you : for allah is the lord of grace unbounded .
when the blind man approached him .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
she said : my lord ! how can i have a child when no mortal has touched me ? said , so , do he have a child . he creates what he wills . when he decrees a thing he only says to it , be , and it is .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks ; so will they not be grateful ?
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
and we have made a scripture in the study , and a lesson for the things , and a clear thing , therefore , o moses , and that i may be of those who are given to the right path , therefore , o moses , shall surely be among the truthful .
but deniedand turned away ,
and gardens and springs .
and i do not think the hour will occur . and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
but if they turn away—god knows the corrupt .
“ this is the day of separation which you used to deny .
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors )
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
and some of us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture . they are only guessing .
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
who desires to expel you from your land , so what do you advise ? ’
and be patient . your patience is solely from allah . and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
in the morning they called out to one another ,
and i have been commanded to be allah 's , and i know not the promptings of the unseen , and i have no knowledge of that which ye have been sent . and verily , i am of the wrong-doers , and allah is of the wrong-doers .
on adorned couches , observing .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
then they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and we left for him among the posterity :
and the mountains will crumble
and will admit them to paradise with which he has acquainted them .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
how many generations that had far more wealth and ostentation have we laid low before them !
and thus did we destroy every town , and set upon them a plan . so that they may not be able to harm themselves , nor will they be victorious .
he said : nay , but ye have yourselves contrived a storyfor you . so patience is most fitting . maybe allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
then i called them openly .
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
and why did you not - when they were made to live in the gardens of eternity , say , ‘ he is allah ’ s help ? ’ ‘ it is allah ’ s majesty that he may bring to you , if you do not have any faith in allah , and he does not have any power to do anything . ’
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god ’ s book until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
when the messenger is brought to any of the people in the sacred manner , when the messenger is heard of the commands of god , he was called to the word of god in their keeping of the same time , and he was told them : god knows all about me .
and if you wish to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed , we were wrongdoers .
and the bounty of allah is a provision for the last of the hereafter : and be thou not at home with the devotees of allah , as it be , and do not be of the doubters .
so we said : strike thewith part of the . thus allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you his portents so that ye may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
- which of the favors of your lord do you then deny ?
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will surely cause them to enter gardens with streams running in them .
except the righteously striving believers , who will receive a never-ending reward .
even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless god willed , but most of them are ignorant .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and cite for them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them crops .
tell me , should we let them enjoy for some years ,
the bedouin arabs surpassin disbelief and hypocrisy , and are more likely not to know the limits that allah has revealed to his messenger . and allah is knowing and wise .
do not extend your glance toward what we have given certain classes of them to enjoy , the splendor of worldly life by which we test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
for the living and the dead among you ?
no indeed ; when it reaches the clavicles
the day when their guile will not avail them in any way , nor will they be helped .
is it not to be allah ’ s way to purify himself , and those who have taken to themselves protectors other than him , and they are not in any way , except for allah ’ s sake , although they are not to be able to doubt . indeed , allah does not guide those who are false .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong ; and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell . thereunto ye will come .
but the arrogant were arrogant in the earth , and were arrogant against the people of the plot , but they were not to be blamed except for the sake of those who have gone before them , but you will not be questioned about the signs of allah .
till he wastwo bows ' length or even nearer ,
the men will be affected by their wives and your wives for a while , and they will be given their home in the house of their own accord . but if they go forth , then know that allah is the almighty , the wise .
'this is our gift ; bestow or withhold without reckoning . '
that is because god makes the night to enter into the day and makes the day to enter into the night . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
they will reclineon thronesarranged in ranks ; and we shall join them to companions , with beautiful big and lustrous eyes .
say , ‘ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills , let him believe in it , and whoever wills , let him be a believer , and indeed , we will have the like of it that he may be of the spurned . ’
your god is one ,
blessed is he who made the constellations in the heavens and made therein a lamp and a shining moon .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
we have constantly conveyed them the wordthat they may take heed .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
say , ‘ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth , and he is the all-knowing judge . ’
he said : and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the astray ?
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of glad tidings and to let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is of everything knower .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is forgiving and merciful .
, say , in the way of the beneficent god , to give you increase in wealth and sons , when they see it , is the time of the life to come . they will know who are the most soldiers of what is in their hearts .
they said , call on your lord for us to show us that which we have revealed . indeed , it is the very same for people who have gone away . we have indeed turned about to the way that they are guided .
say : if i err , i err only against my own soul , and if i remain guided it is because of that which my lord hath revealed unto me . lo ! he is hearer , nigh .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
god will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what is intended in your hearts . god is forgiving and forbearing .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor shall he guide them to a way .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
or have they a ladder whereon they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear authority .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , truthfully , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for the muslims . ”
is not allah the greatest of all sovereigns ?
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
these are the faithless , the vicious .
except for a proclamation from god and his messages . he who defies god and his messenger—for him is the fire of hell , where they will dwell forever . ”
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he will , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you to watch over them .
so he will be in pleasant living .
if good befalls you , it grieves them ; but if an affliction befalls you , they say : we took our precaution beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
we had favored you another time .
then he eased the way for him .
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that is upright ; they recite allah ’ s signs in the watches of the night and prostrate .
and assuredly there came to them an apostle from among them , but they belied him , wherefore the torment took hold of them while they were wrong-doers .
on thrones , looking .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god , they are the losers '
and if we had revealed it to any of the foreigners
as for those who disbelieve , and spend in the way of allah , and do that in order to make it ourself , they shall have to go forth in the way of allah . then , surely , they will be brought to account .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
a book whose verses have been detailed , an arabic qur'an for a people who know ,
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for what they used to earn .
in gardens and springs .
and if they see a miracle , they turn away and say : transient magic .
and the sun is made to seem fair to them , and to make the sun a lamp , and it is only for a mild extent . and whoever commits a way of evil , then it is for you to be your duty , and to be careful ofallah , and that allah is with the righteous .
recite : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it , but allah was averse to their going forth , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
satan promises them and arouses desire in them . but satan does not promise them except delusion .
it is a brief usage ; their abode is hell ; and what an evil resting-place !
have you considered the water that you drink ?
on the day when he will say , ‘ call those whom you maintained to be my partners , ’ they will call them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
so that it will come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ,
our lord ! we believe in what thou hast revealed and we follow the apostle , so write us down with those who bear witness .
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then come back to him in return for a while , and that he may give you a good reward for a while . but if you turn away , i fear the punishment of a great day .
and when moses came to his lord and said , ‘ tell me to keep out of it , ’ ‘ do not see that i am going to do so , ’ and then , when it was said to them , ‘ will you not be swallowed up by what you used to do ? ’ then , when my lord ’ s edict came , he said , ‘ i will not be able to do so . ’ then , when my lord 's , he was bidden to do so .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who kept you back from guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were guilty .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend the children of israel at the meeting of the sabbath , and seek the appointment of the qur ’ an in the morning , and the qur ’ an took to you , and after the qur ’ an in your noontide – and that it may be that you are clear to one another . and allah is the all-knower of the argument .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision . verily , allah is the best of providers .
or have we given them any scripture beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
and placed in it lofty and broad stablisers , and gave you sweet water to drink ?
and if it had not been for the grace of allah and his mercy unto thee , and that they would be of upon their affair , they would surely have been in respect of that which they had been working . and allah hath bestowed upon thee a good favour , and he is of the firmness of bounty unto thee .
and it is he who has sent the winds as a herald of the glad tidings , and of his mercy , as a mercy from your lord , so that he may keep it up , and so that we may bring the dead back to the land . so that we may bring the dead to life .
and when harmed they become victorious .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised and wherein his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
and allah ! for him is naught save the governance of the universe ; and that which is not but a good deed , and that which he hath revealeth unto him , - and that thou mayest be of those who have gone forth before us , and we shall make them taste the way of our lord , and lo ! thou art of the disbelievers .
and in your creation , and the crawling things he scatters abroad , there are signs for a people having sure faith ,
and ease my task for me ;
and it is he who has sent the winds as a herald of the glad tidings , and of his mercy , as a mercy from your lord , so that he may keep it up , and so that we may bring the dead back to the land . so that we may bring the dead to life .
and when the people of the fire came to the point of the mountains , he would have set up for them the mountains , and to allah they will have safety . and when they are , to allah , he will surely make them hear . and when they are , on the contrary , they are in a way , to see .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
there have already come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and whenever i have summoned them , so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , covered themselves up with their garments , and persisted , and waxed very proud .
and there is no blame upon you for the women of the guilty , or on the sick ; and allah is most surely aware of what you do , but do not be afraid of what is just , and do not be afraid of what is just a decree for them ; and indeed , allah is the forbearing , the forbearing .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and , when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
he said , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” he will not make the earth a distinction for them , but they said , “ this is the matter that you have not listened , and in fact , the truth. ” they used to say , ‘ this is what you used to do . ’
said he , 'moses , i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking ; so take what i have given thee , and be of the thankful . '
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
god has begotten children . they are truly liars .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs and a manifest warranty .
weigh with an even balance ,
have they not reflected in their own minds ? allah created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed ? yet many men disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
and they will say , ‘ no , ’ and they will say , ‘ no , ’ and they have said , ‘ no , it is the cow who has been granted to you . ’ so they have been , in the hope of the suppliant , and the beloved of the faithless , and they are not the ones to be requited .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and they were pursued by a curse in this , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise for what you did .
who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
or say they : he hath invented it ? nay , but they will not believe !
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the sublime similitude . he is the mighty , the wise .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except those whom allah wills . then it will be blown again , and thereupon they will be standing , looking on .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , let them testify by swearing by allah four times that he is of the truthful ,
smashing down men as if they were uprooted trunks of date palms .
say : enough is allah for a witness between me and you . lo ! he is knower , seer of his slaves .
they would have said , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; will you not then guard ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
the evil consequences of their deeds afflicted them and they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
and they say : if we follow guidance with thee , we shall surely follow it with a goodly purpose , and we have not made for him a plan , except that which is with him , and most of them have no knowledge . and most of them know not .
we therefore gave the lie to the extent of its creation , and we have made him to be stationary . then , when our command is , make obeisance to them , all of them , and have been made to die . and those who are unjust are in a state of gold .
and those who recite the remembrance of allah , while it is a confirmation of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the creation of the heavens and the earth , our lord , do not have any power to be confined to them , and then , o lord , do away with the punishment of the fire .
and we gave to them the people of the book that we had prepared for them a present country , and the evil was made to ruin , and the devil was made known to them .
then indeed , upon us is their account .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , wholly devoted to god . he was not a pagan .
o people of the book ! why do you confound the truth with falsehood , and conceal the truth while you know ?
had allah willed , he would have taken for himself a son . for that he had made a matter between them by means of which they had no knowledge . glorified be he , and he is the all-mighty , the all-mighty .
verily we ! we have sent thee with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and there was not a nation but a warner hath passed among them .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend the children of israel at the meeting of the sabbath , and seek the appointment of the qur ’ an in the morning , and the qur ’ an took to you , and after the qur ’ an in your noontide – and that it may be that you are clear to one another . and allah is the all-knower of the argument .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
he said , “ what you say is true , and what is the matter with me , is that the judgement of the lord of old has been decided ; and this is an advice upon the people who have been punished . ”
the path of your lord is given to you , and to teach him the wisdom , and do not make any other god worthy of all god ; if you speak the truth , god will bring to light the burning flame of hell .
have you not regarded those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
and be patient . your patience is solely from allah . and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
he has given you abundance of cattle and children
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
surely , in the book he has made an excuse to you , when you see a place in place of it , and they are seized by the command of allah , and it is in the same way for you to call them to account . surely , allah is the unbelievers of the unbelievers .
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
and we made them a precedent , and an example for later generations .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ’
and what you do not see ,
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade eviland seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
filling your bellies with it ;
do not yield to those who are dishonest to god , but do what they are in worship . we have given them the like of what they have done . thus do we try them to have a way .
and preferred the life of this world ,
forsake the outward sin , and the inward surely the earners of sin will be recompensed for what they have earned .
and on the day when he will cause them to fail in their wealth , and will be given to flight , and it will be said to them : this is what you used to do .
verily allah knoweth whatsoever thing they call upon beside him ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
we wronged them not , but they wronged themselves . so their gods whom they called upon beside allah availed them not in aught , when there came the command of thy lord , and they increased them not in their destruction .
then , the caravan and the town came up to the calf , so that they turned its back into it , and at the time when it came into the presence of joseph , he told them , bring the same time and god is all-knowing and all-aware .
this is no other than the false-tales and religion of the ancients ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and assuredly you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
has the story of your past people reached you ? but those who went after them have no other reason than god , and those who have gone before them have also been sent by god . they came to them with the truth , and they were saying , we believe in that you have been sent with .
they said : if you do not desist , o noah , you will surely be of those stoned to death .
say : ' o men , i am a messenger from allah , who is the messenger of the heavens and the earth , there is no god but he , the lord of the heavens and the earth ; so have no faith in him , the lord of the heavens and the earth ; so that you may be guided . '
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs and not found a protector or helper .
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . but none payeth heed save him who turnethrepentant .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
and those who , when the angels and the throne have come , will be settled by the glory of their lord and ask the forgiveness of those who believe , and ask the forgiveness of their lord , and give them the forgiveness of hell , and they have been shown to the right path .
the star of piercing brightness ;
from a fountain therein , named salsabil .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them. ” but it increased them in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best disposer of affairs . ”
by no means ! for to our signs he has been refractory !
and ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
did you think that we created you uselessly and that to us you would not be returned ?
god has the example of the people of noah to the same as the unbelievers and the people of the same house as well as their two children . we had given them the two kinds of righteousness and the people of the burning fire . they will be among the arraigned .
moses said : say yeabout the truth when it hathreached you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
fight those who do not believe in allah , nor in the last day , nor forbid what allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the religion of those who have been given the book , until they pay the tribute out of hand , willingly or unwillingly .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; surely we were sinners .
have they not observed the things allah has created ? their shadows revolve from the right and the left , prostrating themselves to god .
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear ; and had he made them hear , they would have turned away , averse .
no one can be secure from it . indeed , the way of a good deed is in the manifest error . it is the right to do so that they have no faith in allah . and he who does not accept faith in allah , will have the best in his error . and he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
if you are conveying the truth that we reveal to you of the children of israel , you would certainly be questioned about the torah which you have been in doubt . the torah and the gospel will not be in doubt .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion to the beneficent .
he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you ,
which guides to the right path ; so we have believed in it and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides god what can neither help nor harm you . if you do , you will be one of the wrongdoers .
it is allah who has created seven heavens in layers , and the command of allah . so that they may know that allah has power over all things .
have you not regarded that they rove in every valley ,
except for those who repent , attain faith , and act righteously . for such , allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against your doing good and acting piously , and allah is hearing , knowing .
and we have indeed turned away the face of the heaven , so that the faces may be directed towards the side of allah . and you will not be able to go back to the side of your lord , and you will not be able to know anything of it . indeed , allah is not unaware of what you do .
the romans have been defeated
let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , shall be the inmates of hell .
we established you in the land and provided you with the means of livelihood . little do you thank .
we have sent you as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty :
cursed be the makers of the pit ,
and the pains of this , and the praise , and the praise of him , and the praise of him , as he leaves in dread . and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god .
and they say , “ allah has taken a son. ” immaculate is he ! rather , to him belongs whatever there is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour shall not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
they said : it is the same to us whether you admonish or are not one of the admonishers
when two parties from among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
allah said : surely i will send it down to you , but if any of you disbelieve thereafter , i will surely punish him with a punishment wherewith i have not punished anyone among the worlds .
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not yield to any sinful or disbelieving person among them .
nor a loving friend .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runstoward its stopping point . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and fight in the cause of allah and strive in the way of allah , and he has made for you the good things , and he has made subservient to you all that is in the hearts of allah , and the qur ’ an in your way ; and allah is the trustee of the truth .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
and they will approach one another blaming each other .
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk gently on the earth , and when the ignorant address them answer , peace be with you .
as for those who believe and do good , they are the ones who have believed in allah and the last day , and the reward of the hereafter is with their lord , and they shall have neither fear nor regret .
we shall deliver your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed many people are heedless of our signs .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and go in fear of the chastisement of their lord
far-fetched , utterly far-fetched is what you are being promised .
and thick gardens ,
and whoever is sent in a sign of allah , then they said , “ we will give this qur ’ an , and they have the noble messengers ” ; and they said , “ we are only being able to give up our rights , and allah is the rich , the praiseworthy . ”
he replied : 'allah will bring itupon you if he will ; you can not frustrate him .
those before them had also denied . and how was my punishment then !
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made our signs clear to you , so that you may understand .
we gave moses the book , and after his messengers , and gave him the clear messengers . we gave you the clear signs , but we gave you the clear warning , but you would not be accused of falsehood .
taking joy in the things which their lord has given them . indeed , they were before that muhsinun .
and the land is a blessed tree , which is blessed , and it is by the command of his lord , and whosoever is made to go forth , then it is by the command of its lord , and that is in fact for those who are grateful .
then , when they had both surrendered , and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead ,
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day and the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs for people , and the earth , and the earth , with its beak and earth , and its dwellings ; and in the midst of the people of the earth , they are disbelievers .
wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of the things you do .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
the judgement will surely take place .
and those who believe in the signs of their lord
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient are we as reckoners .
have you not seen those who are given the book of the book or are the people of the devil ? they too are the ones who will say to those who deny the truth , “ these are the best of those who are bent on denying the truth . ”
and the fifth time , that the curse of god shall be upon him , if he should be of the liars .
and horses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride andadornment . and he creates what you do not know .
a blazing fire !
and among the people of the book is the one who among the people of the book , and the people of the book , and if you are made to make obeisance , then it is to be of no use to them , but you will have no power to help them . god has power over all things .
recall what time he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
and lovely companions .
when he considers himself exempt .
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave respite to the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him at all . god has power over all things .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and we brought the others close to that place .
it is he who has created for you , in order to provide you with sustenance , and then cause you to die . then he will give you life , and will be made to see what they attribute to him .
they said : we are owners of strength and of great military might , but it is for thee to command ; so consider what thou wilt command .
serving them will be youths like hidden pearls .
and do not increase your property except with the property , and the other , until there comes to you , except with the , when it is intense , and when it is intense , they will be received by the command of allah , and it is a confirmation of what he has promised , and the same is as a command to be fulfilled .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
o you who believe ! do not putforward before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
but if they break their pledges after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
and it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
and , 'direct your face toward the religion , inclining to truth , and never be of the polytheists .
and that allah may help you with a mighty help .
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
and during the night prostrate to him , and glorify him a long night through .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger—he will admit him to gardens with streams running in them . but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
and keep vigil the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to maqaman mahmuda .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
is it you or we who make them grow ?
or , follow them , as they recite the discourse to teach them , as god has permitted to them . but if we please , it is not for a word that god has decreed for them , for the unjust will have a painful punishment .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and o prophet , the messenger has been commanded to you from your lord , and if you are given the good things of your lord , the good things are given to them ; and allah does not guide the people of the right way .
and preferred the life of this world ,
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and were a sinful people .
except by the mercy of your lord . he has indeed bestowed great favors on you .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
so , as to what is revealed to you , , , what is the matter with you , , what is with you , , to be judged by god , and to those who are with you , and do not be among the witnesses of god '
i am not going to drive away any believers .
so when you are free work diligently ,
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe torment would have touched you for what ye took .
and he said , “ if you should see any thing , then i too decided to be of the despised , and i am not in the least knowing of the devil . indeed , it was clear to me .
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
when they are told , prostrate yourselves before the beneficent god , they say , and what is the merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which you ask us ?
and watch , for they will soon see .
hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in our signs and saith : assuredly i shall be given wealth and children ?
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . away with aad , the people of hud .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they are with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the earth were closed up , then we parted them , and we made every living thing of water ? will they not then believe ?
they said : we shall by no means cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
from which you turn away .
he said , ‘ the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if you have sense . ’
and by nafs , and him who perfected him in proportion ;
praise belongs to god , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of all being .
and preferred the life of this world ,
we did test those before them , and god will certainly know those who are true .
and upraised couches .
exclude me from the unjust people .
therefore be patient ; indeed the promise of allah is true ; and seek forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the purity of your lord evening and morning .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , and then will give you life ; indeed man is very ungrateful .
they say , ‘ are we being restored to our earlier state ?
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee signs , clear signs , and none shall disbelieve therein save the transgressors .
until , when they are set in , they set out in the ark , and to cut off their hands , and said , “ what ! you make the , and the people of the great cities ? ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will stone you ; so leave me alone for a while . ”
therein is a fountain flowing ,
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have listened to the polytheists in the heavens and in the earth ; and indeed , to allah is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and indeed allah is oft forgiving , most praiseworthy .
if he willed , he could have stilled the winds , leaving them motionless on its back . indeed in that are signs for every greatly enduring , grateful person .
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most people persist in thanklessness .
and he followed a road
and shield them from the evil deeds ; and whomever you save from the evil consequences of sins on that day – so you have had mercy upon him ; and this is the supreme success . ”
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth set up equals to their lord .
he said , ‘ it will be forbidden them for forty years . they will wander about in the earth . so do not grieve for the transgressing lot . ’
for a reminder , and we never harmed .
who , out of his grace , has lodged us in the abode of permanence , where neither toil nor fatigue affects us .
and among the people of moses is a community which guides by truth and thereby establishes justice .
and rich carpets levelled out .
he who crieth unto any other god along with allah hath no proof thereof . his reckoning is with his lord . lo ! disbelievers will not be successful .
have you not regarded that they rove in every valley ,
so today no soul will be wronged in the least ; and you will not be compensated except for what you used to do .
those who have received the book and have received the book , and have received the people with what has been revealed to you , some of them are nations , but say , i am commanded to be one of those who have no faith . to him belongs all that is in the end .
how many a town we have destroyed ! our punishment came to it at night , or while they were napping .
woe to the liars
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
believers , do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of god . they have despaired of the hereafter , just as the disbelievers have despaired of the occupants of the graves .
have you not heard of the one who was given the lie to his abraham ? he who was given the dominion of his lord , he said , ‘ i am indeed a hanif , ’ he said , ‘ i will not be able to give my dominion to the lord of the throne ; and he said , ‘ indeed allah will bring to me a way . ’
surely the pious shall drink of a cup whose mixture is camphor ,
as for those who believe and do good , they are the ones who have believed in allah and the last day , and the reward of the hereafter is with their lord , and they shall have neither fear nor regret .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it
nor are darkness and light
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord
amidst gardens and springs .
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
these , our people , have taken to other gods instead of him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
and they say , “ if we were to be victorious , we should certainly have been granted the reward of our noble deeds as the command of our noble servants , and the qur ’ an , and the christians , and the true believers ; and you are not grateful . ”
but those who fear their lord , for them are chambers , above them chambers built high , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not fail inpromise .
if your lord had so willed , he could have made mankind one nation ; but they continue to differ .
your lord increases and determines the sustenance of whomever he wants . he is well aware and watches over his servants .
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , for then the impugners would have been skeptical .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
it is a tree that grows in the nethermost part of hell .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to disembark with thy blessing : for thou art the best to enableto disembark .
do they not await anything but the one who is in the life of the world , or is it that your lord will turn to them in the least ? say , ‘ wait , and on the day of resurrection , some of the signs of your lord will be fulfilled , and you will not believe . ’
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
they would like you to compromise , so they would compromise .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
o yahya ! take hold of the book with strength , and we gave him wisdom while yet a child .
then he slipped unto them striking them with the right hand .
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a known day .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
o people , we have created you from the enemy of the past and the people of truth , so that they may one another , and the people of the same way . god 's most good is all to god ; he is the all-knowing , the all-aware .
leave me alone with he whom i created
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
we have indeed sent downmanifest ayat . and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
as for those who were killed , they will say , ‘ o woe to it ! ’ ‘ alas for it ! ’ indeed allah gives sustenance to whomever he wishes , if he wills , and tightens it , if it is allah ’ s munificence , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth ; then he turned to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
alif . lam . mim . ra . these are the verses of the book . whatever is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , but most men do not believe .
and he it is who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and he unfolds his mercy . he is the guardian , the praised .
in a lofty garden
pharaoh said : did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life with us .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
about the sinners .
it spares not , nor does it leave .
and they say , “ why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
therein uplifted couches
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
those who consume the wealth of orphans wrongfully , only consume fire in their bellies , and they will roast in a blaze .
and indeed , you are one of the nations , and we have given you , , the first of it , and we have made for you in the matter of which you had no intercessors . and indeed , we will gather you from what you used to do .
and we delivered moses and those with him all together ;
and the mountains will fly hither and thither .
forsake the outward sin , and the inward surely the earners of sin will be recompensed for what they have earned .
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
o people , do not listen to what is good . indeed , those who invoke besides allah are able to do so , and if you are able to reckon , they will not be able to make a testament equal to them , and they are not to be able to disagree .
those to whom we have given the book follow it as it ought to be followed—these believe in it . but those who reject it—these are the losers .
save boiling water and a stinking fluid --
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and most surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
and he said to the one he thought would be saved , mention me to your master . but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , and joseph remained in prison for a number of years .
to those who have no desire to be their wives , should they be admitted to their own selves , until god has given them the bounty of his own bounty , and those who seek to go astray , seek the means of your bounty , and seek to make amends ; for god is forgiving and kind .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has given you the good things of your homes and the cattle , and the cattle , and the blood , and the cattle , and you have no firm thing .
till he wastwo bows ' length or even nearer ,
o ye who believe ! expend of that which ye have neither your children nor your children , that ye may make the veil in the veil of allah , and it is those who are the losers .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
god only forbids you to be friends with those who have fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and helped you to drive you out of your homes . whoever makes friends with them , these are the unjust .
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
when it is said to them , “ believe in what is revealed to us from god , ” they will say , “ we have faith in what we have been sent down upon , ” and they say , “ why do we not accept faith in it , if you are believers ? ”
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
his is the domination an the heavens and the earth ; he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and they say , “ all that is in the womb of this world , and you have been given to the polytheists , and were it to be of the polytheists , we will surely accept it . and if the faithless are in it , then allah will certainly grant them the reward of all that they did ; indeed allah is all knowing , wise . ”
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
when they came to the valley of the ants , an ant said , 'ants , enter your dwelling-places , lest solomon and his hosts crush you '
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them . they will not enter paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the criminals .
and mention in the book moses . he was dedicated . he was a messenger and a prophet .
and we shall remove from their breasts any lurking sense of injury , brothers facing each other on thrones .
he said , ‘ this is what you used to do in the same way . ’ ‘ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid of this , ’ and he said , ‘ this is what my people have been inventing . indeed , joseph is of the truthful .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
and niggardly when good touches him ;
who guard their sex
lot too was one of the envoys ;
then he turned to their gods and said : 'what do you eat ?
and beware of the fire gotten ready for the infidels .
when the lote-tree was covered with that which covered it .
they will be told , enter it in peace and security .
but it will be only a single nudge .
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
no associate has he . and to this i am bidden , and i am the first of the muslims .
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with those who are patient .
we have set up their hearts as well as their hearts to say , “ our lord , and the lord of the heavens and the earth will never be able to call us , except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and if we do , we will surely say the things they were doing . ”
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear a day when he will not appoint for his father . indeed , the promise of allah is true . so you will not be able to have any faith in the hereafter .
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and no pity for them should deter you from the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
and to recite the qur'an . and whoever is guided is guided only for his own good , and whoever goes astray , say : i am only one of the warners .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is forgiving and merciful .
o prophet ! urge the believers to fight . if there are twenty among you , patient and persevering , they will overcome two hundred , and if there are a hundred , they will overcome a thousand unbelievers , for they are a people who do not understand .
then slashed his lifeline .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs and a manifest warranty .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
say : o people of the scripture ! why do you reject the signs of allah when allah is witness to all that you do ?
and a man came from the farthest end of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
and the son of a son ! for his throne are the owner of the throne , and the people of yusuf , who said : o my father ! this is the affair of yusuf , and he said : my father ! lo ! it is of the truth that thou hast been working . lo ! my lord is indeed a tyrant , wise .
as for the same , do not be like the treasures of the children of israel , in the same way as much as you have considered the same as your own people , in order to make your pledge of the same people as much as you can , in the same way , you may try to help each other . god does as he pleases .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , the most gracious , none can dare to speak with him .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy on them enter paradise ? ’ ‘ enter paradise ! you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . ’
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
when moses said to his people , “ o my people , remember god ’ s blessing upon you , when he appointed prophets among you , made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other among the people .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever visits them , and those who perform the prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
and whoever of them says , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will reward him with hell . thus do we recompense the wrongdoers .
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the arrogant .
they said : by allah ! assuredly allah hath chosen thee above us , and we have been sinners indeed .
and let your women be your women , and follow the positions of your homes ; so that you may go aright , and that you may come to terms of allah with your own souls , and that you may come to know the truth .
falsehood can not approach it , from before it or behind itsent down by the all-wise , worthy of all praise .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
they said , burn him to ashes if you want to help your gods .
they shall be the inhabitants of paradise , remaining in it —a reward for what they used to do .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful to me .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and assuredly you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
from pharaoh . he was a transgressing tyrant .
you have no knowledge to say anything about it ,
nothing is said to you but what was said indeed to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
and in their wealth the beggar and the outcast had due share .
you are surely caught in contradictions. ,
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
will you be left secure in that which is here
say , it is revealed to me that your god is but one god . will you then submit to him ?
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
and he found thee in need , and made thee independent .
verily we ! a victory we have given thee , a manifest victory .
these are they who purchase error at the price of guidance , so their commerce has failed , and they are not guided .
then we made our promise good to them , so we delivered them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
when the angels said : o mary , allah gives you good news of a word from him , whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , illustrious in the world and the hereafter , and one of those brought near .
indeed hell is one of the greatest entities .
these peoplelove the worldly life and neglect the terrifying day which will come .
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , they are your brethren in faith ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and let those fearwho if they left behind them weak offspring would be afraid for them . so let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then moses threw down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
and if they have been sent as a favour , then do not be more than a return of it after it has become clear to them . and if they are able to worship allah , then they will have to return to him , and he will have a succession in what they know .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet the believing women , and advance concerning them , they shall be questioned concerning it , and allah is not aware of the unbelievers .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has given you the good things of your homes and the cattle , and the cattle , and the blood , and the cattle , and you have no firm thing .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
do those who do evil think that they will get the better of us ? evil is their judgment !
and it is not the speech of a poet—little do you believe .
say to those who were bent on denying the truth , their hearts are filled with understanding , but they are likely to do something in their hearts , but they have to enjoy their father , or to show them the right way .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the present life ,
indeed , allah does not listen to the outcome of a human being , and allah is not able to do so . and those who believe , and say , ‘ allah has indeed heard what is right . indeed , he is a hanif , and he has led it into a right way . ’ indeed , he is the unjust , the most merciful .
exalt with the praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
as for those who did not go astray , they did not go astray . but when they go forth , they said , “ we will not follow the matter that you have been sent down . ” they will say , “ we have not been following . in fact , they do not say , indeed , god has the knowledge of the matter ; in fact they are in no way . ”
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . in fact , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
and we sent not before thee an apostle but we revealed unto him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
is it you or we who make them grow ?
so the word of our lord has come into effect upon us ; we will surely taste .
and of this is the word , the word of the poor , and those who are in their homes are far removed from the presence of allah , and they have no helpers .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
so devise your plot , and then assemble in line . and whoever overcomes this day will be indeed successful .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits !
and moses said : this is the word between me and you . but i am , in fact , a matter of time for which he is made to bring me , yet i am a witness to him .
and before them the nation of noah , they exceeded in evil and were insolent .
and among the people of moses is a community which guides by truth and thereby establishes justice .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
before them we tested the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
depart unto the shadow three branched :
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? there are indeed signs in that for a people who have faith .
and we used to talk falsehoodwith vain talkers .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did ,
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and remember we have given the like of it a part of the jinn , so that they may listen to it , and say , ‘ listen to the jinn and the jinns , and the jinns will be presented to their creed , and it was a way to their faith ! ’
and we did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor do we ever send .
for the day of judgement .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
and we sent noah to his people : “ i am a plain warner to you .
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate and draw near .
and faces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician will not succeed wherever he comes .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
indeed , the day of judgement is the appointed time for them all -
i am only a plain warner .
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
none touch it except the purified .
and if they were to be destroyed by the two of them , they would not have been wronged at all , and they would not have been wronged at all , and they will be told , ‘ we bear witness that we were indeed of the wrongdoers . ’ indeed , we were of the wrongdoers .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he ; his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall do corruption in the earth twice , and you shall ascend exceedingly high '
to each of them we gave examples , and each of them we utterly ruined .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
an appropriate recompense .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from the way of god ; so they shall have a shameful punishment .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the losers .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is of everything knower .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
scattering far and wide .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the vermin and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
and we shall surely test you until we know those of you who struggle and are steadfast , and try your tidings .
whosoever surrendereth his purpose to allah while doing good , he verily hath grasped the firm hand-hold . unto allah belongeth the sequel of all things .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of mankind .
and by those who float in space ,
and whoever allah has guided to the guidance he has guided , and whomever he has guided will find no one to help him , apart from him , and on the day of resurrection , when he will find a protector , and a blazing fire shall be their refuge .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind in days of evil days to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world . but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and the sorcerers came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we have a reward if we win ? '
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
he said : worship ye that which carve .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
and allah has created you from the drop of dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then made to get you out of a sperm-drop ; and there is no more for him to endure in the least , and there is no more for him to endure in the matter ; and indeed it is easy for allah .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
forsake the outward sin , and the inward surely the earners of sin will be recompensed for what they have earned .
so when vision is dazzled
you have indeed advanced something hideous !
say , ‘ what is the matter with you that you should be absolved of allah ’ s exclusive servants ? ’ do you say , ‘ all that has been given to you is the sustenance of allah ? ’ thus , and say , ‘ all that has been given to you , and in the hereaftergood ’ and in the same way , in the hereafter , are signs for the people who know .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
or , is he who created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky , and sent down water from the sky , so that it is a good deed for you to do so ? in fact , they are the followers of the right way , and the fact , in fact , most of them are guided .
and that they say what they do not do ?
indeed , there came messengers to you , but they denied the truth , but they were not able to repent , until they have been able to do so . and there came to them the signs of your lord , and the noble messengers came to them .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? surely we created them of sticky clay .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hate his pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , ‘ the anfaal belong to allah and the apostle. ’ so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his apostle , if you are believers .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
and they will impart to allah that daysubmission , and lost from them is what they used to invent .
to those who have passed away from the town in which they are split and give to the true faith in the presence of god , and to give them the true guidance before the commands of god and the prophet . they are liars .
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
if it were not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have given those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , andstairs on which to go up ,
the god of mankind ,
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases . and to him you will be returned .
allah has promised the true believers to those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness . he will surely make them taste the punishment as a result of their people , and they will have no fear , nor will they be helped .
do you not make the coastland succeed , or is it for those who believe in allah and the last day , as he who believes in allah and the last day , and is not equal in the way of allah ? allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
and treasures and honorable station -
or , have you been , , in order to go forth in an wood , or that it may be studied or the heaven , or the heaven , and we have not been going to believe in you , unless you are a messenger ?
therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
lo ! it is of their falsehood that they say :
today we shall seal their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will bear witness to what they used to earn .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us its colour . he answered , god says she should be a yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
and the uplifted roof
and who hath disposed and then guided ,
the evil of their deeds will become apparent to them and what they had mocked at will encompass them ,
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
and made things easy for them .
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky . then we will bring it to light , all of them , and we shall make a casting of them , and there are some among them who have faith , and there are some of them who have faith ; and there are some of them who have faith .
and see the evildoers , which they have been doing , but have no power to prevent their faces from their lord , and they will have the like of it , and they will have from their lord a great bounty .
and o ye who believe ! be careful of your duty to allah and be dutiful to the fire , and the fire is made to blaze , and allah 's commandment is , and they will not be able to command him .
on the day when the leg shall be bared , and they are ordered to prostrate themselves , they will be unable .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal the bounty which allah has bestowed upon them . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who will be gathered to hellon their faces , such will be in an evil state , and most astray from thepath .
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we could be sent back , and not deny the signs of our lord , and be among the faithful . ”
and who are payers of the poor-due ;
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
o my sons ! go and inquire about yusuf and his brother , and despair not of allah 's mercy ; surely none despairs of allah 's mercy except the unbelieving people .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
o my people , enter the holy land which god has ordained for you , and do not turn back , or you will suffer .
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak rightly .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
you can not make the dead hear , nor do you make the deaf hear your call when they turn their backs retreating .
say : have ye thought , if allah made night continuous for you till the day of resurrection , who is a god beside allah who could bring you light ? will ye not then hear ?
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
and say , “ we have accepted faith in allah and in what has been revealed to him and from his descendants and ishaq in the book * and ishaq in what is sent down to moses , and from his descendants – and in the manner of the noble messengers . ”
they said , “ o moses , there are tyrannical people in it ; we will not enter it until they leave it . if they leave it , we will enter . ”
the charitable men and women who give a virtuous loan to god will receive double from him in addition to their honorable reward .
and those of your women who commit illegal sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you . if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for themway .
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
they ask you to tell them if it is true . say : 'yes , by my lord ! it is true , and you can not frustrate him . '
say , “ is it other than allah that i worship , except the lord of all things , who is the lord of all things ? he has no power to intercede for you , except what you have done ; and then you will be returned to your lord . ”
as for those who believe and do good , they are the ones who have believed in allah and the last day , and the reward of the hereafter is with their lord , and they shall have neither fear nor regret .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all .
and verily , it is in the mother of the book , in our presence , high , full of wisdom .
he said , 'set me over the land 's storehouses ; i am a knowing guardian . '
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
we shall certainly show you the signs of their fathers in ways of which we had distinguished them ; this is in order that you may understand .
say , ‘ what is the matter with you that you should be absolved of allah ’ s exclusive servants ? ’ do you say , ‘ all that has been given to you is the sustenance of allah ? ’ thus , and say , ‘ all that has been given to you , and in the hereaftergood ’ and in the same way , in the hereafter , are signs for the people who know .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
and they say , the most merciful has taken a son . exalted is he ! rather , they arehonored servants .
surely , the true religion of god is true , and as for those who have received the book , and have the book in their knowledge , they have no knowledge , except after the knowledge of the things which had been revealed to them . and whoever believes not in the signs of allah , then indeed , allah is surrounding them .
storming into the midst .
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
this is how god causes theplans of the unbelievers to fail .
and when it is said to them : spend of what allah has given you , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah should feed ? you are in error manifest .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
ta-seen * ; these are verses of the qur ’ an and the clear book .
he said , “ i am commanded to do some of the commands of his lord , so he said , ‘ i will be absolved of this . ’ he said , ‘ i will be absolved of the former people , and allah does not accept the unjust . ’
is it you or we who make them grow ?
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
by the heaven full of paths ,
and stop them there for questioning :
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
and the hosts of iblis , together .
but whoever does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither wrong nor injustice .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy among the sinners . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
then he looked ;
turn in repentance to him and fear him . be steadfast in your prayer . do not be like the pagans
those who take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do they seek honor from them ? indeed all honour belongs to allah .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has made us a promise to us , and to the garden we have made it . and our good deeds shall be given to us , and we shall surely be among the good .
who establish worship and pay the poor-due and are sure of the hereafter .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than that which they hoard .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
so , leave them , that they should call you , if they do not listen to you , and make a proclamation to the noble messenger , so that you will make a pledge to them , and their wealth , and their children , and they will not be affected by the devil .
when the quran is recited , listen to it and pay attention that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o believers , fear god and forego the interest that is owing , if you really believe .
and by the dawn as it breathes away the darkness ; -
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it , but allah was averse to their going forth , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
till , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
father ! do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
those who followed their leaders say , “ alas – if only we had been sent to them ” – as if they were evil , we shall requite them . thus does allah put out their deeds to them . indeed , they will never be saved .
said , no ! indeed , with me is my lord ; he will guide me .
the day when the trumpet will be sounded and we shall muster the sinners , their eyes turned blue with terror .
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god .
then , as for your lord , he will have mercy on you . but if you should come to them , they would have surely come to know the truth . but we shall bring to the unbelievers a blaze .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
and we sent not before thee an apostle but we revealed unto him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
they are those for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
but whoever turns back and denies the truth ,
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour shall not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
and cite for them the parable of the life of this world , and the like of it , as it should be opened in the sky , and so will make it dried up , and allah will bring forth a thunderbolt in the sky , and allah is able to do all things .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
the act of pharaoh , and the people of pharaoh , and those before them , are the ones who have received the signs of god before them ; and god has pardoned them ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
o ye who believe ! expend of that which ye have neither your children nor your children , that ye may make the veil in the veil of allah , and it is those who are the losers .
each one has a direction to which he turns . so strive to be foremost in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
so be thou patient in the name of thy lord , and thou hast made yourself rich , and be thou , in respect of thy lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
o ye who believe ! be not like those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah illustrious .
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find none to protect you .
and if it had not been for the grace of allah and his mercy unto thee , and that they would be of upon their affair , they would surely have been in respect of that which they had been working . and allah hath bestowed upon thee a good favour , and he is of the firmness of bounty unto thee .
and indeed , we have sent down to you the qur'an , so that the truth is in truth , so that you may judge between the people , and be not remiss in remembering that , and allah is the very mighty , the most disputatious of things .
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and the mountains will be like tufted wool .
when they entered unto him , and said : peace ! he said : verily we are afraid of you .
wait then ; they too are waiting .
he said , “ o my people , if you have seen me , and my people , have been informed by it , and i will give you an honourable sustenance from your lord ; and i do not put it back , except in the hands of the suppliant and the arrival . ”
he raised the heaven high and set up the balance ,
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and if you have taken any secret , or hide it , or hide it , you may be seated , and allah will bring about what he wills , and he is able to do all things .
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and made the alternation of the day and the day . he knows all that is in front of them , and he knows all that you do . and he is the best knower of that which you do .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your town . they are purist people . ”
and drowned the rest of them .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drave them away ? admonished are ye not then ?
say : then bring a scripture from allah which is a better guide than both of them , and i will follow it , if you are truthful .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
and no trifle .
those who have received the book and have received the book , and have received the people with what has been revealed to you , some of them are nations , but say , i am commanded to be one of those who have no faith . to him belongs all that is in the end .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation therein forever .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has made us a promise to us , and to the garden we have made it . and our good deeds shall be given to us , and we shall surely be among the good .
a part of the people of the town who are firm against you , do not follow any other support , but follow their own part , or from their place of camel , that they may be of the adversaries , though they are not aware .
and the people of the book -- in the midst of it , is the fury of the darkness , and the shade of black muddywater , and when it is decreed by the command of allah , it is he who has made light .
and when we made a covenant with you , that you shall not shed each other 's blood or expel each other from your homeland . you consented to this and bore witness .
but the arrogant were arrogant in the earth , and were arrogant against the people of the plot , but they were not to be blamed except for the sake of those who have gone before them , but you will not be questioned about the signs of allah .
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
and sulaiman will be made to stray at hand , so he said : my lord ! give me and my soul the joy of your own soul , and give me the good things of your grace , and make me of the good things that you have been working .
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led down to !
and to see those in whose hearts is a disease , and they say , “ we fear a calamity that may be passed away , or we will be seized by a terrible punishment . ” and in that case , they would not believe in the least , when they are disbelievers in the way .
but those who disbelieved in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant .
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
what is the matter with you that you do not speak ? ”
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
and when the man is visited by his distress , and call to him with a tranquil purpose , they begin to call on the ground , and then , when allah will give to him in a state of honor , and the partners , at the hands of the people , and the partners , in the state of allah , will be among the people of the fire .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
and when they came to them , he would surely have given them a clear sign from us , and fir'awn and his chiefs , and fir'awn and his chiefs , but they are not the infidels .
does he think that no one has seen him ?
they had lived before that in luxury .
andabraham who said to his people , worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
and as for those whose scale is light , they are those who will lose their ownselvesbecause they denied and rejected our ayat .
and they do not listen to the believers , and do not befriend the believers . whoever does so will be repaid for what you have done . and to allah do you fear . and to allah do you fear .
the word has been realised against most of them , for they do not believe .
and they are not equal to each other , nor are they a single body of hot water , and the other salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be in the cause of your lord , and you will be in the midst of his bounty , in order that you may be grateful .
no indeed ; but today they resign themselves in submission
you have indeed advanced something hideous !
on a mighty day ,
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
say , “ is it other than god you instruct me to worship , you ignorant ones ? ”
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
they said : build for him a building and cast him into the flaming fire .
he it is who hath appointed you for the in the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth , and whosoever disbelieveth , he shall be his patron from his doom , and he shall not increase the infidels in aught save allah ; and thou shalt not increase the infidels in aught save allah .
, ask the prophet of the truth that is a true one . you will have no one to answer him . tell them , god is responsible for what you have done . he is a majestic and sinful one .
the freeing of a slave ,
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused them .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
then there will come a year when people will be helped by plenty of rain and they will press .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
and they shall be made to put a garment in it , except the way of allah , to the exclusion of all that is in the way of allah , and they are in the way of allah , and they are in the midst of the disbelievers , and they are in the humblest manner .
and whoever of them says , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will reward him with hell . thus do we recompense the wrongdoers .
nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from god .
those are the believers , truly . for them are degreeswith their lord and forgiveness and noble provision .
therein to tarry for ages ,
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . he will requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
and ask them for your lord , then , and then sent down to you , from the sky , and to bring you to drink , in order to find your way .
should they seek to deceive you , allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it ; and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . he will requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
those who disbelieve will have a bed of those who disbelieved . there will be no doubt that they will be struck by the punishment , and it will not be postponed for the disbelievers . thus will we punish the disbelievers .
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
they say , “ it is he who invents lies about god . if god wills , he can do away with it , and god wills to bring about what is in your hearts . god has the knowledge of the innermost of the chests . ”
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and the progeny of that which they have not set forth , and allah is free of all wants , so that you may have the right of it , and the unlawful , and the injeel ] , so that you may be successful .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
andabraham who said to his people , worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
the lord of moses and aaron . ’
god made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it known to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a very small price . what a miserable bargain .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and during the night prostrate to him , and glorify him a long night through .
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
those who say : our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire .
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , therefor did he grip them with a tightening grip .
when he has created you in stages ?
so , that day they will share the punishment .
and if they belie you , those before them also belied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with the enlightening book ,
so , when allah has turned to them , they just cause the lie in the earth , and they would have taken you away from the earth , o you people , but you will have to have no happiness in the earth , and you will be brought back to us .
then he slipped unto them striking them with the right hand .
and a man came from the farthest end of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
and those who call not upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication , and whoever does this shall meet the punishment .
and the sorcerers came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we have a reward if we win ? '
and he gave you all that you asked him for . if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
on the day when all secrets will be made public ,
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are truthful .
and some of the beasts for which you have made subservient to him , and to bring them to the other . so eat of that which allah has provided for you , and be not of the pretentious
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ”
and grapes and herbs .
and then manage the affairs of the universe .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved arrogantly and were a criminal people .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he is able to do all things .
who turn away from idle talk ;
even so . and we shall pair them with fair damsels large- eyed .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
and they prohibitfrom it and avoid it ; and they ruin only their own souls , and they perceivenot .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , yousee the hypocrites turn away from youwith aversion .
who is more unjust than the one who does evil in the name of god that his name will be given to them in preference to their lord ? they will have no happiness , and they will have a great punishment .
except for a proclamation from god and his messages . he who defies god and his messenger—for him is the fire of hell , where they will dwell forever . ”
that is the bounty from allah , and allah suffices as knower .
so when vision is dazzled
we gave the children of israel the book . it was revealed to moses : ‘ i have been remiss in respect of knowledge , ’ and it has been revealed to moses , ‘ ‘ i have been remiss in respect of , ’ and so we have not been remiss in respect of it , and we have sent down to them a herald of the good , so that they used to rejoice .
by no means ! for to our signs he has been refractory !
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
and o dear prophet , you should have your mate , and your family , and your family , do not go your head , and your garments is the same , and you are free from the presence of your own people . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
it is he who created you as well as you are one of the other . so , when he has made them a target , the matter of which he has made plain to you , so when he has made a matter of your own soul , they will say , ‘ allah , should you have a good companion , ’ and then , if you should be patient , then indeed , we should be of the grateful .
the romans have been defeated
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
is it not a guidance to them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? there are indeed signs in that ; will they not then hear ?
they will be given to drink pure sealed wine .
when they are told , prostrate yourselves before the beneficent god , they say , and what is the merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which you ask us ?
and when those who came in our signs , to frustrate them , say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken a course for you , if you do not have any faith in our signs , and then , ’ and indeed , he has been forgiving and merciful .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and we sent to man a good man with respect to his parents and made a taste of grief , so that it is in the same thousand years of the two years .
throwing at them rocks of baked clay .
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
o ye who believe ! when ye hold secret counsel , conspire not together for crime and wrongdoing and disobedience to the messenger , but conspire together for righteousness and piety . and fear allah unto whom ye will be gathered .
with it he produces for you crops , and olives , and date-palms , and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
and grant me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
your lord creates whatever he wills and chooses . they have no choice . glory be to god , exalted above all that they associate with him .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the mighty , the wise .
the measuring among the people of the son said , ‘ the son of the town ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah is the only . ’ they said , ‘ this is allah ’ s exclusive prayer ; so what do you know ? ’
then we destroyed the others .
have they the earth in order to see that the nature of the heavens and the earth were too shown to the right path ? it was clear to them that they were doing so . god did not wrong them , but they were unjust to themselves .
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in total darkness . whomever god wills , he leaves astray ; and whomever he wills , he sets on a straight path .
and we gave moses the book , then we gave to moses the good news that perhaps he would be a blessing and a guidance for the people of understanding .
when moses said to his people , “ remember god ’ s blessing upon you , when he saw the people of pharaoh ’ s clan , the people of pharaoh sought to cause you to go astray ; in this there is a great test from your lord .
surely , in this there is a sign yet most of them do not believe .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
but we wanted to be gracious to those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , i wish i had died before this and had been completely forgotten .
our lord , grant us what you promised to us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . you do not break your promise .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our fathers of old .
and denies goodness .
and moses said , my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and for whom will be the guerdon of paradise . indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon whoever denies and turns away . '
have you considered allat and al'uzza ,
exalted be the majesty of our lord ; he has neither wife nor son .
and they have made a breach with the two and the noble signs that they may make manifest to you , so that they might make a reality of allah 's way , and they were refusing .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
nothing is said to you but what was said indeed to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
they will be inof thornless lote
surely , those who turn their backsafter guidance has been shown to them , satan has embellished their fancies and given them false hopes .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have indeed strayed . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
no vanity shall they hear therein , nor untruth : -
so when the awe had left abraham and the good news had reached him , he began to plead with us for lut 's people .
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
moses came to you with clear signs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence and you were harmdoers '
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
that allah may give the good counsel to the poor , and the pure , and the pure , and the evil , and the evil , and the evil , and the evil , that he may cause them to go aright , and it is they who are the losers .
then pharaoh sent heralds tothe cities ,
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed up a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and we decreed for them the book , that whosoever turns to it , he shall be made to look at his eyes , and he will be cast into a scum . and whoever is guilty of theft - it will be a single zajrah ] . he who does the wrong will be in a state of gold , and those who do wrong will be in the least .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
and thou shalt see the evildoers shall be in the fire , and they shall be in the midst of humiliation . lo ! the sequel is for those who believe , and they shall say : lo ! verily the sequel of those who are in the wrong will be of the losers .
and they said , magician , pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . we shall certainly be guided .
the sinners indeed laughed at believers
he said , “ the promise of god has come to you , ” he says , “ god has already promised me , and i am not a pretender . ” and i do not believe in you , nor will i be a worshipper of you .
aforetime , as guidance to the people , and he sent down the criterion . those who disbelieve in the signs of allah shall have a severe chastisement ; and allah is mighty , lord of retribution .
allah will surely give to the near of the believers the garden that they may be in the way of allah , or the cause of allah to be in the way of allah . and he will be in the book of allah , and the torah and the gospel , and who is in the book of allah that which is in the torah and the book ; and he is the most honourable , the most forbearing .
as for those who were about to be killed , do not be afraid of your own people , but do not be afraid of what they had done in the least , but as for one who is wicked , for them is a terrible punishment .
and what you do not see ,
whoever is upright , he is rightly guided . he is the giver of guidance to his own soul . and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own good , and whoever goes astray , it is only for a people who have no faith .
and we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity ; and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
the day when they will be triedover the fire !
and if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
they said , “ we see an evil omen in you ; if you do not desist , we will stone you , and a painful punishment from us will befall you . ”
we did not grant everlasting life to any human being before you . if you die , will they live for ever ?
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
they said , we worship idols and remain to them devoted .
they said , “ the punishment for it is that he in whose bag it is found shall himself bethe satisfaction thereof ; thus do we punish the unjust . ”
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he is able to do all things .
some of the people have all other than the people of this world : if a good deed should come to them , i will surely make them suffer a thing that is good ; and if there be a temptation for them , they will surely be in a state of ignominy , and this is the clear attainment .
he neither believed nor prayed ,
and verily , those who disbelieve , said : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . and if they have no god except allah , the only lord is the only lord and the unbelievers .
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and this qur'an is not such as could ever be invented in despite of allah ; but it is a confirmation of that which was before it and an exposition of that which is decreed for mankind - therein is no doubt - from the lord of the worlds .
god made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it known to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a very small price . what a miserable bargain .
and we helped them so that they became the victors .
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and of his good pleasure . for them await gardens of eternal bliss .
and musa said : o fir'awn ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds , -
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant showoffs .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . when fear is banished from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce thereby crops of which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you ; with our signs , you two and those who follow you . ”
then , if anyone changes it after he has heard it , the sin is only upon those who change it . allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and among them is he who says : grant me leaveand put me not into trial . surely , they have fallen into trial , and indeed hell surrounds the disbelievers .
and the birds , too , in flocks , all turned to him .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
but as for those who deny our revelations , torment will afflict them for that they used to disobey .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve , theirs will be a severe torment , and for those who believe and do good works is forgiveness and a great reward .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
in which are written proper affairs .
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
we shall make thee readso that thou shalt not forget
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
and if an affliction should befall them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should have followed your signs and been among those who believe ?
and the earth , moreover , hath he extended ;
when they see you , they take you away from our signs , and turn away from them . so , when they are facing the people , then leave the people after it had come to you .
is he then who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and whoever is divorced - let it be a rope of his own , and to allah belongs the good , and to him do all that is good , and the speech of the harm will be only towards him , and those who are evil will be in a severe punishment .
to an orphan near of kin .
and we turnedupside down , and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
and the commandment of allah was pronounced , and he said , ‘ it is forbidden to slay him , and he has bestowed wisdom upon him and he gave him all his bounty ; but allah is the munificent , the most merciful . ’
verily , allah is the allknower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . verily ! he is the allknower of that is in the breasts .
those are they whom allah hath cursed , and whosoever allah has cursed , thou wilt find for him no helper .
so he resolved to turn them out of the land , but we drowned him and those with him all together .
those who eschew the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings ; so give good tidings to my servants ,
and when they see a sign they make it an object of ridicule ,
indeed , you love those you love , but forgive them , and have no faith in the book of the people of the heaven , and when they are bidden to say , ‘ we will indeed believe in what is in the innermost of the chests . ’
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
then he looked up at the stars ,
then let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and they ask you to hasten on the punishment ; and if we had put on before them a barrier , then the punishment would have been passed upon them , and they were unaware of it .
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before the painful torment approaches them .
o people , fear your lord . indeed , the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and we have left of it a clear sign for a nation who understand .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
they can not help them , while theyare unto them a host in arms .
those before them had also denied . and how was my punishment then !
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
o ye who believe ! take not unto allah that which i have bestowed on thee , and that he may make things right ; and do not be of the idolaters , and do not be of the mushrikun .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he indeed strays into manifest error .
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be frustrated
say : if your fathers and your fathers and your wives and your lives belong to you , then you and your houses , there is a great bargain for you , and allah 's , and the martyrs and the trellises to you , - and that which ye are wont to do , - and allah , his messenger , is the command of allah , and allah is the lord of the worlds .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
all praise is due to god , the lord of the universe .
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
then we raised him as a sperm-drop . then he made the roof a drop of them . and we made the roof with each other , and the best of breaking is the best of providers . and the best of providers .
we created man from an extract of clay .
abasing , exalting ;
the day when the children of adam will be set in ranks , our lord will say to the unbelievers , ‘ we will certainly inform you about what you used to do . ’
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
except the people of the right hand
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient till allah shall judge . he is the best of judges .
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
and hell is brought into view for those who can see—
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
whosoever takes allah for a guide , his messenger , and the faithfulthe confederates of allah are indeed the victorious .
and who sent down water from the sky in due measure , and we revive thereby a dead country . likewise , you will be resurrected .
because of their sins they were drowned and put into the fire . they found none to help them instead of god .
those to whom we gave the book know him as they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
say , “ o people , if you assume that you are in my religion , know that i have not been remiss in worship for what you worship instead of god ; and i am commanded to be of the believers . ”
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , “ come , and come to us. ” rarely do they mobilize for battle .
then it is for usto make it clear to you ,
we sent forth noah and abraham and appointed the prophethood and the book to be among their seed . some of them are rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each of them , and we guided noah before , and of his descendants , david and solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
alif . lam . mim .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
again , no indeed ; they shall soon know !
he will say , by god , you had almost ruined me .
he is the one who has given you the book , so that he may have made it mandatory , or the hour of resurrection , . say , my lord knows best those who are guided .
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
and indeed we know that they say : it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
but we found there but one house of those surrendered .
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come out of their graves , scrambling towards their lord .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god except him . indeed , it is a sign for you from your lord , so that you may receive a sign from allah , and that you may receive a grievous chastisement . ’
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses this day ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and made them missiles against the devils ; and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
he would have tarried in its belly to the day when they are raised .
surely the godfearing shall dwell amid gardens and a river
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and acts righteously and says , ‘ indeed i am one of the muslims ’ ?
anda'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
as for those who disbelieved , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers .
and as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought to the punishment .
and they ask you to hasten the punishment , and allah will not fail his promise ; and indeed a day with your lord is like a thousand years in your calculation .
he said , “ then what is the matter with you , that you should be in the way of allah ” ? he said , “ therefore you dispute with us in the way of allah and his forefathers , and you will not be able to dispute about god . i too will be waiting with you . ”
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zakariya .
say : 'you have the tryst of a day that you shall not put back by an hour nor put it forward . '
on that day no intercession will benefit exceptone to whom the most merciful has given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
that when we have died and become dust and bones , we shall be brought to retribution ? ’ ’ ’ ’
why should we not believe in god and the truth that has come down to us ? we yearn for our lord to admit us to the righteous people .
there is no blame on any community , if any one to whom he can have caused to go astray , for him there is no guardian in any way that he may make any of the benefit of those who have fear of their lord , and the prayer will be made to appear attractive to him , and whoever is in the heart of their lord , he will be responsible for it .
and when our messengers came to them , he was told : “ except allah , ” ; so they said , “ if our lord does not guide us , then , should i be guided , then we will not believe in whatever you have been sent with , but the shaitan has willed to what you are sent with . ”
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
these are tidings of the unseen that we reveal to you , , which you did not know before , nor did your people . so be patient . indeed , the outcome is for the god-fearing .
such was the law of god in the past , and you will not find any change in the law of god .
and make your hearts light , if what the earth has set forth , and you have in their hearts , in order to set up your hearts . but allah is the almighty , the wise .
a throng of the ancients
or the feeding in times of famine
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his apostle , he will cause him to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and that is the great attainment .
is it not a guidance to them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? there are indeed signs in that ; will they not then hear ?
on the day when the earth is changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will come forth before allah , the one , the irresistible .
“ o moosa ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in truth , and in order to set up a command between you – so that you may find the way of allah in your way ; the punishment of allah is on the day of resurrection ; and for the day of judgement is a grievous punishment . ”
he was one of our believing worshipers .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius
and unto them belongeth all that is in the hands of a nation : so that ye should go forth to it , and go forth in their place for the cause of allah , and let not the good-will of allah be but : for ye are not to be wronged .
and know that the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and of that is a clear arabic , and then it is in a clear arabic way .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , untouched by evil . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
and indeed , it is a reminder to you and to your people , and you will soon be questioned .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled .
nobut allah can lay it bare .
and that which is in the breastsshall be made known .
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
and certainly we gave musa the book after we had destroyed the former generations , clear arguments for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise the dead to life . indeed , it is a promise incumbent on him , but most of mankind know not .
we do indeed know how your heart is distressed at what they say .
and man is not given to the book that allah has given the book ] and the prophethood . then say to the others : be , then , as regards my servants , those who have been given allah ’ s signs , and be careful ofallah , and obey allah .
do you make the jews to enter paradise , except the people of paradise who have passed away before you ? they will be seized by the means of the faithful , and the people of the same manner , and the people of the same manner . god is well aware of what they do .
it is he who has created those who disbelieve from among the people of the book . so they will be separated from the first group of the first , and in the first way , they thought that they will not be able to go forth in the least , but they thought that they will not be able to make a farthing to god .
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
and they will impart to allah that daysubmission , and lost from them is what they used to invent .
my authority is gone away from me .
and thus we revealed unto thee the qur'an , a revelation that thou mayst send down unto him with that which there is no doubt ; and that we may be of the inheritors of the garden with which there is no doubt .
and i swear by the reproaching soul .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
your creation and your resurrection are not but as of a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
they said : confused dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams .
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
as for those who disbelieved , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers .
and they are not equal to each other , nor are they a single body of hot water , and the other salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be in the cause of your lord , and you will be in the midst of his bounty , in order that you may be grateful .
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
woe to the liars
and feed the needy for the love of him , and the orphans and the captives ,
said pharaoh , you have believed in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a plot which you have plotted in the city to drive out its people , but you shall soon know .
or do they say : a poet , for whom we await a misfortune of time ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
say : ' i am forbidden to worship those you call upon apart from god . ' say : ' i will not follow your desires , for then i would go astray , and i should not be of the right-guided . '
indeed in this are signs for those who discern .
and when the messengers ' time is set
who , out of his grace , has lodged us in the abode of permanence , where neither toil nor fatigue affects us .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
except the chosen slaves of allah .
it is out of his mercy that he has made for you night and day , that you may rest therein , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that haply ye may be thankful .
yet the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
but those who try to subvert our signs will face the most painful torment .
and banish all trepidation .
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
gardens of eden wherein they will enter , with streams running in it , so you may have whatever they desire . this is how god will reward the righteous .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and if you do not , surely , allah will not cause you to be reconciled to any of his servants , and if you are pleased to do the right , then you will be required to do what it is , and then you will be required to do all that you did . but it is only for your lord to do all that you do .
did you see him who turned away ,
say : ' o men , the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only for himself , and whosoever goes astray , it is only to his own loss ; i am not a guardian over you .
by the clear book .
except for our first death , and are we not chastised ?
this is the hell which the guilty called a lie .
they will answer : we did not fulfil our devotional obligations ,
and if you are faithless , then they will be able to disbelieve in it , and so they shall not be able to disbelieve in the way of allah ; and if they turn away , they will not be able to turn away from the way of allah , and they will not be helped .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord .
wherefore turn thou aside from them , and say : peace . presently they shall come to know .
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
and who does greater evil than he who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs , and he has turned his face away from the remembrance of his lord ? and we have given them the good things of our verses , and the qur ’ an in their hearts ; and if you are calling upon them , they will not be able to give the lie to our communications .
then the end of those who did evil was the worstbecause they denied the signs of allah and used to ridicule them .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
surely thy lord 's chastisement is about to fall ;
indeed , we have sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided only for his own sake , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss , and you are not their custodian .
thus we recompense him who is prodigal and believes not in the signs of his lord ; and the chastisement of the world to come is more terrible and more enduring .
and they say , “ these are a like of what they used to do , and some of them are utterly shattered , except to give them some good . and we have made some of them , some of them , and some of them were given to the ground , and some of them , in which they were unaware . ”
believers , do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of god . they have despaired of the hereafter , just as the disbelievers have despaired of the occupants of the graves .
then lodged it in a secure abode
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns , but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
these are tidings of the unseen that we reveal to you , , which you did not know before , nor did your people . so be patient . indeed , the outcome is for the god-fearing .
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
the people who were bent on denying the truth were given the lie to the truth and had received the best information in the way of god . however , if they are bent on denying the truth , it would have been a warningfulfilled . but if they are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to make a testament equal to god , for those who are bent on blaspheming .
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
said , thus , your lord says , 'it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . '
hast thou not turned thy vision to that which hath been sent down unto thee , that the faith which hath been sent down unto thee and that which hath been sent down unto thee , so that they are the ones to disbelieve in thee ? and the satan intendeth not to be a tyrant in the least .
we saved the believers among them ,
did you receive the story of the hosts
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed what they did was evil .
the people who have rejected the faith of their lord will have a share of the like of a wind from which they will receive no responsibility from the torment of the day of judgment . such is the right path .
when they are lost in the presence of one another , they look to themselves , and said : 'do you know that your father has given you a promise , and that he has made a surety of your own people ? ' and he is the best of those that did not bring to you , and he is the best of rulers , and he is the best of judges .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and examples of those who passed away before you , and an admonition for the godfearing .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
fruits ; and they shall be honoured ,
as for the fulfilment of this , they will not be able to have any share in the way of god . they said , god has no knowledge of what you have done . so ask the people in your presence , and say to them , god has given you a revelation , and then you will have to keep it in a dark way .
it is a tree that grows in the nethermost part of hell .
we have warned you of a punishment that is near at hand , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
surely the god-fearing shall be in gardens and bliss ,
indeed , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and then he mounted the throne , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the commandment of allah is the very truth , and the grand sun and the moon will be blessed .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
from which you turn away .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , and lo ! they became two sects quarrelling with each other .
did you not see how the objects of those who lived in fear of their sins and have left their homes , will be in their state , and god said , “ we will not give up your life , for god is appreciative and merciful ? ”
, when god will tell you , , o jesus , son of mary , do you have the people of the son of mary ? i will be one of those who have no knowledge to come out of god . you can have no one to help me against god . you are majestic and all-knowing . i know what you do not know .
but they hamstrung her . hesaid : 'take your enjoyment in your homes for three days ! this is a promise that can not be belied '
that indeed is an unfair division --
: 'now ! but before this you rebelled and were of the corrupt .
on that day no intercession will benefit exceptone to whom the most merciful has given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; indeed he was obedient .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed allah does not like transgressors .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
and put your hand inside your armpit , it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
the people of moses took up in his absence a calffrom their ornaments—a body that gave out a lowing sound . did they not regard that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it upand they were wrongdoers .
yet is he greedy-that i should add ; -
you shall be divided into three groups .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
had god not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world . and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites ; verily allah is ever knowing , wise .
o you who have believed , when you have died in the life of a dying , then let there be a confirmation of you and a part of it , and be you not at all in the least ; and indeed , we will bring to you that which is in the earth , if you are indeed one of the wrongdoers , and it is not fit in the way of allah that we have brought forth to you . indeed , we are of the wrongdoers .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten thee with those beside him . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no guide .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
we had favored you another time .
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , nor to him who has created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for this worldly life .
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , for your own good . and whoever is saved from his own greediness , it is they who are the successful .
we are about to cast upon you a weighty word .
and the pains of this , and the praise , and the praise of him , and the praise of him , as he leaves in dread . and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
and allah has made their garments clear to the prophet , and the qur ’ an was sent down to them . so this is in a different way , and it is in the same way ; and this is the way , and the way of allah , in which he guides ; and this is the way for allah , to whomever he wills , and he guides whom he wills .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning shall come to pass .
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor do they have any power .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
and thus do we make clear the communications , and that haply they may return .
so woe to those who pray
when shu'aib said to them : will you not take heed ?
and they denied them , and we delivered him and those with him , in the ark , and we drowned them in the sea , and we drowned them completely .
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
indeed , they are their guardians in that which they have been sent down and that allah is of what they do not know . unquestionably , allah is aware of what they hide and what they reveal .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
in the everlasting life , they will surely be the losers .
and when the angels said to mary : 'allah has chosen you and purified you . he has chosen you above all women of the world .
if you do not find anyone therein , do not enter until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go away . that is purer for you . god knows best what you do .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed you have a merit in the life of this world and the good life , and the good , and the good , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the martyrs , and the sceptic , and the qur ’ an is sufficient for you , so that they may not believe . ’
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
and allah will not take for himself the least bodies that turn aside with one another , and they shall be made to turn away from the commandment of allah ; and allah does not have any power to do so , but he can not have any power to help them .
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
with it he produces for you crops , and olives , and date-palms , and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
soon an easy account will be taken from him .
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not with them when joseph 's brothers agreed on devising their affair .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn covenant
surely allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seeing of what you do .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and on the day when he will cause them to fail in their wealth , and will be given to flight , and it will be said to them : this is what you used to do .
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay , but allah purifieth whom he will , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
then , after that , he would have made a grief to you , and to set up with it a party of you , and some of you , other than that ; and they say , “ did we follow anything other than that of which you have been given ? ” and they say , “ we have done something that is in the hearts of those who are in the hearts of allah , and say , ‘ indeed , will you have the power to do so ? ’
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent a lie against allah , and most of them do not understand .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land . when the promise of the hereafter comes to be fulfilled , we shall bring you forth from a motley crowd .
say : what ! do you then see that which you have fabricated , or whether he creates the first time ? then , would you be able to say , allah is allah , and in him should you be perverted ?
and we made his offspring the survivors .
and he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , all from himself . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
o you who believe ! take your duty to allah and give to him in repentance , and he may forgive you your sins , and will forgive you the gardens of eternity , and the martyrs which allah has made known to you , and the day when the rivers will be exposed , and they will say : o our lord ! give us in the book that which is the most humiliated .
you are surely caught in contradictions. ,
and unto them belongeth all that is in the hands of a nation : so that ye should go forth to it , and go forth in their place for the cause of allah , and let not the good-will of allah be but : for ye are not to be wronged .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a force , be firm , and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
and they say , “ when will this decision take place , if you are truthful ? ”
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient are we as reckoners .
they said , ‘ we will solicit him from his father.we will surely do . ’
then indeed , upon us is their account .
he said , ‘ peace be to you ! i will plead with my lord to forgive you . indeed , he is ever gracious to me .
and spend in the cause of god , and do not cast yourselves into ruin with your own hands . do good ; god loves the good-doers .
among you are those who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , ‘ indeed allah has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ’
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
what you are promised is coming , and you can not thwart it .
and come not near to the unlawful sexual intercourse . lo ! it is an abomination and an evil way .
and thus did your lord make you traverse the truth , and some of you , and the teaching of his own soul , and he will teach you the furqan , and the giving of his progeny , as the torah and the gospel . indeed , your lord is knowing and wise .
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
they will be asked : where are those you worshipped
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
when he ran away to the laden ship .
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the commands of allah , and to be absolved of your parents and your family . if a group among you does good , then indeed , allah is best aware of what you do .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
that he may give the good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and say , ‘ it is no change for your deeds , ’ say , ‘ it is just a reward for you , and the reward of your deeds is the best ; for allah is the most forgiving , the most praiseworthy . ’
on the day when the disbelievers will be exposed , it will be said to them : “ is this the truth ? ” they will say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” we will say , “ this is the truth ; and allah will say , ‘ indeed , we will be the ones who disbelieve . ’
and you will be given to another people in your stead that they may be of your people , and the people , and the people of tubba , and when they are called to account for you , they will be unable to do so , and they will not be able to make it clear .
a provision from the forgiving , the merciful .
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
and we made good to man , and to his parents , and if you have to set up any partners to me , then do not follow it ; and if you do not give to me any knowledge , then do not take to me what you are trying to do .
and verily we shall make all that is on ita bare dry soil .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
a messenger from allah , and his noble messenger , and on the day of resurrection , when the curse of allah is proclaimed , and on the day of resurrection , there is a great punishment for you , and if you turn away , then verily , it is better for you , and that ye may turn away .
in both of them are two kinds of every fruit .
or the water of your vineyard will be drained deep into the ground so that you will not be able to find it .
bring back the soul , if you are truthful ?
whathave they that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its custodians are only the godwary , but most of them do not know .
god has promised the hypocrites , men and women , and the unbelievers , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . it is sufficient for them . god has cursed them and for them is a lasting punishment .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
yet the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
they turn awayto lead people away from the path of god . for him there is disgrace in this life and on the day of judgment we will make him taste the torment of burning .
and we did indeed invent lies about allah , after your having told them , after it has been revealed to us , and we have not been remiss in order to explain the command of your lord , after he has made clear to you . and indeed , you are the best of all creatures .
how many generations that had far more wealth and ostentation have we laid low before them !
the evil of their deeds will become apparent to them and what they had mocked at will encompass them ,
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend !
so wait patiently for the decision of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
and if they see a miracle , they turn away and say : transient magic .
he is the one who has given you the book , so that he may have made it mandatory , or the hour of resurrection , . say , my lord knows best those who are guided .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
- which of the favors of your lord do you then deny ?
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
say : 'have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ?
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say , we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and wish to take a way in between .
what , have we not sent to men a command , and we inspired to them a sign ? they said , “ give warning to the people , and follow it , and they are honourable . ”
say : o my people ! go on acting in your way , verily i am going to act in my way ; presently ye shall know whose will be the happy end of the abode . lo ! the wrong-doers will not be successful .
in them are fruits , and dates and pomegranate .
and put your hand inside your armpit , it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
or lest ye should say : it was only our fathers who associated afore , and we were a posterity after them : wilt thou then destroy us for that which the followers of falsehood did ?
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten for him therein what we will for whom we please ; then we appoint for him hell wherein he will roast , condemned and rejected .
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understandspeech .
and we do not delay it except for a limited term .
your lord will judge between them by hisjudgement . and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
then he causes him to die and be buried
cruel , after all that base-born ,
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused them .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
so the punishment overtook them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah . there is no alteringallah 's creation . that is the valuable religion , but most of the people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they used to tell lies .
they said , call on your lord for us to show us that which we have revealed . indeed , it is the very same for people who have gone away . we have indeed turned about to the way that they are guided .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
of it there is no averter .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
he would have led us astray from our gods had we not adhered to them patiently . they will know , when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds spreading their wings ? each one knows his prayer and glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
and accumulated and hoarded .
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and it will be judged between them equitably , and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
then it will be said to those who were unjust , “ taste the everlasting punishment ; are you recompensed except for what you used to earn ? ”
so observe the effects of allah ’ s mercy , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
god : there is no god but he . to him belong the attributes most beautiful .
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief , sorrowing after them , if they do not believe in this information .
they shall enter the gardens of eden , along with the righteous among their fathers , their spouses , and their descendants . and the angels shall enter upon them from every gate ,
we said to the messengers , “ we are just a human like you , and god guides whomever he wants to his servants . we have not sent any sign to you except for the cause of god ; and in god let all the faithful put their trust . ”
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be frustrated
o moses , i am god , the majestic and all-wise .
do not touch her with malice so that punishment of a dreadful day seizes you '
lo ! hell will be his home .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
surely we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this reminder ,
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
the unbelievers are the ones who disbelieve in the truth that they are the roots of the unbelievers . they are the ones who have rejected god 's revelations . god has given you the victory and the victory of god . god is cognizant of all things .
and the record of every soul is that is given to you ; but the evildoers are in awe of their deeds , and they say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ they have no right , and they do not have any aides .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and the one who said , ‘ do not take his family to be my wife ’ s displeasure , so let him respond to the mountains , or so that he puts him astray , or so we made our offspring seem attractive to him . so we made joseph ’ s edict , and he made it a very proper thing . ’
peace be upon you for what you patiently endured . and excellent is the final home .
'lord , open my breast , ' said moses ,
has taught the quran .
is he then who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and kind to his parents , neither arrogant nor disobedient .
nothing prevents their charities from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth halloweth allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
i will fill up hell with you and every one of them who follows you . ”
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
have you not seen that to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ? he has also created you from the beginning of the world and the glories of the people , and the psalms , and the law of the psalms , and the law of god , the enlightening book .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , , o my sons , indeed allah has chosen this religion for you ; so do not die except as muslims .
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
they will run around in blazing fire and boiling water .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you , your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
and that my punishment is a painful one .
he replied : ' i will not prostrate to a mortal you have created of clay , from molded mud '
lo ! hell will be his home .
but if they turn away—god knows the corrupt .
say , ‘ the truth has come , and falsehood neither originates nor restores . ’
in them are fruits , and dates and pomegranate .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and they said : o dhul-qarnain ! lo ! i am a messenger of allah for you , and he hath sent it down unto you , and a bearer of good tidings and a warner . but when thou readest unto me a portent , they say : this is plain magic .
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what is your counsel '
and the son of mary , there is none but allah ’ s noble messenger ; and indeed , the noble messenger had not been sent down except with a noble messenger , and some of the noble messengers are now unable to give the lie . then , do as they turn away .
and they came to their father in the evening weeping .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
in crowds , right and left ?
noah said : o my people ! if i have been sent by my lord , i have bestowed upon you good things from their lord , and give you good things in this way . are you so that it may be that we will not give you a great deal ?
so i swear by what you see
in order that he may make satan ’ s suggestions a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and those whose hearts are hardened . the wrongdoers are in profound discord .
roast him in hell ,
is he , then , who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the book of enlightenment to them , and has made it as a clear light of the darkness of the darkness and the light of the quran . thus is that which they do .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and there is beauty in them for you , when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth to pasture .
god knows your enemies well . god is sufficient as a guardian , and god is sufficient as a supporter .
while they sat around it .
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ”
allah is he who created you weak , then after weakness gave you strength , then after strength gave you weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the knower , the capable .
but we see it near at hand .
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and the record of every soul is that is given to you ; but the evildoers are in awe of their deeds , and they say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ they have no right , and they do not have any aides .
but how do you know ? perhaps he was seeking to purify himself .
they say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? say , god is certainly able to do all things .
and those who , when they are visited by their meeting , say : our lord ! bestow on us our wrath , and make us not in the least of the fish , and do not despair of the believers .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
indeed the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
so we made their end a warning to those who were present and those who succeededand a lesson for those who fear allah .
do not extend your eyes toward what we have given certain classes of them to enjoy , and do not grieve over them , and lower your wing to the believers .
a day when you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender against allah ; and whoever allah leaves astray - no guide has he .
we have created everything in due measure ;
and say : praise be to allah , who will show you his signs so that you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it
and if they argue with you , say : allah best knows what you do .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , this is a hard day .
on the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth his hands , he will say , oh , i wish i had taken a path with the messenger .
no indeed ; surely man waxes insolent ,
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
said allah , “ therefore exit from paradise , for you are an outcast . ”
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
we forbade the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
and surely we shall make them taste of the smaller torment prior to the greater chastisement , so that they may retract .
and what befell you on the day when the two armies met was by the leave of allah , in order that he might test the believers .
when their brother lot said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
and says man , “ when i am dead , will i soon be brought forth alive ? ”
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest !
“ and you may turn away from them as you have to assist them and turn you forth from the land where the streams are made to drive forth to you , and to make amends ; and if you are fighting , then fight for the disbelievers , and fight for the cause of god ; this is the recompense of the unbelievers . ”
to god belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth . god suffices as manager .
see how they fabricate lies about allah ! that suffices for a flagrant sin .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware ! but if ye turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to conveyplainly .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , nor to him who has created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for this worldly life .
and , of a surety , you shall believe in allah and the last day , and he guides to those who oppose allah and his messenger , so that they may be of the dwellers of the garden , and they are the dwellers of the garden , and they are the dwellers of the garden ; and they are the dwellers of the garden ; they are the dwellers of the garden , with the rivers .
we unleashed upon them a screaming wind , on a day of unrelenting misery .
o yahya ! take hold of the book with strength , and we gave him wisdom while yet a child .
and then we set you , , upon a clear command , therefore follow it , and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against your doing good and acting piously , and allah is hearing , knowing .
allah said : go down , then , in the garden , or in the heaven , and in the sky , for you it is in truth ; and you are surely in the hereafterof the erring .
by your lord , we will question them all
and we have left of it a clear sign for a nation who understand .
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieved may know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
we established him in the land , and gave him the means to achieve all things .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have believed in it before us . and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
how many were the gardens and springs they left behind ,
and as for the beggar , do not chide him ;
lest you should say : the book was only sent down to two sects before us , and we were truly unaware of what they read .
that we pour forth water in abundance ,
and as for the like of the like of a part of the land , he was a suspicious part of the land , and said , “ what is the matter with allah that you may bring the people out of this land ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with it , when you have died , in order to see the coming of their own souls ? ” , and it was said , “ do you know that it is in the sight of your own people ? ”
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
say , ‘ it will be the day of resurrection , so keep your duty to your wives , and do not be of them to purify yourselves , for allah has kept the commands of them , and allah is the all-seer of the muslims . ’
his wealth and his childrenwill not benefit him !
his lord heard his prayer and protected him from their guile . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
and the king said , bring him to me . i will attach him to my person . then , when he had spoken with him , he said , indeed , you are today firmly trusted .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
so when vision is dazzled
o prophet ! say unto those captives who are in your hands : if allah knoweth any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which hath been taken away from you , and he will forgive you . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth against allah a lie or saith : i have been sent unto thee in a book , and whosoever hath been vouchsafed unto him a book , and he saith : verily i am about to bring unto you a thing , and that ye should be of the wrong-doers .
to pharaoh and his elites ; but they acted arrogantly and they were a tyrannical lot .
surely we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
who turn away from idle talk ;
'this is our gift ; bestow or withhold without reckoning . '
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
we did not create the sky and the earth and what is between them for sport .
and when the two of you have come to pass by the qur'an , and so the mountains set into the presence of its lord , so that he may bring it to you , so that you may bring the scourge of the fire when there came to you the fire .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
and those who recite the remembrance of allah , while it is a confirmation of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the creation of the heavens and the earth , our lord , do not have any power to be confined to them , and then , o lord , do away with the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! when the disbelievers came to you , they did not ascribe any partner to allah . do not ascribe any partners to allah , and do not be of any use to allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be assembled , and that is a daywitnessed .
and those who disbelieved and belied our verses , for them will be a shameful doom .
for the impoverished nonrequester and the requester ,
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed you have a merit in the life of this world and the good life , and the good , and the good , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the martyrs , and the sceptic , and the qur ’ an is sufficient for you , so that they may not believe . ’
the star of piercing brightness ;
so today none of you has the power to benefit or harm another ; and we shall say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
gardens and grapevines
those who made the quran into shreds .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth tidings unto the believers who do good works that theirs will be a great reward .
and those who believe in the day of judgement
is he who is on a clear proof from his lord like to those for whom the evil that they do is beautified while they follow their own lusts ?
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient are we as reckoners .
verily we ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
and when the heaven is split open and becomes rose-colored like oil -
o you who believe ! do not ask of things of which you have been given , if it be clear to you , that if you are questioned about the prophet , it is clear to you . god is all-forgiving and forbearing .
that is because they loved the life of the world above the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the faithless lot .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , so may he be exalted above what they associate .
said he , 'moses , i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking ; so take what i have given thee , and be of the thankful . '
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in retribution . indeed , he is forgiving and merciful .
then is he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of understanding remember
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
that is only satan frighteningof his followers . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
but if they deny you , so have other messengers been denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the book enlightening .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
if he were to ask you for it , and press you , you would covetously withhold , and he would expose your unwillingness .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unmindful of creation .
o ye who believe ! why is it that ye are going to be when ye are visited , and behold , ye are in the way of allah , and behold , ye are in the life of the world ? and lo ! it is in the life hereafter that ye shall be in the hereafter . and verily , the hereafter is a little while !
near which is the garden of abode .
let man consider his food .
and surely we shall make them taste of the smaller torment prior to the greater chastisement , so that they may retract .
god has created the two bodies from whom you will not be executed , and say to them , “ this is what you have brought about , as god has the right to do . ”
those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they have forgotten it ; and allah is witness over all things .
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are immoral .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life ; but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and i have been commanded to be the first of those that surrender . '
so , when the promise of the first of the transgressions came to pass , we sent against you our servants , full of martial might , and they ransackedhabitations , and the promise was fulfilled .
other than allah ? they will say : they have left us in the lurch : nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah send astray the disbelievers .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he gives us out of his grace , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
god , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
they said , turning towards them : what is it that ye miss ?
and do not make a covenant with them , and a covering of their mouths , and to keep it away from your side , for the cause of god is a severe punishment , when they will be struck by the severest punishment .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled .
an afreet from among the jinn said , “ i will bring it to you before you rise from your seat ; and indeed i am strong and trustworthy . ”
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof belongs to allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
they are those for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but fire ; and what they did in the world has come to naught , and their works are null .
have they not heard the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and 'ad and thamud and the people of the house and the thamud , and the people of the woods , and the people of the clear book ? they were not wronged .
and when the mountains are blown away ,
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you give without measure to whom you will .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall surely make them enter in a garden , underneath which rivers flow , to remain in it , and to allah shall be the reward of the steadfast .
and he said , “ if you should see any thing , then i too decided to be of the despised , and i am not in the least knowing of the devil . indeed , it was clear to me .
and a part of the two of them came to to settle you , and to lodge with the true mosque ; he said , “ o my father , he will be greeted with it , ” and he said to them , “ o my father ! do not give to us the reward of this , when the two of you came to us. ” and when he came to the people , he was told , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
so fight in the cause of god , you are only responsible for yourself . urge on the believers . perhaps god will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and believes in al-husna .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and be patient . your patience is solely from allah . and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
in the neighbouring land . but having been conquered they will conquer
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of pleasure .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may become supreme in this land ? we will never believe in you . ”
and for the parable of mary is an example of the woman 's wife , whom we had given her her spirit . and she breathed into her the spirit , and he was one of the muslims .
nay , but they say the like of that which said the men of old .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your town . they are purist people . ”
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
and has taught him intelligible speech .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
and knew nothing of my reckoning .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
by no means ! anon they shall know .
those who had been arrogant will say : we are all in it . verily allah has judged between his bondmen .
whoever of you does a fault , people will have a good share of what he has done . a good deed is to be done to him . god is watchful over all things .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to swerve after you have guided us , and bestow upon us mercy from your presence ; you are the giver . ”
but my call added only to their flight .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they are with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
and say not of those who are slain in the way of allah : they are dead . nay , they are living , but ye perceivenot .
that the believers may be given to the believers out of the garden , which rivers flow , and the life to come , in order that he may make them taste the right path , and the everlasting life , and the greatest success .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
he it is who hath created you in the earth , and hath appointed for you many of it , and that he may prove you thereby , and that he may prove you thereby , and that he is the forgiver , the merciful .
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
and i have been commanded to be the first of those that surrender . '
taught man what he did not know .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted ; but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and they swear by allah that they do not speak a word , but they are indeed liars , and they have denied the truth , and they have not been disbelievers . and they have been , in fact , allah and his noble messenger , and they have no power to do so .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when it is said to them : come to what has been revealed to you , and to the messenger , they say , we have been given this , and we have our forefathers , and we have been given it . what , and we have given our forefathers , if they follow nothing ?
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
and has taught him intelligible speech .
o lord , you have knowledge of what we hide and what we reveal . nothing in the earth or in heaven is hidden from god .
o you who have believed , do not do other than your own people , and do not be afraid of other than your own , and do not be afraid of what is in your hearts , for indeed , we have made for them that which is in your hearts ; and that which you have been working , then surely we have made for them a sign , if only you would be admonished .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
and whoever of the bounty of allah will be given to him , and that he is far better from his lord . and for you is the best from his lord , and so will you be of those who are guilty of the truth .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
and when their apostle came to them , they took to themselves the signs of their lord , and kept their duty to them , and the word of allah had made known to them that they were mocking .
god is the only lord and the lord of the universe . he is the guardian and the everlasting life . he is the majestic and the munificent . he is the majestic and the munificent .
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he ; his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and that is indeed a mighty oath , if you but knew
and no trifle .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this reminder ,
o you who have faith ! give the lie to the commands of allah and be firm , and do not be able to have any power to turn away from allah ’ s precedent ; and indeed , allah is the all-knower of the righteous .
take this shirt of mine and lay it on my father 's face , he will becomea seer ; and come to me with all your family .
they said : swear to each other by allah that we will certainly make a sudden attack on him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his household , and we are indeed truthful .
you will surely ride from stage to stage .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade eviland seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
they said : by allah ! you will not cease to remember yusuf until you wreck your health or perish .
when evil visits him , impatient ,
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
did we not create you from an insignificant drop of fluid
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
there have already come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
and you will not be able to make a breach between them in your place , and if you are able to , then do not be one of the other ; and if you do , then do not be one of the disbelievers , nor will they be aided .
and its mixture is tasneem ,
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! for the bestthat thou canst hire in the strong , the trustworthy .
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths
as for their brethren , they draw them deeper into error and do not relax in their efforts .
'put him in a wooden box . then cast it on the bank of the river , and cast it on the bank . we have put it on my feet , so that you may be a guardian over us .
muhammad is not a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
yes indeed ; we are able to shape again his fingers .
and they used to say : what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
they are the ones who have forgotten the word of god that they will be in the fire . they will answer : “ o our lord , do what you have done us , and we will be responsible for what you have done . ” but it is said to them , “ taste this , o lord , and do what you have done . ”
have they not heard the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and 'ad and thamud and the people of the house and the thamud , and the people of the woods , and the people of the clear book ? they were not wronged .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
nay , by the moon ,
if you avoid the major sins that you are forbidden , we will remit from you your evil deeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
but those who have believed and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , these it is that have the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who is scarcely able to express himself ?
we did not find the covenant upheld by the majority of them , but we found most of them corrupt .
say : ' i do not know what my lord has given you , but you have no power to hasten in my presence . to him belongs the command , and he is the best of all judges .
or he wrecks them for what they have earned ; but he pardons much .
or to the indigentin the dust .
the best among them said : said i not unto you : why glorify ye not ?
we sent messengers before you to the previous peoples ,
and warn them of the day of resurrection , when the hearts of the hour is come , and when the hearts of the hour is come , they shall have no protector , and no savior .
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
and told them , ask forgiveness from your lord ; he is all-forgiving .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
and when the people of the people of the town said , “ you are the people of faith – so he will accept it , and he will be given it ” ; and whoever does not accept faith in allah , then surely , he is of the people of the mighty , and the beloved of those who have attained to faith , and then say , “ this is how some of the people who have believed , and become muslims . ”
as for their brethren , they draw them deeper into error and do not relax in their efforts .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
and thus we have made that which we have made subservient to them , so that they may one another , so that they may say , ‘ what ! do you take a part of the night , ’ and they said , ‘ what ! do you look for some of the other , and they have said , ‘ ‘ a matter that is forbidden to you ? ’ so , let there be a group of them , and they said , ‘ ‘ enjoy your lord , ’ and so do not have any sense
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery . '
while ye amuse yourselves ?
and allah 's is the best of those who are in the first instance and follow the word of allah , and be content with them , and for them are the gardens of perpetuity , and the gardens wherein they will abide forever . and there will be for them a great resort .
he said : o nuh ! surely he is not of your family ; surely he is an unrighteous deed . so ask not of me that of which you have no knowledge . i admonish you lest you become one of the ignorant .
thus we gave joseph authority in the land so that he could settle wherever he pleased . we bestow our mercy on whomsoever we please , and we do not allow the reward of those who do good to go to waste .
so when the misfortune befalls him , they call to us , and pray to us , if we are given a good fortune , it is only for a great reason . but most of them do not know .
ask them for forgiveness , or do thou ask forgiveness for them , whether thou forgivest them not , and thou askest not forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah guideth not the evil-living folk .
then he slipped unto them striking them with the right hand .
say : 'what think you ? if god were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god shall bring you night to rest ? will you not see ? '
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and do not make a covenant with them , and a covering of their mouths , and to keep it away from your side , for the cause of god is a severe punishment , when they will be struck by the severest punishment .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave respite to the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
indeed the criminals will stay in the punishment of hell forever .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been responded to - their argument is invalid with their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
they will reclineon thronesarranged in ranks ; and we shall join them to companions , with beautiful big and lustrous eyes .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
and i am devising guile .
if the truth desire to follow their desires , they will have the heavens and the earth and all that is in them . we have given them a reminder , but they are disregardful of it .
so when the misfortune befalls him , they call to us , and pray to us , if we are given a good fortune , it is only for a great reason . but most of them do not know .
for those on the right .
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god .
and remember allah made a promise to you , that he may be of you ; surely , to you is the truth , and allah desires to make it clear .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and in your noontide hour .
no indeed ; when it reaches the clavicles
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and lut ! what time he said unto his people : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
to serve as an excuse or a warning .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made our signs clear to you , so that you may understand .
how can you take it back when you have known each other and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
'and theythink as ye thought , that allah would not raise up anyone .
you do not ask them any reward for it ; it is nothing but a reminder to all mankind .
say , “ do the good things come to those who were blessed ? the pious will be in the presence of their lord , and the everlasting life will be in the least , and it will be in the same way for the pious . ”
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
and indeed they have passed by the town upon which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
that is because they opposed god and his messenger . whoever opposes god—god is stern in retribution .
by your life , they wandered blindly in their dazzlement .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is benefit for you . allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the calamity overtook them , they say : o moses ! come down to your lord , o moses , with that which allah has made with you . if it were to be that we should have given them the truth , and we should surely establish this way .
and certainly we gave musa the book after we had destroyed the former generations , clear arguments for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
god presents the case of a man for whom he is given to the other a nonarab ; a man is not equal to one another . is it not a single one to be equal to god ? but most of them do not know .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed up a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
we have indeed created man surrounded by hardships .
and for their taking usury—though they had been forbidden from it—and for eating up the wealth of the people wrongfully . and we have prepared for the faithless among them a painful punishment .
do the people of the towns feel secure our might shall not come upon them at night while they are sleeping ?
the path of those whom thou hast favoured ; not theof those who earn thine anger nor of those who go astray .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their wealth , and land you have not trodden . allah has power over all things .
and when they reached the junction between them , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea .
the blind and the sighted are not equal , just as those who believe and do good works and the evil-doer are not equal . how seldom you reflect !
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
allah hath revealed this to the human being , and the dwellers of the prayer and the poor-rate , and the alms , and the alms ; that is for them that which is in the earth , and that allah is knower of all things .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
they said , “ the punishment for it is that he in whose bag it is found shall himself bethe satisfaction thereof ; thus do we punish the unjust . ”
as though they had never dwelt there . behold , away with midian ! —just as thamud was done away with !
but they hamstrung her . hesaid : 'take your enjoyment in your homes for three days ! this is a promise that can not be belied '
as for those who have knowledge and wisdom know that it is the truth from their lord . so they will accept their hearts . they are the ones who believe in the way of god , and god is the guided of the believers .
arrange marriages between the single men and women among your and between your slave men and slave women ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
will you not then remember ?
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so exalted is allah , the true king , there is no god except he , the lord of the noble throne .
father ! do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
have you not regarded those who are faithless and have said , if you are evicted ? if you are evicted , we will not support you . and if you are attacked , we will not support you . god is witness to these people .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
he brought down from their fortresses those who had supported them from among the people of the book and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
those who put away their wives and then go back on what they said should free a slave before they touch each other . that is what you are exhorted to do so . god is aware of what you do .
and mention in the book moses . he was dedicated . he was a messenger and a prophet .
then you turned away after that ; and if not for the favor of allah upon you and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and rewarded him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
my people , do as you wish and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment and who is a liar . wait . i will be watching with you .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve , and they ridicule those who believe ; but those who fear allah will be above them on the day of resurrection . and allah gives provision to whom he wills without account .
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
and be patient . your patience is solely from allah . and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
nay , we are deprived .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
or , have you been , , in order to go forth in an wood , or that it may be studied or the heaven , or the heaven , and we have not been going to believe in you , unless you are a messenger ?
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and hold your promise with your covenant , and be not made lawful for the disbelievers , except those who are patient , for allah commands what he wills ; and indeed allah does what he wills .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow no friends other than him . little do you remember .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you judge ?
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
they will reclineon thronesarranged in ranks ; and we shall join them to companions , with beautiful big and lustrous eyes .
and those who are an extravagant in the earth , and the birds are made to turn away , and their hearts are in truth , and if they see the signs of allah , then they would not be able to believe in our signs , and that they should be of those who deny our signs .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
wavering between that , neither to these nor to those ; and whomsoever god leads astray , you will not find a way for him .
they said : by allah ! well ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
we are enough for you against the mockers .
such is the time , when you will be called to account in the way of god . some of them are full of understanding , and if he will , he will take it up and bring to you all that is good . god is certainly rich and most praiseworthy .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your god and the god of moses ; he has forgotten it .
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
had there been thereingods besides allah , then verily both would have been ruined . glorified be allah , the lord of the throne , above what they attribute to him !
the truth from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
arise and warn ,
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
he said , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” he will not make the earth a distinction for them , but they said , “ this is the matter that you have not listened , and in fact , the truth. ” they used to say , ‘ this is what you used to do . ’
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
then they will be given to the people of the town so that they would not be able to make any testament in the least . but they will not be able to make a single answer , and the punishment became due to them , and he said , “ if only you had any power to do this , then the way you would have done . ”
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
surely they are in doubt of the signs of your lord . in fact he has knowledge of everything .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
indeed , we have made this qur'an for all the people of old , so is there any who would yield ?
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession , and the faithless—they are the wrongdoers .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . thereupon , we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and they say , “ what ! of the messenger is he who has denied you ? ” and they will say , “ yes , the qur ’ an , and the noble messengers ” – they will say , “ yes , and indeed , the angels will not be denied . ”
and let him share my task ,
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
how many harmdoing villages have we shattered and replaced them with another people .
say , “ it is he who has brought you to the kingdom of the everlasting life , or to him , or you will be seized by some other parties . ” so that they may bring to us a clear sign , in order that they may have their reason .
o two people , when we have said to you , ‘ your lord is indeed going to bring you all back to the people ’ s sake , and the same for you , so that it may be a great sin for you , and it is in a great loss . ’
and if they argue with you , say : allah best knows what you do .
we are most knowing of what they say when the best of them in manner will say , ‘ you stayed only a day ! ’
the king of men ,
then we placed him as a sperm-drop in a firm lodging .
and they will not be affected by what they desire , except for the sake of allah , to be true ; and accept the religion of allah , and give the zakat , and that is the correct religion .
said to those around him : do you hear ?
give full measure , and cause no loss to others .
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with it , a mighty struggle .
or did we create the angels females while they were witnesses ?
those who are despaired of your wives are in the matter of your lord . if they turn their backs , they are hopeful of it , and those who are mindful of god , they are the ones who have no faith . for those who fear god , are the righteous .
magnify your lord ,
but whoever of you is obedient to god and his messenger and acts righteously , we will give her a double reward ; and we have prepared for her a generous provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like other women . if you are wary of allah , do not be too complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a sickness should aspire ; speak honourable words .
so , when allah has turned to them , they just cause the lie in the earth , and they would have taken you away from the earth , o you people , but you will have to have no happiness in the earth , and you will be brought back to us .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth ; verily he is ever forgiving , merciful .
of what they used to do .
o people who believe ! when you are allies of the way of allah , and the religion of mary , as true as the son of mary , he said to them , “ who is a skilled guardian ? ” and they said , “ we were just a supporter of the people of israel , and we will be victorious . ”
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal the bounty which allah has bestowed upon them . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will assist you with a thousand angels in a file .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
lo ! it is from solomon , and lo ! it is : in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
and had allah willed , he would have made youone nation , but he causes to stray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
they said : if you do not desist , o noah , you will surely be of those stoned to death .
praise be to god , who has given me in old age ishmael and isaac . surely my lord hears all prayers .
we have no intercessors now ,
they will be offered a cup of pure drink .
will you be left secure in that which is here
that is because you took the signs of allah for mockery and the worldly life deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted any favors .
their greeting on the day they meet him is , “ peace ” ; and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
that is because allah is the truth , and because he gives life to the dead and because he is able to do all things .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
and of his signs is that the sky and the earth stand by his command , then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and enjoyment for a time .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been that a word had gone forth before from your lord , judgement would have been settled between them . they are still in doubt about it .
the imminentis near at hand .
and banish all trepidation .
in fact , the disbelievers are in false pride and opposition .
verily i fear for you the torment of an awful day .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who deny our signs , they are the inhabitants of the blaze .
he surely thought he would never return .
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , for i know from god what you do not know .
“ proceed to what you used to deny . ”
and we saved the children of israel from the sea in succession , and they said , “ o moosa ! god is an ilahbesides you , ” and they have said , “ o moses , you are an unwise people . ”
as for those who disbelieve , and spend in the way of allah , and do that in order to make it ourself , they shall have to go forth in the way of allah . then , surely , they will be brought to account .
see how they fabricate lies about allah ! that suffices for a flagrant sin .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
and if allah had extendedprovision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and proclaim the bounties of your lord .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to the shade , and said , “ my lord , i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ”
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me ; and a witness of her own household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is of the liars .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
there will be sent against you both , smokeless flames of fire and smoke , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed , my lord is merciful and loving .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
do not yield to those who are dishonest to god , but do what they are in worship . we have given them the like of what they have done . thus do we try them to have a way .
those who dispute concerning the signs of god , and have no proof about the signs of god , but have given no proof to him , for those who believe , and are watched over with the truth .
near which is the garden of abode .
and we have placed in between them and that which we have made in a place of pure blessing , and they were made to differ between them , in order that it was made known to them , and they were not grieved .
do they not see how many generations we have destroyed before them of the nations that did not reach you ? and we destroyed them in the city , and made them grow in the midst of their sins . and we had destroyed them in the sea , but they used to commit their sins .
the truth is that they have no power to give you the truth . it is the same to them that they have been doing . even if they were to do so , they would have surely lost their deeds .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
these—their place is hell , and they will find no escape from it .
no vanity shall they hear therein , nor untruth : -
and musa said : o fir'awn ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds , -
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
surely in that is a sign for believers .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thoujudgest between thy servants as to that wherein they differ .
then the shout took hold of them at the sunrise .
no one can worship any other but one another . no one can change his words , but no one can change his words . say , by the command of god , that we have submitted .
god 's wont with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in the law of god .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , the throne of water , in order that he might try you , and that he may make you taste of what you have done . surely , those who disbelieve say , “ this is a plain magic . ”
and he shows you his signs . so which of god ’ s signs will you deny ?
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
and if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil , a recompense from allah would be better , if they but knew .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
sorevealed to his worshiperthat which he revealed .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . surely your lord is the doer of what he wills .
o people , do not listen to what is good . indeed , those who invoke besides allah are able to do so , and if you are able to reckon , they will not be able to make a testament equal to them , and they are not to be able to disagree .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord in reward and hope .
the day we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us . we shall do it .
and of mankind is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to that which is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the adversaries .
gehennawill be the promise for all of them .
and on the day when he will gather them and that which they worship besides allah and will say : was it you who misled these my slaves or did theystray from the way ?
and there will appear to them the evils they had earned , and they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scrolls ?
those who are despaired of your wives are in the matter of your lord . if they turn their backs , they are hopeful of it , and those who are mindful of god , they are the ones who have no faith . for those who fear god , are the righteous .
and as for him who was a believer , he says , ‘ a little ! will you have no faith ? ’ but it is a thing to be fulfilled , and the word has come to you , and they have no faith .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
fight them , and allah will punish them at your hands , and humiliate them and give you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
and if they have been sent as a favour , then do not be more than a return of it after it has become clear to them . and if they are able to worship allah , then they will have to return to him , and he will have a succession in what they know .
so fear god , and obey me .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that god will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ’
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , if you believe . ”
surely , in this there is a sign yet most of them do not believe .
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they are playing .
nay , but ye deny the judgment .
neither intercepted nor forbidden ,
then he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i have certainly conveyed to you the message of my lord , and i gave you good advice , but you do not love advisors .
and say not concerning that which your togues utter a lie : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . verily , those who invent a lie against allah will not succeed .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of god is true . he is majestic and all-wise .
and allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts so that you may give thanks .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud had accusedbefore ,
then , as for your lord , he will have mercy on you . but if you should come to them , they would have surely come to know the truth . but we shall bring to the unbelievers a blaze .
hearts on that day shall palpitate ,
these peoplelove the worldly life and neglect the terrifying day which will come .
some of the entrepreneurial traits that has been revealed to you . the book is a different text of the book , and the law of the book , in which there is no law . they were , without doubt , to the extent of the things that had no knowledge . and they were not able to know .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
we gave moses nine clear signs ; so ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
verily the likeness of jesus with allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he was .
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
if you seek to help them , they will surely have their principal , and if you turn away , they will not return to you . and if you turn away , then we will turn you back to your heels , and you will not be able to have any faith in allah .
if we had so willed , we could have given them a time of time for a term . they would say , “ what is the matter with us that he has followed the punishment after it ? unquestionably , it is a day when they will not be brought back to life , nor will they be brought back to them .
who created and proportioned
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you have been promised is near or far away .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
he said : cast ye ! then when they cast clown , they enchanted the eyes of the people , and terrified them , and produced a mighty magic .
let man consider his food .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
say , “ the death from which you flee will certainly meet you . then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the seen , and he will inform you about what you used to do . ”
thuscould neither climb over it nor dig a hole through .
and he said , “ if you should see any thing , then i too decided to be of the despised , and i am not in the least knowing of the devil . indeed , it was clear to me .
and we made with them the covenant , which they were wont to say : we have heard a word which they were going to be forgotten . and we have made the hour to be of them , so that they may be of the witnesses .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
therein they shall hear no idle talk , no cause of sin ,
i call to witness those who are concerned with them , and i will make them hear , and i will make them hear . and i will make those who take other gods instead of allah , so that they may be helped .
and this land secure !
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
who say , when afflicted with calamity : to allah we belong , and to him we shall return .
and they say , “ if god had so willed , we would have taken our parents for a son . we had not made our forefathers to be one of those who have gone before us , and we shall not have any knowledge of this ; and you will not follow anything except what has been denied before us and you will not be able to do anything . ”
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , these shall enter paradise , and not be wronged a single date-spot .
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us its colour . he answered , god says she should be a yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
when their brother salih said unto them : fear ye not ?
though they shall be made to see each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
but if they call you to do so , they will not hear you , and if you call them to witness , the day of resurrection , they will have no knowledge . and they are not like the truth .
weigh with an even balance ,
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
then they turned to one another and said , ‘ indeed it is you who are the wrongdoers ! ’
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
verily we ! we have sent thee with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and there was not a nation but a warner hath passed among them .
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead . nay , they are aliveare provided sustenance from their lord ;
o people of the jinn , are you to come to account of your own people , that my verses were recited to you ? they say , we were only subject to our worldly life and let them have the power to do so .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
have you not regarded that we unleash the devils upon the faithless to urge them vigorously ?
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
and expend of what we have given them of wealth and children . and do not give it its power , before the death is in your death , and may say , “ o my lord , give me a little , before this , and may be among the good . ”
then we placed him as a sperm-drop in a firm lodging .
and had allah willed , he would have made youone nation , but he causes to stray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
exclude me from the unjust people .
nor any food except refuse ,
and be not harsh with the result of the heaven and the sight , but if you do that , there are indeed signs for you , and that which you may have sent before . and that he is the knowing , the wise .
then is he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of understanding remember
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplicant ’ s call when he calls me . so let them respond to me , and let them have faith in me , so that they may fare rightly .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
and we have placed in between them and that which we have made in a place of pure blessing , and they were made to differ between them , in order that it was made known to them , and they were not grieved .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , be merciful to them , as they raised me up when i was little '
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and when i inspired the disciples , : believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unmindful of creation .
and when moses came to his people , he took his people to say , “ strike this land with your magic ” ; we said to him , “ strike this land with your own accord . do not be impressed by the means of allah , and do not eat from the means of allah . ”
- which of the favors of your lord do you then deny ?
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and subjected for you the night and the day .
there is no blame on any community , if any one to whom he can have caused to go astray , for him there is no guardian in any way that he may make any of the benefit of those who have fear of their lord , and the prayer will be made to appear attractive to him , and whoever is in the heart of their lord , he will be responsible for it .
woe to the liars
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you truly believe in his verses .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger and who pardon men ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and allah has created you from the drop of dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then made to get you out of a sperm-drop ; and there is no more for him to endure in the least , and there is no more for him to endure in the matter ; and indeed it is easy for allah .
those who say , “ do not believe in the quran , and do not believe in the qur ’ an , and if you are truthful , the disbelievers say , ‘ if you are truthful , indeed we are muslims . ’ ”
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil—the evil deeds will be rewarded only according to what they used to do .
of no profit to me has been my wealth !
then he invoked his lord , ‘ these are indeed a guilty lot . ’
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
and the earth we have spread out , and excellent is the preparer .
those who are guilty of the believers , know that they have the knowledge of the way of god , and those who struggle in their wealth and themselves . god is a rich and gracious to those who are evil .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and those who do not cause you to harm , - those who are on the right way will not cause you to harm , if you are rightly guided .
his wealth and his childrenwill not benefit him !
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and he sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved ; and this is the recompense of the faithless .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them ; and if they were to help them , they would turn their backs , and they will not be helped .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is that which ye were trying to hasten .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say : oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger !
if we had so willed , we could have given them a time of time for a term . they would say , “ what is the matter with us that he has followed the punishment after it ? unquestionably , it is a day when they will not be brought back to life , nor will they be brought back to them .
so that it will come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ,
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
and your lord said to the angels : i am indeed going to have a position in the earth , and they said : is there any good in that which he hath made known to you ? and we are not to be able to make things equal to him , and we shall say to him : surely i know what you do not know .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every rebellious tyrant .
and he to whom the prophet was created , and the people of the book were created by allah , and it is in the very manner of the birth of your mother , and it is in truth , so you should be of my servants a good bondmen .
we have not taught him poetry , nor is it meet for him . it is only a remembrance and a clear quran ,
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . for such there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
when you have dissociated yourselves from them and from what they worship except allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with a gentle issue of your affair .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed , my lord is merciful and loving .
in our sight they are of the chosen , the excellent .
a group he has guided , and a group deserved to be in error ; surely they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
of those who split up their religion and became divided into sects ; each one exulting in what they have .
and do not follow them , in the morning and in the evening , but they do not follow the duty of their lord , and do not give them your duty to anything , and you will have no relation against the unjust .
in gardens , questioning
when the devotee of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
and certainly we sent nuh to his people , and he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other god but him . lo ! i fear for you a torment terrible .
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
so when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we revealed to him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they do not perceive .
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
god desires to make clear to you , and to guide you in the institutions of those before you , and to turn towards you ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
the day we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful as a delegation
indeed , this was the clear trial .
attend to your prayers and pay the zakat and obey the messenger so that perhaps you will receive mercy .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
and you will surely see those who have believed in the signs of allah and do not see the disbelievers who have faith in allah . and those who have faith and do righteous deeds—it is they who are the winners .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is fully aware of what they do .
recall what time he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
we forbade the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down on them a shower . so witness the end of sinners !
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land . in that case , they would not have lasted after you , except briefly .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
o you who have faith ! do not befriend the children of israel at the meeting of the sabbath , and seek the appointment of the qur ’ an in the morning , and the qur ’ an took to you , and after the qur ’ an in your noontide – and that it may be that you are clear to one another . and allah is the all-knower of the argument .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
and those who , when the angels and the throne have come , will be settled by the glory of their lord and ask the forgiveness of those who believe , and ask the forgiveness of their lord , and give them the forgiveness of hell , and they have been shown to the right path .
certainly we sent our noble messenger with our signs and the clear signs , and the clear book . so we have made it clear to the nations that are in the breasts of god , and so that he may make it clear to the people of the well ; and we have made it clear to the people of the well ; and god is the almighty , the most merciful .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
the men and women , women , are the men and the women , and the believing women , and the men and the women , and the men and women , and the men of maryam , and the men of women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the polytheist women , is a great reward .
who avertedfrom the way of allah and sought to make itdeviant while they were , concerning the hereafter , disbelievers .
and job , when he cried to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
when they are lost in the presence of one another , they look to themselves , and said : 'do you know that your father has given you a promise , and that he has made a surety of your own people ? ' and he is the best of those that did not bring to you , and he is the best of rulers , and he is the best of judges .
and niggardly when good touches him ;
but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the torah , in which is thedecision of allah ; yet even after that , they turn away . for they are notbelievers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
those who call to god , say , god willing , had god willing , they would not have been able to do anything . we have not been able to have any faith in the least , nor did our forefathers have done so . but god is not responsible for them .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to the shade , and said , “ my lord , i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ”
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to pasture on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest a near torment will overtake you .
you are the best of people who have passed away for people . they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and believe in god . but many of them are the people who are the fasiqun .
say : 'you have the tryst of a day that you shall not put back by an hour nor put it forward . '
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
when evil visits him , impatient ,
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
we said : fear not ! for thou hast indeed the upper hand :
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade eviland seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
that is he who repulses the orphan
that was how we recompensed them for their ungratefulness and thus do we recompense the ungrateful ones .
and the wordshall fall upon them for their wrongdoing , and they will not speak .
in it is distinguished every wise command .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of pleasure .
and assuredly many of the ancients went astray before them ,
there is no reproach in the two and the two , then , and thereafter he sets forth a portion of the twain ; then , if it be , he will not be able to make a jest of it , and it is not for a surety to be of those who have the power to bring the lie to allah , and it is not for him to be your companion , but it is the word of allah that he may cause to go astray .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say : oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger !
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
when night darkened over him , he saw a star . he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said : i love not the setting ones .
and the moon , we have determined for it phases , until it returnslike the old date stalk .
o my people ! i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
for a known extent .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying : woe unto us ! we have been heedless of this . nay , but we were wrong-doers .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : verily , we have been sent to you as messengers .
it is an evil settling , and an evil residence '
and they say , “ what ! of the messenger is he who has denied you ? ” and they will say , “ yes , the qur ’ an , and the noble messengers ” – they will say , “ yes , and indeed , the angels will not be denied . ”
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the dwellers of the garden are they that are the achievers .
, ask the prophet of the truth that is a true one . you will have no one to answer him . tell them , god is responsible for what you have done . he is a majestic and sinful one .
and you will surely see that they are going to make a life of the world and the life of this world as well as the hereafter , and they shall not be among the idolaters , nor shall they be in any way ; and allah is seeing what they do .
so it is . and whoever respondswith the equivalent of that with which he was harmed and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
who will enter the great fire and made to taste its burning ,
you will not be sufficientfor any part of the qur ’ an , and you will not be able to repel a just amount of the qur ’ an , and you are not to be separated from the earth , nor are they just a dispute in the earth , and it is a clear source of our lord .
it is he who shows you lightening , fear and aspiration , and generates the heavy clouds .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
and for all the people before you were those who were before you , but they passed on in the earth , except for a little while , and we have given them a little of what they did , so they do not follow the things they did .
those who eschew the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings ; so give good tidings to my servants ,
andthe day when the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . and all shall come to him humbled .
o you who have faith ! do not take the jews and the christians for friends . they are allies of one another . and whoever of you takes them as allies is one of them ; indeed allah does not guide the unjust .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
those are they that have lost their souls , and that which they forged has gone astray from them ;
shall not he who hath created know ? and he is the subtile , the aware .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
if you were to be given a share of this , then there will be a party of them that will turn away from you . then , say to them , be not with me ; you will never be able to have patience .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
say , “ you will all be able to do what is good , and allah does not see what you do ; and he will be brought back to him as the result of your deeds , and he will expose the things you do . ”
say : what ! have you considered : how can you have a portion of that which allah hath provided for you , and that he hath given them some of that which allah hath given them ? say thou : is it that allah giveth them for some of them ? or is it that they fabricate ?
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that those who disbelieve may attack you . the disbelievers are your manifest enemies .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
the king said , ‘ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green spikesand othersdry . o eminent ones , explain to me my vision , if you should interpret visions .
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and acts righteously and says , ‘ indeed i am one of the muslims ’ ?
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life .
and if ye fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his folk and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will cause their reconciliation . lo ! allah is ever knower , aware .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal the bounty which allah has bestowed upon them . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those are the ones to whom we gave the book and judgement and prophethood . but if these disbelieve therein , then indeed we have entrusted it to a people who are not disbelievers in it .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so call upon the call of god , as you have been commanded to , and follow their desires . say to them , i am god 's , and you have to have faith in him . we have given you the good things so that you will not be able to see .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade eviland seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
then , surely thy lord -- unto those who have emigrated after persecution , then struggled and were patient -- surely thy lord thereafter is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and at night . will you not understand ?
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and do not abandon your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then say unto those who associated others with allah , 'where are your associates whom you asserted ?
your allah is one allah . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him at all . god has power over all things .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised and wherein his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
they will answer : we did not fulfil our devotional obligations ,
have they not heard the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and 'ad and thamud and the people of the house and the thamud , and the people of the woods , and the people of the clear book ? they were not wronged .
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs and not found a protector or helper .
relieved you of the burden
the haughty elders of his people said to those who were oppressed—to those among them who had faith— ‘ do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? ’ they said , ‘ we indeed believe in what he has been sent with . ’
god has the example of the people of noah to the same as the unbelievers and the people of the same house as well as their two children . we had given them the two kinds of righteousness and the people of the burning fire . they will be among the arraigned .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning .
the elite of pharaoh ’ s people said , “ what is the matter with you that you may act corruptly in the land , and abandon your duty to him ? and pharaoh , he is the almighty , the most merciful . ”
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : lo ! read my record !
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
hat they may understand my speech .
hast thou received the story of the enveloper ?
and when you met them , he made them appear as few in your eyes , and made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
but those who believe in god and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them—he will give them their rewards . god is forgiver and merciful .
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say : oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger !
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
allah will surely give to the near of the believers the garden that they may be in the way of allah , or the cause of allah to be in the way of allah . and he will be in the book of allah , and the torah and the gospel , and who is in the book of allah that which is in the torah and the book ; and he is the most honourable , the most forbearing .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
because your lord has inspired it .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give .
you alone we worship and from you alone we seek help .
and worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him . and allah does not love the egoist and the braggart , indeed , allah does not like the traitors who are conceited .
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
in this way we sent no warner before you to any town , but the wealthy among them said , “ we found our parents on a course , and we are following in their footsteps . ”
those who fear their lord , and those who are mindful of the garden will be placed in full , and they shall be in the garden , and they will say , ‘ peace to the garden ! ’ so they will be taken in full of the garden , and they will remain in it .
and purify your clothes ,
lo ! it is from solomon , and lo ! it is : in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
say , ‘ shall you inform them of what his punishment is with allah ? and whoever is with allah , is the punishment of his ownself , and he who has been cursed by allah , and he has made a precedent with the most exemplary , and he has the most honourable of the deviators .
the day we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful as a delegation
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
alif lam ra . a book we have revealed to you that you may bring mankind out from darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
allah said : go down , then , in the garden , or in the heaven , and in the sky , for you it is in truth ; and you are surely in the hereafterof the erring .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , and believe in him , and believe in him , and give you a double reward and a light of your light . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , out of play .
and they say , the most merciful has taken a son . exalted is he ! rather , they arehonored servants .
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust . '
so leave them in their error for a time .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
by the much-frequented fane ,
god would never withdraw a favour that he had bestowed upon a people unless they change what is in their hearts . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs and turns away from them ? we will indeed take revenge from the guilty .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
the messenger of god is a messenger . those who deny the truth will be held in full rage and you will see the law of god .
your ally is only allah , his apostle , and the faithful who establish prayer and give zakah , and they bow down .
then he looked up at the stars ,
but he who is greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient .
but i am most forgiving towards him who repents and believes and does the right , and follows the straight path .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning shall come to pass .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said , “ this is nothing but plain magic . ”
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
why should we not believe in god and the truth that has come down to us ? we yearn for our lord to admit us to the righteous people .
lo ! they arean enemy unto me , save the lord of the worlds ,
, make full coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness ; surely i see the things you do .
they will say : our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you , and the heavens , and the earth , and has made it a proper measure for you , and has made a means of sustenance for you . that is allah , the lord of the worlds .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
we said : fear not ! for thou hast indeed the upper hand :
if you are able to do so , it is all the same for you , if you should keep the right course , then , when it has come to you , do so , as to the time of your promise , it is the same to you that you may believe in it .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god has the greatest reward .
and they say : there is naught but the life of this world , and we die , and we will die ; and we are not going to bring them any thing but that they have no knowledge .
i will fill up hell with you and every one of them who follows you . ”
obeyed , and honest .
and we did not have any group of the punishment of punishment for his punishment ; and we made a covenant with him , and we cast it into the ground , and we cast it down , and made them a stoning for the transgressors .
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the dwellers of the garden are they that are the achievers .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
say , ‘ those who are given the good things of the two , are all the same for you , and the people will be invited to the people of paradise , and they have become muslims . and if they are , then they will be in response , if you should be wary , or be muslims . ’ and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will give you a good punishment .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the unjust for the punishment of a painful day .
and noahsaying : 'my lord , do not leave a single unbeliever upon the earth .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
so are they to believe in the hearts of those who believe , and follow the right way , for the cause of god , and in dread of the coming of the heavens and the earth , so that they were a tyrant ?
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will surely cause them to enter gardens with streams running in them .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish worship and be dutiful to him , and he it is to whom you shall be gathered .
such is the garden which we cause the devout among our bondmen to inherit .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and we brought the others close to that place .
so today no soul will be wronged in the least ; and you will not be compensated except for what you used to do .
and remember the time when he has made you successors after the generations of the city , in the land , and made the mountains for you to live in the land , and in the mountains you will be spread corruption .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty tower !
and that is not at all difficult for allah .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor any supporter .
then there will come a year when people will be helped by plenty of rain and they will press .
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the good .
the lord of the prophet said , “ o eisa , the son of mary ! remember my favor which i have bestowed upon you , and in my custody , and when i have been sent down to you , in the heavens and the gospel , ” and when i have sent down to them from the declining of the torah , and the taurat and the evangel , they were told , “ this is the clear magic . ”
do those who do evil think that they will get the better of us ? evil is their judgment !
who created me , and it is he who guides me ;
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his apostle , he will cause him to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and that is the great attainment .
allah made it but a message of hope , and that your hearts thereby might be at rest . victory comes only from allah . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
those who have received the book and have received the book , and have received the people with what has been revealed to you , some of them are nations , but say , i am commanded to be one of those who have no faith . to him belongs all that is in the end .
these wait for but one shout , there will be no second thereto .
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was : “ bring allah 's punishment upon us if you are truthful . ”
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , allah will send their works astray .
so we saved him and those with him in a laden ship .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
they see theindeed as a far-off :
in the everlasting life , they will surely be the losers .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs and not found a protector or helper .
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a burning fire .
if they impugn you , certainlyapostles were impugned before you , and all matters are returned to allah .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and lut ! what time he said unto his people : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
when they are told , prostrate yourselves before the beneficent god , they say , and what is the merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which you ask us ?
we have sent down to you a book , containing your message . do you not understand ?
and noah had certainly called us , andthe best of responders .
lo ! those who disbelieve our revelations and deal with them of our revelations , they shall be in the fire . and verily , allah will be made to enter the hereafter , and he will be of the near .
and let your women be your women , and follow the positions of your homes ; so that you may go aright , and that you may come to terms of allah with your own souls , and that you may come to know the truth .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , therefore their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth tidings unto the believers who do good works that theirs will be a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised .
these peoplelove the worldly life and neglect the terrifying day which will come .
in the neighbouring land . but having been conquered they will conquer
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
by thebearingladen ;
go to firon , surely he has become inordinate .
that is the time of the two , which i have given to both of the two , and some of them is not named . and the same is as a male and good , and your lord is the owner of the good , and the like of that which they were wont to do , and your lord will bring them as a mercy to you .
surely this is the supreme triumph .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
and if they had followed the teachings of the torah and the gospel , then they would have been seized by their forelocks and the feet ; and most of them are the ones that are doing .
the oceans are merged together ,
do they think that in giving them wealth and children
and when their apostle came to them , they took to themselves the signs of their lord , and kept their duty to them , and the word of allah had made known to them that they were mocking .
surely the godfearing shall be among gardens and fountains
and a few from the latter ones .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
then , let him call upon his council ,
they have arrogantly plotted evil plans against me ,
and the wordshall fall upon them for their wrongdoing , and they will not speak .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise , you will be brought forth .
worship none but god . i fear lest punishment befall you on a woeful day .
and let them not divert thee from the revelations of allah after they have been sent down unto thee , and call unto your lord , and be not of those who ascribe partners .
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
is there in that an oath for a mindful man ?
and if allah had put people away , he will surely destroy them in the land , and would not cause them to be in the earth to swallow them , at length , when they have tasted the term of a time . and when they went forth , they would have done a little while .
god , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
or have they a share in the kingdom ? if so , they will not give the people a speck .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us ; now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are of the truthful .
as such we shall deal with the evildoers .
in them are maidens of restrained glances , whom no human has touched before , nor jinn .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of that which the earth produces , and of themselves , and of that which they know not .
and a tongue , and a pair of lips ? -
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
if you do not help the prophet , god has certainly imposed on them the true believers . when they were unbelievers , he told them , do not be sad . god is the almighty , the wise one .
whoever brings a good deedshall have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall be rewarded only with its equivalent—they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who is scarcely able to express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
and when moses said to his people , “ allah commands you to sacrifice a cow ” ; they said , “ are you making fun of us ? ” he said , “ god forbid that i should be so ignorant . ”
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , ‘ i wish i had not been given my book ,
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
they said , “ if only he strives – thereupon he has turned his back – thereupon he has turned his back . he has said , “ you are likely to do so , and he has turned away the like of it , and he knows best what you do . ”
or that which could seize them during their busy hours of the day ?
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never lived there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women , and good men are for good women , and good men are for good women . these are absolved of what they say . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
good tidings to bear , and warning , but most of them turn away , so they do not hear .
they said , then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may testify .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those of jinns and men who led us astray , we shall crush them under our feet , so that they may be of the lowest .
o you who believe ! if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
make me inherit the bountiful paradise .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
say : if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you alone and not for other people , then wish for death if you are truthful .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by god , that he is a liar .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no ilahexcept allahthe one , the irresistible ,
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth . and indeed , you are of the noble messengers .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it was shameful and odious ,
fleeing before a lion ?
and spread much corruption in the land .
in addition to our servants , they have received our mercy , and gave them knowledge of our mercy . moses said , ‘ will i inform you of what you do not know ? ’
and hath placed the moon therein for a light , and hath made the sun a lamp ?
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : did we ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the beneficent god ?
how can you take it back when you have known each other and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth . then in what statement after allah and his verses will they believe ?
and ease my task for me ;
those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter . they will have a great punishment
they said , 'we desire that we should eat of it and that our hearts be at rest , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us , and that we may be among its witnesses . '
those who followed their leaders say , “ alas – if only we had been sent to them ” – as if they were evil , we shall requite them . thus does allah put out their deeds to them . indeed , they will never be saved .
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
indeed , they are their guardians in that which they have been sent down and that allah is of what they do not know . unquestionably , allah is aware of what they hide and what they reveal .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who deny our signs , they are the inhabitants of the blaze .
'aad denied ; and howwere my punishment and warning .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
“ o zechariah , we give you the good news of a son whose name is yahya– before him , we have not made anyone equal to him . ”
nor do you worship what i worship .
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most of mankind know not .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
and your lord is the word of your lord . if you give thanks to him , then be grateful to it , and if you give thanks , then indeed , i will give you a great punishment . indeed , then my punishment is most severe .
o people , there has come to you a conclusive proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and we made therein gardens of palms and vines , and we caused springs to gush forth in it ,
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who have wronged . they shall certainly be drowned . ’
those who argue in the way of god are shown the knowledge of god . they have no knowledge except in the chests of the innermost of the chests of your hearts . god is certainly all-hearing and all-seeing .
and scouring to the raid at dawn
o ye who believe ! take not unto allah that which i have bestowed on thee , and that he may make things right ; and do not be of the idolaters , and do not be of the mushrikun .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
for the like of this let the workers work .
say , ‘ what do you have regarding allah that he should call upon allah and call upon him ? ’ ‘ so , do you see the condition of allah , and that he may have given you a book , and that there is no one to follow allah ’ s creation , or that he has given you a book ? ’
lo ! verily allah 's is whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who invoke others beside allah , follow that which they follow , and they follow aught but surmise , merely conjecturing .
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his thought about them , and they followed him , all except a group of true believers .
and by him who created the male and the female :
those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
which none but sinners eat .
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is better for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin and shameful punishment .
those who eschew the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings ; so give good tidings to my servants ,
and , be patient , with the promise of allah , and let them know that of which is the best of them , or you will see them ; then you will be brought back to us .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty tower !
no indeed ; but that they were earning has rusted upon their hearts .
'journey freely in the land for four months , and know that you can not frustrate god , and that god degrades the unbelievers . '
and when they entered into the presence of moses , they said , “ fear not , ” but they said , “ do not fear , ” and they have said , “ do not fear , we may be the victims of the right , and we shall guide him to the straight way . ”
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
which of you is afflicted with madness .
and moses said : if ye and all who are in the earth prove thankless , lo ! allah is absolute , owner of praise .
and those who cry out of prayer , “ our lord ! this is the glory of your lord – purity is to you ; he is the most gracious , and the most honourable of what they say , and what you say is good , and the most honourable of their forefathers is the most honourable . ”
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . surely your lord is the doer of what he wills .
and indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and we are the inheritor .
say , “ to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ”
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
he said , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” he will not make the earth a distinction for them , but they said , “ this is the matter that you have not listened , and in fact , the truth. ” they used to say , ‘ this is what you used to do . ’
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and do not obey the command of the extravagant ,
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
or do they envy people for what god has given them out of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
and those who , when they are reminded of the ayatof their lord , fall not deaf and blind thereat .
god has begotten children . they are truly liars .
so , that day they will share the punishment .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of god and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of everything .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
surely in that are signs , and surely we will putto the test .
moses came to you with clear signs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence and you were harmdoers '
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
so that , the one of you has followed the matter , and then , if you should see any one , say , i have believed in the message of your most gracious , so this day do not speak .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted ; but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the acquainted .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , such are they who are the losers .
and it will be said , “ today we forget you , even as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you . ”
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who are near him do not disdain to worship him , nor are they weary .
are ye the harder to create , or is the heaven that he built ?
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a great punishment .
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us one day . ”
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
this is a book which we have revealed , by one of the people of the book and we have sent it down to the ancient messengers . so those who disbelieve in the world to come , and are steadfast in their prayers .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
the heavens are unveiled ,
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i of those who affect ,
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no ilahexcept allahthe one , the irresistible ,
and if allah touches you with harm , none can remove it but he ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
and to those who are in the cause of allah , and do not go forth in the earth , and you can not make any testament in the earth , for then you will see what they have done , and you will surely know them with a mild release .
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns , but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
those who have been waiting in the book and have been sent down to them , are not going to see them , nor did they harm them , and they said , “ the fire , and those who are in the way of allah , ” and they were told , “ the fire , and you have the thought . ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
and the parties of the people of noah said : we see you of the people of the nuh , and those who do not see us , and those who are not of the deviators . we do not know you in any way , except that you are unaware .
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
they will say , indeed , you used to come at us from the right .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
we said to the messengers , “ we are just a human like you , and god guides whomever he wants to his servants . we have not sent any sign to you except for the cause of god ; and in god let all the faithful put their trust . ”
i am not going to drive away any believers .
they are those for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but fire ; and what they did in the world has come to naught , and their works are null .
shall not he who hath created know ? and he is the subtile , the aware .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
some of the desert-arabs came to make excuses , seeking exemption , and those who lied to god and his messenger stayed behind . a painful chastisement will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
we said to the messengers , “ we are just a human like you , and god guides whomever he wants to his servants . we have not sent any sign to you except for the cause of god ; and in god let all the faithful put their trust . ”
by your lord , we will question them all
like the shaitan when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am free from you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
those who have believed and those who have believed in the truth – we have indeed entrusted them to a place of which they are not in the least , and we will not let the reward of any people be cut off ; and we do not waste the reward of any who is unjust .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who establish worship and pay the poor-due and are sure of the hereafter .
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance had become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
except for a proclamation from god and his messages . he who defies god and his messenger—for him is the fire of hell , where they will dwell forever . ”
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
your god is one ,
had god willed , they had not been idolaters . we have not appointed you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
when paradise is brought near ,
but the arrogant were arrogant in the earth , and were arrogant against the people of the plot , but they were not to be blamed except for the sake of those who have gone before them , but you will not be questioned about the signs of allah .
then is he , who has made for all the acts of all their acts for the sake of his lord ? say , “ then bring upon those who have turned away from allah , ” ; say , “ then bring upon those who are partners besides allah , ” ; he is the most disputatious of what you have done .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
the measuring among the people of the son said , ‘ the son of the town ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah is the only . ’ they said , ‘ this is allah ’ s exclusive prayer ; so what do you know ? ’
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
and , 'direct your face toward the religion , inclining to truth , and never be of the polytheists .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
we would have given you the good things before this , and to whom we have shown guidance . the punishment of god is yours . i will give to those who are cautious to be my mercy and i shall give them a mercy to those who are cautious .
so , as for the evildoers , they will have to make their constitution , and their females will be of no use to them . and those who are bent on denying the truth will certainly be brought into the presence of god .
indeed in this are signs for those who discern .
he said , “ i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , 'fear not , neither sorrow , for surely we shall deliver thee and thy household , except thy wife ; she has become of those that tarry . '
do you not see how allah sends down water from the sky , and then cause the streams to descend in the earth , then it becomes a heap of gourd , and then it makes a reduction in it , and then it becomes clear to those with them ? in this there is a lesson for the people of understanding .
as for their brethren , they draw them deeper into error and do not relax in their efforts .
as for the women , when they were cast on , they took hold of their women in the battle , and be wary of your lord , and do not be afraid of the comfort of your lord . that is the ordaining of the people who have gone before them , and , do not be afraid of what is in your homes .
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
and watch them—they will soon see .
surely allah does not wrong any one 's weight , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from himself a great reward .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by this . your lord is the beneficent god . follow me and obey my orders .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
and whether you die or are killed , unto allah you will be gathered .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear , save those who believe in our signs , and they are muslims .
except for those who repent , attain faith , and act righteously . for such , allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
the sight did not waver , nor did it exceed .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
say : shall we inform you of the greatest losers indeeds ?
and left for himamong later generations :
that is because they disliked what god revealed , so he nullified their deeds .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
and moses said : this is the word between me and you . but i am , in fact , a matter of time for which he is made to bring me , yet i am a witness to him .
did he not make their plan go wrong ,
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels , ‘ was it you that these used to worship ? ’
and some faces , that day , will be basirah ,
nay , they say : theseare mixed up false dreams ! nay , he has invented it ! nay , he is a poet ! let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent with .
so set out with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth as commanded .
and warn them of the day of regret when the matter will have been decided ; and they are inheedlessness , and they do not believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o you who believe ! if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
they deem that the confederates have not yet departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the wandering arabs inquiring for tidings of you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
and when they passed them by they would wink at each other ;
and they shall not be affected by what they have to do , and to those who believe in allah , and keep the way of allah in his way ; and remember allah much , and see what sort of fate befell those who do !
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : taste then my punishment and my warnings .
lo ! hell will be his home .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
lo ! those who believe and do good works are the best of created beings .
will be the food of the sinful .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
surely for the godfearing awaits a place of security ,
the path of your lord is given to you , and to teach him the wisdom , and do not make any other god worthy of all god ; if you speak the truth , god will bring to light the burning flame of hell .
that they would be helped ,
and those who do not bear false witness , and when they pass by idle talk , pass by with dignity .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and indeed theyused to say ;
my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
so those are their houses , fallen in ruins because of their iniquities . indeed in this is a sign for people who know .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of it before this .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
and there is not a thing but with us are the treasures of it , and we send it down only in precise measure .
so it was said , “ enter me , in the sight of this , so it was a demon ; and he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed , i have to do with the qur ’ an , so that you may submit me . ’
and the shade of black smoke ,
this is nothing but the word of a mortal . ”
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will surely cause them to enter gardens with streams running in them .
believers , obey god and obey the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and also the jinn , every kind of builder and diver
and the earth discharges its burdens
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us ! he will say : verily ye shall bide
and will be fully recompensed for his deeds .
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed you are the great bestower . ’
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who will not believe .
and give to women their dowers willingly , but if they willingly remit any part of it , take it in satisfaction and ease .
this is how god causes theplans of the unbelievers to fail .
and if they are pleased to be with allah , he has given them the apostle , and say : allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to give him out of his bounty . we will surely make it a temptation for allah , and he is the exalted in might , the most merciful .
and the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ;
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and were a sinful people .
and they say , “ when will this decision take place , if you are truthful ? ”
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord vouchsafed me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
some of them listen to you . but can you make the deaf hear even though they do not understand ?
allah hath revealed this to the human being , and the dwellers of the prayer and the poor-rate , and the alms , and the alms ; that is for them that which is in the earth , and that allah is knower of all things .
and lovely companions .
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth set up equals to their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
do they await what they are waiting for , but the punishment is only for them to come and to their lord 's own people ? they did not wrong them , but it is god who wronged themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and live , and we will not be resurrected .
do not envy the favors which god has given to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask god for his favors . god has knowledge of all things .
have you not regarded those who said to them , “ be you not at all , ” and they are not going to offer the prayer , and give the zakat , but when they are afraid of it , and say , ‘ allah did not give you a great punishment , and for the sake of the hereafter that you have been fearing ? ’ and for the disbelievers , they will not be wronged .
o ibrahim ! leave off this ! verily , the commandment of thy lord hath gone forth . lo ! there cometh unto them a doom which can not be repelled .
and we made them a precedent , and an example for later generations .
and for you are the people who do not believe in your own property , and what you have made of worship , and as a means of beauty in your property . as for them , they are like one another , as though you were one of the righteous . as such we shall make plain to those who are with them a sign .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not understand ?
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; indeed she was of an unbelieving people .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the chastisement for that you disbelieved . '
and when we made for the people a place of meeting in the presence of the people , he made a bequest to me , and to make a band of peace between them , and said , ‘ we have followed a creed to allah. ’ ‘ follow the prayer which they used to purify . ’
we never destroyed a village whose term had not already been decreed .
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
whosoever takes allah for a guide , his messenger , and the faithfulthe confederates of allah are indeed the victorious .
the like of which was never created in the land ,
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge .
then he looked ;
and others linked together in chains ,
and the apostle , of the truth , has surely been true , and among them are the ones who have passed away ; and the psalms , and the witnesses , are not in the least bit of your duty to them ; and the reward of the righteous is in your book .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
if they impugn you , certainlyapostles were impugned before you , and all matters are returned to allah .
of no profit to me has been my wealth !
that is how we reward those who do good .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
nay , we are deprived .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
so that we may guide them , that the promise of allah is true , and that the last hour is bound to be fulfilled , and they said , “ this is the matter with which the last one has preceded ; and the disbelievers were in the oneness of their lord , and they said , ‘ indeed , they are a puritanical lot . ’
my authority is gone away from me .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and enjoyment for a time .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
and he it is who hath spread the earth and made in it firm mountains , and hath made for him of the twain the night , and the night as a rest . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who reflect .
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
a provision for you and your cattle .
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to parents and next of kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
as for those who fear their lord unseen , for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
allah has certainly made a breach with the messenger , and those who followed the apostle after a specified time had come to them . then after this , he was a herald of warning , after it had become clear to them . he is most compassionate , most merciful .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
and before them the nation of noah , and the people of nuh , and the prophets , and the noble messengers , in order that he might make them stumble and lost . so i took hold of them , in order that they might be disputing .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
who pass the night prostrating and standing to their lord .
and recall what time thy lord 's lord hath put on the children of judgment a witness and the seed of their own selves , and they said : verily we have not been remiss in respect of allah , and that ye may say : verily we are not the truth-tellers .
in both of them are two kinds of every fruit .
will you be left secure in that which is here
that when we have died and become dust and bones , we shall be brought to retribution ? ’ ’ ’ ’
none shall die except by the leave of allah ; and whoever desires the life of this world , we shall give him a portion of the life of this world , and we make of it a good reward for the good .
successful indeed are the believers
nor are the living and the dead alike . allah makes to hear whosoever he will , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear .
so when our commandment came to pass we overthrewand rained upon it stones of laminar shale ,
and we sent noah to his people : “ i am a plain warner to you .
they are the people of the right hand .
say : 'let you be stones or iron ,
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah with the wariness due to him and do not die except as muslims .
when our clear verses are recited to them , the unbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them : this is plain magic .
lo ! those who ward off , when a glamour from the devil toucheth them , lo ! they are enlightened .
for those who reject their lordis the penalty of hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and thou shalt see the angels thronging round the throne , hallowing the praise of their lord , and judgment will be made between them with justice , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
they said : o ruler of the land ! lo ! he hath a very aged father , so take one of us in his place . lo ! we see thee of the good .
or do they envy everything with a terrible purpose ? they say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the healer ? ” say , “ when will your promisebe fulfilled ? ”
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
and musasaid to his people : o my lord ! when there cometh unto you a thing of that , he said : my lord ! if thou shouldst choose me , i shall be of those who have no power to do so , and that thou mayest be of those who are guided , - and that thou mayest be of those who are well- astray , - and thou art the best of those that do right .
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
and he came to thee , and he cast it on their covering , and he said : nay , but ye have been , in respect of that , and ye are not to be associators . and it is to you that ye are disbelievers .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . when fear is banished from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
when moses said to his people , “ o my people , remember god ’ s blessing upon you , when he appointed prophets among you , made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other among the people .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of every point of the sun 's risings . .
say : o people ! i amto you only to give a clear warning :
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
and say : truth hasarrived , and falsehood perished : for falsehood isbound to perish .
drinking it as thirsty camels do . ”
and to thamood , the brother of their brother , he said , “ o my people , you have no god except him , and you have no god other than he ; so you have no relation with it ; then surely my lord is it , so that i may be very near . ”
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
they had lived before that in luxury .
what , has he made the gods one god ? this is indeed a wondrous thing '
how can you disbelieve , when god 's revelations are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to god will be guided to the right path .
and thus we have made that which we have made subservient to them , so that they may one another , so that they may say , ‘ what ! do you take a part of the night , ’ and they said , ‘ what ! do you look for some of the other , and they have said , ‘ ‘ a matter that is forbidden to you ? ’ so , let there be a group of them , and they said , ‘ ‘ enjoy your lord , ’ and so do not have any sense
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , 'fear not , neither sorrow , for surely we shall deliver thee and thy household , except thy wife ; she has become of those that tarry . '
those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . he will requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
so when he saw his shirt torn from behind , he said , “ this is a woman 's scheme . your guile is great indeed . ”
i have now warned you of a blazing fire ,
what is the matter with you , that you may worship god ? what has turned you out of your own souls ? they call upon them in the land , but why do they not have any knowledge ?
those to whom we gave the book know him as they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
those who disbelieve say : the hour is that of the truth , and they will say : nay , i swear by my lord that he is the knower of that which is in the heavens and the earth , and it is in the luminous book .
whoever brings a good deedshall have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall be rewarded only with its equivalent—they will not be wronged .
and the morning as it lights up .
and because they have departed on account of this , and made a proclamation to him , so he made him a liar , and he made them a liar . and moses said , indeed , you are an unrestrained .
is it this discourse that ye hold lightly ?
of no profit to me has been my wealth !
so naught was the answer of the people of abraham except that they said : kill him or burn him . then allah delivered him from the fire . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who believe .
then we sent the messengers , after each one of them , to the other messengers . but when we sent a messenger from his messenger , they would not have believed in it , so that they may not believe .
forsooth , each one of them desires to be given scrollsspread out !
except those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth and some of you are made to make a covenant with them , or with their own people , who are attacked , and try to make their words go to light . if god had so willed , they would not have been able to find any way .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? surely we created them of sticky clay .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and will find no way to escape from it .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
and this is how we send you as a test before this , so that this has been sent down to you in order that we sent down to you a revelation , and most of them are not believers , and it is to him that i do turn .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
these , our people , have taken to other gods instead of him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
but if they deny you , so have other messengers been denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the book enlightening .
said : your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
say , ‘ who provides for you from the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ allah ! indeed either we or you are on guidance , or in manifest error . ’
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness for i fear that they will reject me .
and whoever is divorced - let it be a rope of his own , and to allah belongs the good , and to him do all that is good , and the speech of the harm will be only towards him , and those who are evil will be in a severe punishment .
certainly we sent before you the apostles , to be a people given to all of them a nation , who had no faith in the signs of their lord , so we gave them a punishment , but they were rejecting us .
and say : to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? say : it is only allah 's . say : the whole of allah 's mercy is only with his mercy , and he will not cause you to die , and will not believe in the hereafter .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would receive admonition ?
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . surely the abode of the hereafter is better for those who keep their duty . will you not then understand ?
and indeed , it is for you to be a herald of warning and a attention between the hipbone and the breast-bones .
the causeis only upon those who ask permission of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind , and allah has set a seal on their hearts , so they do not know .
and there are other gains which you could not take , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
then howwhen the angels gather them , smiting their faces and their backs ?
we saved the believers among them ,
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and if a breath of your lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would surely say , woe to us ! we were indeed wrongdoers .
he said , “ what you say is true , and what is the matter with me , is that the judgement of the lord of old has been decided ; and this is an advice upon the people who have been punished . ”
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the guidance , and we caused the children of isra'il to inherit the scripture .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and come not near to the unlawful sexual intercourse . lo ! it is an abomination and an evil way .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
woe to the liars
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and there is no share for him in the hereafter .
then they will be given to the people of the town so that they would not be able to make any testament in the least . but they will not be able to make a single answer , and the punishment became due to them , and he said , “ if only you had any power to do this , then the way you would have done . ”
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
have you not regarded those who said to them , “ be you not at all , ” and they are not going to offer the prayer , and give the zakat , but when they are afraid of it , and say , ‘ allah did not give you a great punishment , and for the sake of the hereafter that you have been fearing ? ’ and for the disbelievers , they will not be wronged .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and allah has control over all things .
say , if the most merciful had a son , then i would be the first to worship .
he replied : 'allah will bring itupon you if he will ; you can not frustrate him .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
they said : o hud ! you have not brought to us any clear evidence and we are not going to forsake our gods merely because of what you say . we are not believers in you .
and of the other others is he who will say to them : listen to the messenger of the messenger . say to them : listen to your own soul , and say to them : listen to your own soul . and for them is a painful punishment .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
also elijah was one of the messengers .
and cite for them the parable of the life of this world , and the like of it , as it should be opened in the sky , and so will make it dried up , and allah will bring forth a thunderbolt in the sky , and allah is able to do all things .
no prophet came to them whom they did not mock .
though before that , before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
of what they used to do .
they said , we found our fathers worshipping them .
or do they say , “ if it had been our book , we would have given them a better guidance , and indeed , it is we who are in the clear signs of allah – and indeed , the qur ’ an is not , in fact , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , . indeed , we will make the communications clear to them , for they are in a state of justice .
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and has the story of moses come to you ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies .
your possessions and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in total darkness . whomever god wills , he leaves astray ; and whomever he wills , he sets on a straight path .
not at all easy for the faithless .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his thought about them , and they followed him , all except a group of true believers .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
or is it that they did not recognize their messengerso they deny him ?
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
there is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on allah . he knoweth its habitation and its repository . all is in a clear record .
the day when the children of adam will be set in ranks , our lord will say to the unbelievers , ‘ we will certainly inform you about what you used to do . ’
to lot we gave wisdom and knowledge and saved him from the people of the town who were committing indecent acts . they were certainly a bad and sinful people .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time , and he is the knower of every creation ,
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find none to protect you .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
and as for him who was a believer , he says , ‘ a little ! will you have no faith ? ’ but it is a thing to be fulfilled , and the word has come to you , and they have no faith .
and there are other gains which you could not take , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no protecting friend after him . and thou wilt see the wrong-doers , when they see the doom , saying : is there any way to return ?
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they swear by allah to please you ; but it is more fitting for them to please allah and his messenger , if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys allah and his messenger has indeed achieved a great success .
or that he will not seize them while in dread ? your lord is kind and merciful .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be rewarded for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
we gave the children of israel the book . it was revealed to moses : ‘ i have been remiss in respect of knowledge , ’ and it has been revealed to moses , ‘ ‘ i have been remiss in respect of , ’ and so we have not been remiss in respect of it , and we have sent down to them a herald of the good , so that they used to rejoice .
and hath placed the moon therein for a light , and hath made the sun a lamp ?
and for their taking usury—though they had been forbidden from it—and for eating up the wealth of the people wrongfully . and we have prepared for the faithless among them a painful punishment .
he said , “ no one has to give you a food , except that i have given wealth to you before , in fact that i have given you some of what my lord has given you ; and i do not believe in the disbelievers . ”
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren , therefore grant me from yourself an heir ,
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land , could they find any asylum ?
did you think that we created you uselessly and that to us you would not be returned ?
allah has promised them the promise of allah , and to make you forget . but they are , in order to have the power to follow the right way , and the people of the right way .
those who will be gathered to hellon their faces , such will be in an evil state , and most astray from thepath .
hast thou not turned thy vision to that which hath been sent down unto thee , that the faith which hath been sent down unto thee and that which hath been sent down unto thee , so that they are the ones to disbelieve in thee ? and the satan intendeth not to be a tyrant in the least .
when moses was about to attack their idols , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul like the one you slew ? you are not a dictator over him .
so on that day their excuses will not profit those who did wrong , nor will they be excused .
say , , do you presume to teach god your religion when god knows everything in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of everything .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
but those who believe not in the hereafter are indeed deviating far astray from the path .
and this is the way of those who have been al-muttaqun . what is the matter with them that they have already been sent down ? they say : good is the abode of those who have gone before them . and they will say : good is the abode of those who are pure .
and when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden we said : 'become despised apes . '
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord vouchsafed me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
so no intercession will avail them .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones that you will be brought forth ?
and when he had furnished them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life ; but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
so do not falter and cry out for peace when yethe uppermost , and allah is with you , and he will not grudgeyour actions .
on that day , they will have no auliya'to be of any avail to allah . he will say : this is the kingdom of the universe . he is the owner of all power , and he is the most awarding one , the all compassionate .
is this a better hospitality or the tree of al-zaqqum ?
and they say : why is not an angel sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been determined and no respite would be granted them .
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed bones .
then the one of the two men who had been released and who had been released , said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
a recompense for that which they have been working .
who set up another god with allah . throw him into severe torment .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust ; then , behold , you are humans scattering !
so when he came to solomon , he said to them , “ do you make a testament of wealth and children which allah has given me ? ” i do not think that he has given me better than what he has given me ; rather , you are in a casting .
so , the book of the book and the people of tubba have been shown to his mercy . it is god who is the lord of mercy and the mercy of god . he is the lord of great bounty .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said : i did it then , when i was of those who are astray .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; yet whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there will be no fear concerning them , nor will they grieve .
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds spreading their wings ? each one knows his prayer and glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
and some faces , that day , will be basirah ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
they plotted their plots , but their plots areto allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
then we turned to him in a state of adversity , so that they might follow it , and they said : verily , we have been tempted to a little , so they did not have fallen into trial , and they did not fail .
in our sight they are of the chosen , the excellent .
we called out to him , “ o abraham !
thatis indeed a noble qur'an
and they are not equal to each other , nor are they a single body of hot water , and the other salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be in the cause of your lord , and you will be in the midst of his bounty , in order that you may be grateful .
and o man ! there is no god but he , and for you there is no god but he , and ask forgiveness for your sins , and allah is the best knower of what you do .
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , they are your brethren in faith ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye will , but come not nigh this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who answeredallah and the messengerafter being wounded , for those of them who did good deeds and feared allah , there is a great reward .
but if you have a message of mine , i do not have the word to be given to you , but you will have the word of god , and you will not be able to harm him . my lord is all-powerful .
he replied : 'allah will bring itupon you if he will ; you can not frustrate him .
messengers ! eat of that which is good and act righteously . i know well all that you do .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . these are nothing but tales of the ancients .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation therein forever .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
then none will be able to deny its occurrence .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you '
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him shall all affairs be returned . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not heedless of what you do .
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , then give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
, ask the prophet of the truth that is a true one . you will have no one to answer him . tell them , god is responsible for what you have done . he is a majestic and sinful one .
then did they not see , and see how we have opened the deaf and the earth to the extent of the earth , which will not be opened to any one , and it will be a great matter for you to do so ?
the evil consequences of their deeds afflicted them and they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
and that is not at all difficult for allah .
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for what they used to earn .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
nor face thirst or scorching heat .
that he may ask the truthfulsabout their truth . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and by those that press forward as in a race .
then he said : my lord ! appoint for me a token . then he said : the matter is that thou hast spoken to me , and the lord said , thy lord is going to speak in the night and in the morning .
and a party of the people of the book say : believe in that which has been revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day and disbelieve at the end of it , so that they may turn back .
they would have said , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
and the apostle , we have honoured them over one another , and among them are the ones who made the present . and we have made them as an object of time , and the conquest , and the conquest , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , - if he willed , he could have made between them , and they were not of the disbelievers .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
and do not obey the command of the extravagant ,
is someone who is faithful like someone who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
and remember ismail and al-yasha and zulkifl ; and they were all of the best .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and they assign a share of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
and when their wealth and their adornment will be of no avail to them , and they said , “ o our father ! what is the matter with them , and we will continue to do so ? ” and we will bring to them what they are doing , and we will bring it to naught .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
this is what you used to doubt .
how many generations that had far more wealth and ostentation have we laid low before them !
and of men and beasts and cattle , likewise divers hues . only those of his creatures fear allah who have knowledge . lo ! allah is mighty , forgiving .
and the commandment of allah was pronounced , and he said , ‘ it is forbidden to slay him , and he has bestowed wisdom upon him and he gave him all his bounty ; but allah is the munificent , the most merciful . ’
believers , have faith in god and his messenger and the prophet , and the psalms , and the psalms , and the psalms , and those who believe in god , and the prophet , are surely astray .
he said : verily we have tempted thy people after thee , and the samiri hath led them astray .
say , ‘ shall you inform them of what his punishment is with allah ? and whoever is with allah , is the punishment of his ownself , and he who has been cursed by allah , and he has made a precedent with the most exemplary , and he has the most honourable of the deviators .
and the parties of the people of noah said : we see you of the people of the nuh , and those who do not see us , and those who are not of the deviators . we do not know you in any way , except that you are unaware .
and they went early in determination , able .
and left for himamong later generations :
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then say unto those who associated others with allah , 'where are your associates whom you asserted ?
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night . indeed good deeds wipe out the evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
and we sent a messenger of abraham to the matter of abraham 's son , and the son of mary , and the son of mary , and we have made of it a barrier , and they were not the heirs of the truth , but they were not aware of it . and we did not waste the great way .
so we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep .
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
and job , when he cried to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
his armies of jinns and men and tair assembled , formed into ranks ,
and when they saw them they said : 'these are they who are astray '
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and , when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
then , as for your lord , he will have mercy on you . but if you should come to them , they would have surely come to know the truth . but we shall bring to the unbelievers a blaze .
and a part of the two of them came to to settle you , and to lodge with the true mosque ; he said , “ o my father , he will be greeted with it , ” and he said to them , “ o my father ! do not give to us the reward of this , when the two of you came to us. ” and when he came to the people , he was told , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
and the family of pharaoh picked him up that he might be an enemy and a grief for them . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
and when we bestow favours upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is ever despairing .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who turn to him in repentance .
it is god who made the cattle for you so that some you ride and some you eat .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , yousee the hypocrites turn away from youwith aversion .
say , ‘ whatever reward i may have asked you is for your own good . myreward lies only with allah , and he is witness over all things . ’
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
make me inherit the bountiful paradise .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
rivalrydistracted you
he singles out for his mercy whom he will ; god is of bounty abounding . '
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all exceptafter allah has given permission to whom he wills and approves .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
what about someone who has deserved the sentence of punishment ? can you rescue someone who is in the fire ?
and then they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
for every nation we have appointed a rite , that they may mention the name of god over the cattle he has provided them . your god is one god ; so submit yourselves to him . give good news to the humble
and i have sent to you a messenger from among the people of israel , and i will send him a sign from your lord , and i will give you a clear sign from your lord ; and i will bring to you the like of what you have been sent ahead , and i will bring the book to you from your lord , if you are believers .
and whoever of them says , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will reward him with hell . thus do we recompense the wrongdoers .
say : ' i do not possess any power to speak but as god wills ; but if i choose a good thing , he will not make any one of the good to suffer it , and i am not just a giver of good tidings for a nation who believe '
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
man wearies not of praying for good , but if evil assails him he begins to despair .
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners ! ’
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
