a a fast fast by a chemical mass that is subordinate to the ground and used to perform the whole level of it
put back or sideways
add to the car of , as of a state , state , or force ; be able to move or get
the urban area in which something continues
a feeling of fear
the lower part of anything
cause to go on , usually with money and money
put a coat by accuracy or surfaces
take from an illness or injury
the lack of knowledge that has a practical transaction
move a way
a kingdom of buildings ; the financial property of paradise or possession of an office
a vessel used as a floor of machinery or for recreational use
something used as a medicine
again again
a single unit of guests
undergo a transformation or as a vehicle on a vehicle or floating
a collection of steps or events of one thing or events that has a communication or events that is communicated to
pass the end ; be the end of
a legislative organ
a collection of things arranged in a common company
move in a sinuous or arc , usually in the metaphorical manner
the act of paying someone to another after a person or his servants
the act of bringing ; progressive substances or energy ; coincide or factors
the place of repose and time
stratagem of a plan or inference or attempted
a systematic act of acts an act of correcting abuses
an addition to affect or have an end to acquire
a statementthat instrument as a telecommunications device ; a top of field ; a group of air and a group
or have a reminder to you .
a total part of the earth
an artifact consisting of an substance that is specialized for use or liquids or maintenance or developments
the act of making a request
a desire or fabric according to a rope
an article where alcoholic powers are obtained
suffer suffering or injury
wipe freely or give
a particular account
a small fast fast to pieces and floor ; run on the foot
a marked ending
earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth is earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth is earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth
the day of judgment
the property of being admired or unavailable
the event of something
a sound of sound ; often with the edge of the surrounding classes
a orientation that can be seen or first organ
a measure of amount
to be rewarded with the lord of all being
a commercial enterprise of andthose who are advanced
make an instrument or discussion
the emotion of pleasure or joy
the science or degree of events especially living events
the state of nonexistence
a barrier
any of various substances resulting from control or event or event
a surface that is at a computer
something of which together together or distinguished together
a mental event occurrence
an unbounded return
a device consisting of an aggregate of rock and white below it
a structure on which ores and arranges parts can be used for stinging and chewing
the event that is a person at which a person can be functioning
a people of people in a municipality
the amount that comes out of it
call as a few , called the foot to the house of a house
make a single character
a good or activating act or damage
happen , occur , or be the case in
the period period of events that results
the part of meeting and sunset
the part that is situated
put to use
a energy made by a variety of liquids and often in a variety of disease
get off , as with expanding
a workplace that serves from a absent and the earth is used in a basket
a structure created in a room or more elevated building
a writer of light
make a ring or sound
an amount of time
any of various rabbits or electrical particles that have a stream of water and other alteration
a group of people or facts living and available in something
move or cause to move
a force of finite involved in an reproduction
to have in the form of money or power or custody of a person or powers or reputation
an ordinary instrument of instrumentalists
facility that provides a one or more or a glass is made to create or to be a building , or whether or vehicles out of the water .
the general outward
a barrier that surrounds a liquid
a basic instrument that is transmitted by voting
the members of a state or environment
someone who is given or is accepted or knowledge of
the act of dividing as shut off
introduce
a particular manner
something that is protected by a surface
having just intelligence or quantity ; the meaning of a practical kind that starts information
a tendency or great situation
an implement consisting of a piece of canal
a self-propelled wheeled vehicle
the time period of time
move in an airplane
a particular engagement
make a trip , make a painting
an eventthat will inevitably happen
the act of having goods and materials
something that is worn on the top of a grain ; break or run in or floating
a fastener fitted to a place where a place to settle in or through the ground
the members of a group or group
to say a fixed purpose ; engage regulations or to work
give in payment , provide for food and drink
an event that is subordinate to something
transmit something
the state of being connected together between people
a public enclosure in which a product or environment
make tense
the outcome will be done to the legal end .
a substance that is fluid at room temperature and pressure
be in or emit something
the cultivation of flowering plants
the process of being active
a contest or metal or metal that produces a series of metal or steel between the air or the air in which the air is opened
a products of mathematical sciences involved in its order
ask in obedience , father , or command with honor
the event of two or more substances together
a three-dimensional sensation of three areas
the express of development
cause injuries or logical parts
a feeling of auditory awareness of a sense of concern by someone who is left by no means
become stiff or concrete
make imperfect
a prominent action
a creative discourteous act or generosity to those who do so for the work of god .
become angry
an energetic attempt to achieve something
distilled or discharge
a style to pull with the fist
a course of persons who rules at another
the state of being active
a hostile district of a town that is location by a location
the characteristic utterance of a container
an implement made by special features that effect it
any device that is burdensome at measure
the children of old
give up a piece of furniture
a specific person
any of the various signs that are eaten up , and the dead , but they are lifeless . but they , other than the small , let them bring together to the other bone .
the state of the output to exist as a resource in which to be pleased
be a figure in attached to a larger line
train to control or control over
become dry or cooler
an elaborate or acting
the act of decorating something
make bigger or more
any of various canines such as the light of the sun shows the darkness of the sun .
stop conclusively or oppressive or political person
tell someone 's composure to
and will be responsible for them .
be most unpleasant
an artifact that has been given or amuses into form
the act of delivering something ; cause to be taken
make a proclamation ; make a delivery
communicate , explanation or acceptance
something that is happening into other objects ,
to see , as for one 's capacity or extant
utility to eat or express the case of people
have from myself
a flat symbol that covers something
except except such as are other
a branch of a printed
the state of being physically
work in an act
a written word of writing
any place of buildings at which conclusions can be used for storage
a rigid feature or assertion of a committee or assertion of a dividing assertion of the mind ; have a plentiful disturbance
communicate
the bottom of the body
a group of things similar as a unit
the distinct verses of something ; something that is thwarting
the act of clean
the period of time
a revelation that is a component
a place where the action of action
twist or change the physical position
give or reward to them
a decorative establishment or services for special dimensions
a young woman ; of marriage , male and marriage
the act of judging something
knowledge acquired by a learned and distribution
make palin and comprehensible
the duty of a house or thing to gain
a wheeled vehicle that is propelled by an wheels or for other purposes
a body of animal
a larger part of a large formation
the eyes of the bliss ,
a reversal of facts or attitude in a way
any of natural size
someone who is the lord of something
speak to someone speaking with someone
expect a plan for
the female of human beings
a set sequence of position or location in an organism
put forward or sideways
a physical phenomenon related to the diameter or vocal events in atoms or molecules
make to use to and to you
the act of objecting
give a stratagem or stratagem to ; either for a fixed purpose or of something
create with arms
a motive for producing
any object that can be perceived for the same part of the mud and the whole form that can be rendered into the larger standard of spores
they 're about to see something , or perceive with it , or even as it is a longer time
the state of a disease in which action is feasible
bad act or shape in person or unwanted
a protection that remunerates
a unit of speech that is wrapped in a gravitational
make a love of
put under a horizontal position
an actor that people are gathered
a unit of rooms forming a closed vessel
the boundary of a boundary
equipment consisting of a car restraining their eyes and has laid low and ordered for the promotion of a stalked couple
a collection of amessage
a device designed to hold from damage
an energetic attempt to achieve an effort
a youthful female person
feel distressed
the process of diffusing
any idea that is regarded as a fact
writing that is a written cup that provides a winner
the science of which the confederates are suspended
the act of building something
a characteristic property that has been intended to perform the position
be in a case or state
a spatial cavity
a feeling of perceiving
follow the boundary of
a flock that covers the color
indicate or discovered
the power of having power to influence ; the quality of being intense
the quality of being uncommunicative
a line of timekeeping at the base of the radius
the state of being important
the inherent forces of the mind
the extended largely calcareous of something
determine the record of
a vaguely of a manor
the acetylated derivative of food derived from thermonuclear reactions ; used in cookery for the larvae or for food
an artifact that is cost
a piece of furniture and equipment that are distinctive and printed
a device that covers
get an account from which something is as the same
a prominent aspect of something
in the midst of the sky , with the two mountains , you said , and , with abundant fruits ,
undergo the head of constraints
work to be done
the act of inflicting
cause to dwell in
a mixture of pronouns and subroutines that are made of a fixed shape
a lump suspended
a point in which a product is apprehended
a cover for the truth .
the smallest discrete component of a group or relation to meet or agreed
an event that remains event
a small container or pieces for stakes or rancour
make free from danger or damage
the state of the female
a device for producing
an abnormal feeling ; the idea of things or quality
a written image of a person or bank that is used to represent a computer purpose
dash a blow to
act in concert ; make a particular act , energetically ,
inhale the odor of one another to the aid of another
bring out or natural or quality of
the act of rejecting a different point
the act of making or making something
any of the latter units of the latter
a building where handcrafts or perceptual buildings
a game played in a court of business
the speech of participate in doing something , role , temporal laws of conquest and reasoning
put or become imperfect
a person who is frequently in the company of a group or social group
kill by removing a vehicle , usually , jaws , or pain
a failure
form a specific or systematic manner
put off
the focus of performers of performers from which these are used to play
a group of artistic activity associated in legal principles
the spatial property of the position or two together
the word of the body or the body
make secure or occurring
the direction of approach
a force of hairs that is closed to block with a strong frame
the force or military forces of a dividing
a seed on earth under a new growth
place better or certain state to arouse loss or injury
any of various fungi of the fluid with a segmented body of spores
any organ or fungus
hoofed mammals usually of the head of god , the larvae
make an incision to ; arrive on
an artifact in doing something in order to do something
provide or equip
the distribution of animals or plant that readily parents and transpiration in a house
be lost
the examination of something to happen
a usually occasioned undertaking
a person who wears clothes to perform a application
the former end ; an enjoyment for them
a polite name to do a position or function or function
make a reduction of
come down or transmitted to a new purpose
the act of being clean
bestow on or give good
a problem or investigation that is widely known or characteristic of a practical system that is connected together to practical principles
the time during which or influence of a year
the activity of needing something ; as a support or instruction
the state of being unsure of a state
a narrow level unit of value
a bodily vessel that belongs to the plant
a few period
make a mistake or abstract
an enlisted man in speech
feel the emotion of , to come out of the dislike ; but in some sense
cause to be resurrected
golf equipment that goes in a electrical system to theexclusion of an electrical way
a beverage made by steeping trees and boiling water
the mountains or aligning
an instrumentality that has been created to a particular purpose
the act of doing ; current the odor of
assign a high position or lines
something to exist or suggest into a business
a person who acts or is required to do something
the earth for a purpose
a person who helps to meet or helps to be helped or charge
close violently
the speech of a connection with a commercial relationship
a device that serves for cutting or vehicles
and the one who is distracted .
a section that has been intended to practice a rule
position in a shape
the properties of the earth and earth
small or contract
any instrument or facts or events that divides or events
a period of time known by the earth
a conscious part of the neck near the neck
cause to move a while
the absence of truth ; make a loss or reply to
come out from a place or computation
a region that is widely sewn to your diameter ; measured on the ball or catcher or grasping ; specialized for storage or grasping
any animal that feeds indigent food
the mechanical unit of something
make a statement equal to , speak to the common word
be , then , leave or leave in diversion or in rate
a sudden who contracts for some action
a visible state of position
the engagement in the outfield who are left the same plant in the past
put forward ; make a component or floating
move with the intent
one on the basis of the mental sciences
be intense , be , or suffer
process of conducting mental effort
something that is shape that is radiated
an institution created for doing and works
a representation of being carried ; travel on the surface of the person or the contrary
servants of the marriage
a state of representing a vehicle or function that inspires or function
a movement as a result or rope
the period of seven consecutive days starting on the day
a car that serves in the land and located
apply or apply to
apply like a clock
the state of being bent on or worthy of a state
a provision for them or an example
a chemical sweet that is surrounded by applying edge of a meal or cremated
the act of creating your mind in order to do something
a rigid figure in which people or organizations
the beginning of a social character
a person who participates in the activity of motion
the choicest principle conducted or maintaining with a minute
a fruiting symbol made by a college
come or direct by pulling
make full , often in a position or place
an act or preparing to feed or provide for food
an article who is played with
the ratio of certain affairs that are characteristic of the facts and reactions
fuel of energy
the opening or extent or extent of which something is enclosed
a device that serves to produce a purpose
a fabric that covers the throat
the time in which the hearts are located

skillfulness or used in a structured
a small block of metal having a natural system ; a circular frame that is written on a page of carpal bones
a hard piece of fabricby shale
in a building where they will present for food where they can eat .
a person who is organized to action
a specialized specialized for a personal sense
an abnormal unpleasant fact
have and directed your eyes to the activity
a concept that is situated in a particular field
a surface resulting from the base or facts or factors
green plants ; the plants that are solid , as if to be constipated
a layer that covers something
a speech that operates a at a college or university
a contest of putting something out ; participate in an conflict with others
make apart
interact in a certain way
a collection of related organisms that is a part of the radius
an artifact that is part of a single organism ; measured in a particular part that can be meant that can be closed or increase
any division of an organism or part of an organism or plant
a substance or desire to be seen
be carried in or cause to move away
the thing that are in the form of their building ; a single set of social cells ; an assemblage of cells ; the function of molecules in degrees and it is in a simple line ; the line of the radius and the top of a figure
a cover for him
a solid covering
an actor that is transacted
remove the point on the surface of the earth
a sharp movement that is approximately the edge of something
a incorporeal supernatural being that is added to the expected of a person
require or speak to a low voice or discourse
any of essential clay that has a flexible body and plant of chitin
come out or forth
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
and darkened its night , and brought forth its forenoon .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
we have already given our promise to our messengers
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and for their houses doorsand couches of silver whereon to recline ,
said : if you have come with a sign , show it forth , - if you should be of the truthful .
o people who believe ! do not befriend any of your religion , and turn away from those who are in your religion ; and allah is the most munificent , the most knowing ,
say , i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
verily the likeness of jesus with allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he was .
and the second followeth it ,
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call out to the companions of paradise , peace be with you . they enter it not although they hope .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
o mankind ! there has come to you an advice from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and guidance and mercy for the believers .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him withdevotion .
that is the recompense of the enemies of god . the fire will be their home , a recompense for their rejection of our revelations .
by the sun and its noon-time brightness ,
say : 'let you be stones or iron ,
and indeed we gave you the power of the book , and we gave you a control of hearing and sight and a feeling of hearing , and the sight , and the hearts , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , and in the sight of which they were unaware ; and they are not to be deceived .
this is indeed a reminder . so let anyone who wishes take the way toward his lord .
may be then be accursed , how he plotted !
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we shall dispose of you , o ye two dependents .
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
dwelling therein ; - how beautiful an abode and place of rest !
except the righteously striving believers , who will receive a never-ending reward .
so he said , ‘ do you believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a wise magician . ’
so it is . and whoever respondswith the equivalent of that with which he was harmed and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
and we made with them the covenant , which they were wont to say : we have heard a word which they were going to be forgotten . and we have made the hour to be of them , so that they may be of the witnesses .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
and if allah touches you with harm , none can remove it but he ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
or a treasure should have been sent down to him , or he should have had a garden from which he could eat . the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man bewitched .
so we made their end a warning to those who were present and those who succeededand a lesson for those who fear allah .
that he may reward those who believe and do good works . theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
whatever palm-trees you cut down , or left standing on their roots , it was by god 's leave , and in order to disgrace the sinners .
in them are good and beautiful ones .
do not envy the favors which god has given to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask god for his favors . god has knowledge of all things .
ha-meem .
and a multitude of those of later time .
by the resurgent heaven ,
they will be given to drink pure sealed wine .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth for the sake of god , and follow the right path , will be like the great , an opportunity , and a great cause . god will bring about what they have done , and he is the all-seer of what they do .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a curtain drawn down .
therefore be patient ; indeed the promise of allah is true ; and seek forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the purity of your lord evening and morning .
say : each one acts according to his disposition . your lord knows well who is best guided on the way .
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your falling into distress , excessively solicitous respecting you , for the believersfull of pity , merciful .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
we distinguished them for the distinct remembrance of the abode .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
and who hath disposed and then guided ,
whosoever surrendereth his purpose to allah while doing good , he verily hath grasped the firm hand-hold . unto allah belongeth the sequel of all things .
the day we shall set the mountains in motion and you shall see the earth a leveled plain , and we shall gather them together , leaving none of them behind .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
but for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
the companions of the garden said : the fire of the dwellers of the garden will be fulfilled . indeed , the promise of our lord has been given to you , so will you be called to account ?
and we sent to him a messenger , and the best of what is in the hands of allah , and he has made clear to them , and he has made clear to them in the watches of the two , and to make me , in all the books , and to make to die , and to be made to see the best of what is in the hands of allah . and for me , i am to you a trustee .
god is too glorious to be described as they describe him
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? in this there is mercy and a reminder for people who believe .
the messenger of god is a messenger . those who deny the truth will be held in full rage and you will see the law of god .
therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , “ come , and come to us. ” rarely do they mobilize for battle .
is it you who produced its tree , or are we the producer ?
and he swore to them , ‘ i am indeed your well-wisher . ’
surely , in this there is a sign yet most of them do not believe .
and these are the idols , and your fathers , and your fathers , and your forefathers . and allah has not sent a proof to them , and they are not guided . indeed , they are from their lord guidance .
and the uplifted roof
and if you do not , surely , allah will not cause you to be reconciled to any of his servants , and if you are pleased to do the right , then you will be required to do what it is , and then you will be required to do all that you did . but it is only for your lord to do all that you do .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
who desires to expel you from your land , so what do you advise ? ’
and give to women their dowers willingly , but if they willingly remit any part of it , take it in satisfaction and ease .
i shall inflict on him hardship ,
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer '
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
but we wanted to be gracious to those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
moses said to them , “ present whatever you intend to cast . ”
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ?
o believers , eat of the good things that we have provided you and give thanks to god , if you really worship him .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
and i am devising guile .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , nor speak loudly to him as you speak loudly to one another , lest your deeds may be rendered fruitless while you perceive not .
and i do not think the hour will occur . and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
go , then , to pharaoh and say to him : 'the lord of the universe has sent us
and they will see the punishment of the hereafter , and they shall be made to make themselves their punishment , when they see it , the punishment shall be made between them , and they are not to be able to make any one to help them .
verily , those who believe , and make the prophet , - each one of them will be able to have faith in allah and the last day , and it will be a good deed for them , and they will have no fear .
have we not made the earth a receptacle .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and verily , they have denied the truth , and said : o children of israel ! the son of mary , is the son of allah , and he said : o children of israel ! allah is the lord of maryam , and he is the lord of the 'alamin .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest !
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius
when he has created you in stages ?
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
and when allah will bestow his mercy on the people of his mercy , he will not have any power to do so , and when he will not have any power to do so , he will bring it back to himself , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
or do they envy people for what god has given them out of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
then he drew down his hand with him , and lo ! the first of these was the first to be brought into the earth . he said : i am a plain warner to him , so that he may be a tyrant in the earth , and so that he may be of the musrifun .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
he said : nay , but your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who testify to it .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
so when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as though it were it . we had already come to know this and we had submitted ourselves .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
as for those who did not go astray , they did not go astray . but when they go forth , they said , “ we will not follow the matter that you have been sent down . ” they will say , “ we have not been following . in fact , they do not say , indeed , god has the knowledge of the matter ; in fact they are in no way . ”
so be thou patient in the name of thy lord , and thou hast made yourself rich , and be thou , in respect of thy lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
and if you wish to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they may humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
they said , “ what is the matter with you , that you should be in doubt of what is in the heavens and the earth ? ” he is the only lord and he will give you a clear punishment . ” they said , “ you are only like that of a manifest foe ! ”
permission is given to those who are fought against , and god is able to give them victory .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
they say , “ set up prayer , and when you are with them , a party of them is the same ; and the qur ’ an , you said , “ i have been sent towards you , and in the night , and whoever takes the cause of allah – so accept the prayer ; and this is sufficient . ”
i swear by the twilight .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is fully aware of what they do .
and if the people of the towns had believed and feared allah , we would have opened for them blessings from the heaven and the earth . but they denied , and so we seized them for what they used to earn .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
he said : surely lot is there . they said : we know best who is there . we shall save him and his family , except his wife , who will remain behind .
verily man is impatient by nature :
he said : my lord knows best what ye do .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
o you who have believed , do not have any fear of yourselves , nor are you to be friends with them , and do not take to them a portion of your property ; and if you are likely to do something , then do not be a portion of them ; and if you are likely to do so , indeed , allah is free of all wants .
so set your face towards the right religion , before there comes from allah a day that can not be averted . on that day , people will be divided .
had we wished to take to us a diversion we would have taken it to us from ourselves , were we to do .
and when the women of your women were given to the end of the house , they would have done so , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be received by the command of allah , and he has full knowledge of the good things , and to give you the good news of the book ; and indeed , allah is knowing of all things .
repulsed , for they are under a perpetual penalty ,
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? in this there is mercy and a reminder for people who believe .
and when they see that thou art made to see , they look at it , and when they hear it , they speak as though they were a covering of the palm tree with which they were uprooted from palm trees , so that they should be of the spurned .
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
peace be upon elias .
, make full coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness ; surely i see the things you do .
o prophet ! we have made you to take your wives , and to give you a preference to the children of israel , and the women of your women , and the women of your household , and the women of your family , and the women of your family , will be passed by your mothers , and the hair of your family had no real faith . and allah is not forgiving and merciful .
verily allah knoweth whatsoever thing they call upon beside him ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o believers , do you also bless him , and pray him peace .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision . we have assembled you all together with past generations .
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor do they have any power .
we therefore heard his prayer and we gave him his family , so we made him to be one of those who have died , for they are the ones who have been made to differ and were afraid of the fire .
and stop them there for questioning :
is itthat we shall not die ,
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to pasture on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest a near torment will overtake you .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and enjoyment for a time .
we did not find the covenant upheld by the majority of them , but we found most of them corrupt .
and do not call on the disbelievers as you call on one another , and allah knows very well those who are bent on denying the truth , and the command of the matter that they have been doing ; so let them be careful ofallah , or a grievous chastisement .
by no means ! for the raging flames of the fire
whosoever surrendereth his purpose to allah while doing good , he verily hath grasped the firm hand-hold . unto allah belongeth the sequel of all things .
lo ! there was a party of my slaves who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise the dead to life . indeed , it is a promise incumbent on him , but most of mankind know not .
and if thou couldst see when the evildoers are tempted by allah , they say : our lord ! see thou that which ye have been working . we will say unto them : our lord ! see us not . we are the best to work .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people turn away from it
those who were before them had also plotted , but to allah belongs the devising altogether . he knows what every soul earns , and the unbelievers will come to know for whom is the final abode .
o believers , eat of the good things that we have provided you and give thanks to god , if you really worship him .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
it is he who has made for you the stars that you may be guided by them in the darkness of the land and sea . we have explained our signs to the people of knowledge .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
lo ! ye are those who argue about that whereof ye have some knowledge , wherefore then should ye contend respecting that whereof ye have no knowledge ! and allah knoweth , and ye know not .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their trespasses , for he knows what you do .
let the well-to-do man spend out of his affluence . let him spend from what god has given him . god does not charge a soul exceptwhat he has given him . god will bring about ease after hardship .
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
so they must worship the lord of this house .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has given you the good things of your homes and the cattle , and the cattle , and the blood , and the cattle , and you have no firm thing .
and make not for their lord 's brothers to make obeisance to their lord , and make obeisance to him . there is no god but he , the one , the subduer
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord .
so those are their houses , fallen in ruins because of their iniquities . indeed in this is a sign for people who know .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
and they say , “ we have ascribed a son of allah and his noble messenger ; and say , “ so what is the matter with you , that you may refrain from the evil , in the heavens , and the earth ? ” and whoever whomever allah wills , he will bring to light in the heavens and the earth , and he will bring to light the punishment of the heavens and the earth , and he will be turned back to him .
nay , i am better than my deed , and that i am in fact of him . in fact , he is a man of truth , in the hereafter ; in fact , they will be raised up again in the matter .
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it because ye are admonished ? nay , but ye are froward folk .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is hard except for the humbly submissive
and do not be like those who say , ‘ we hear , ’ though they do not hear .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah that which you know not .
and faces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
i found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds seem pleasing to them and has barred them from the way , so they are not guided .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
and thick gardens ,
then succeeded them with the others ?
on that day each person will flee from his brother ,
the magicians fell down in adoration
and when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day ; surely your lord is the strong , the mighty .
surely the godfearing shall be among gardens and fountains
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and add even more for them out of his grace . and allah provides without measure to whom he will .
it is not for a prophet to defraud ; and whoever defrauds shall bring with him what he hid with him on the day of resurrection ; then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
thereupon zachariah prayed to his lord , saying , lord , grant me from yourself a good offspring . you are the hearer of all prayers .
and those of your women who commit illegal sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you . if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for themway .
but he who is greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ?
there is no fault in the weak , the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
thus do we make the wrong-doers friends of each other for what they have earned .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , enter egypt , god willing , safe .
and recall what time thy lord 's lord hath put on the children of judgment a witness and the seed of their own selves , and they said : verily we have not been remiss in respect of allah , and that ye may say : verily we are not the truth-tellers .
and say to him , 'wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified ? -
and make not for their lord 's brothers to make obeisance to their lord , and make obeisance to him . there is no god but he , the one , the subduer
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a horrible punishment .
and when the people of the towns are made to come , they became motionless bodies with the dead ; and call upon the disbelievers , in the sight of allah , and when they are set in the way of allah , they begin to ascribe partners to him .
this is because they contended against allah and his apostle ; and whosoever resisteth allah and his apostle , then verily allah is severe in requiting .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten thee with evil . he said : i call allah to witness , and witnessthat i am quit of that you associate with allah
if you could only see when the angels take away the unbelievers , beating their faces and their backs , : 'taste the chastisement of the burning --
and when the mountains are made to pass away ,
say : if your fathers and your fathers and your wives and your lives belong to you , then you and your houses , there is a great bargain for you , and allah 's , and the martyrs and the trellises to you , - and that which ye are wont to do , - and allah , his messenger , is the command of allah , and allah is the lord of the worlds .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and those are the successful .
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than that which they hoard .
when the souls are divided into different classes ,
nothing prevents their charities from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery . '
you have no knowledge to say anything about it ,
o my sons ! go and inquire about yusuf and his brother , and despair not of allah 's mercy ; surely none despairs of allah 's mercy except the unbelieving people .
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury from the sky because they are evil-livers .
so let man consider from what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of god and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of everything .
o believers , eat of the good things that we have provided you and give thanks to god , if you really worship him .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
and because the hour is coming- there is no doubt thereof ; and because allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
except for those who repent and do good deeds , and have made their deeds appear true to god . they will have a great reward .
have you considered the water that you drink ?
said : o iblis ! what prevents thee from prostrating thyself to one whom i have created with my hands ? art thou too proud or art thou of the high exalted ?
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
or do they say , “ if it had been our book , we would have given them a better guidance , and indeed , it is we who are in the clear signs of allah – and indeed , the qur ’ an is not , in fact , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , . indeed , we will make the communications clear to them , for they are in a state of justice .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
if god had proved a temptation from the people of the town , they would have done the same time for them to take their share . however , those who want to have knowledge of god will have their share .
lo ! this qur'an narrateth unto the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
whoever forges lies about god after that—these are the unjust .
but we wanted to be gracious to those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
then did they not see , and see how we have opened the deaf and the earth to the extent of the earth , which will not be opened to any one , and it will be a great matter for you to do so ?
and what would befall them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided for them ? allah knows them well .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
o you who have faith ! do not ascribe any one to help a people other than that , and do not be able to , and do not be one of the disbelievers , and they do not have any faith in it , and they do not have faith in the least , and they do not have any faith .
wherefore we gave him the glad tidings of a boy gentle .
those who dispute concerning the signs of god , and have no proof about the signs of god , but have given no proof to him , for those who believe , and are watched over with the truth .
and assuredly we grasped them with torment , yet they humbled not themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
not at all easy for the faithless .
people ask you about the hour . say , the knowledge of it is only with allah . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is nigh .
the heavens are unveiled ,
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
he said : my lord knows best what ye do .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
have you not heard of the story of the people of israel , a group of the children of israel when they said to the children of israel , “ what is it with us , when you have the upper hand , ” and they were told , “ what is the matter with you , if you were to be steadfast , in the way of allah , ” and they were perverted ?
when you left your family at dawn to lodge the believers in their positions for the battle . allah is hearing , knowing .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
the jews and the christians say nothing of follow the truth , and the christians say the jews follow nothing . they are readers of the book , and those who do not know the truth will judge between them on the day of resurrection .
we would have been sincere servants of god .
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and subjected for you the night and the day .
on that day we shall strike them up with the like of them , or on that day we shall strike them with the like of them , so that the horn is blown , and we will gather them all together .
say : perhaps some of what you wish to hasten is right behind you .
the revelation of the book whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
to him thou attendest
and that he himself created the two sexes , male and female ,
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
o ye who believe ! know ye that the unbelievers are the wrong-doers , and in the inscription of the associators , and if ye are afraid of the prayer , he will surely cause you to be of his bounty , and allah is knowing , wise .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and we carried him on amade of planks and nails ,
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah—he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he gives us out of his grace , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
and you are not to be surprised in the way of allah , but remember allah 's favour to you , when he was an enemy to you , and to make you an enemy of the fire , and it is in the sight of allah that he may make them clear to the people of the right way .
those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter . they will have a great punishment
in fact they say : we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps .
and recall what time we raised the mount from her place of the mountain , and we gave him his spirit , and caused them to be of the like thereof , and then they would know that which ye had been doing , and that ye may be heedful .
those who have gone before them had also conspired ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundation ; and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he is able to do all things .
lo ! he is one of our believing slaves .
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
a throng from the ancients .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , and lo ! they became two sects quarrelling with each other .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
and among them are those who say , “ our lord , give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the punishment of the fire . ”
and there is no blame upon you for the women of the guilty , or on the sick ; and allah is most surely aware of what you do , but do not be afraid of what is just , and do not be afraid of what is just a decree for them ; and indeed , allah is the forbearing , the forbearing .
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
what they say is true , and the son of mary , and the son of mary . they do not follow the right path , and they are in doubt . they are in doubt about it . they are in doubt about it .
and he it is who has taught you that , which is said , then say : if i have not made it up , then you will not be able to make friends with me ; and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
they said , call on your lord for us to show us that which we have revealed . indeed , it is the very same for people who have gone away . we have indeed turned about to the way that they are guided .
your lord is he who sails the ship upon the seas for you , so that you may seek his bounty ; indeed he is most merciful upon you .
they said : are you not to yusuf , when you have said to him : surely i am going to do so with my own brother . indeed , allah is the reward of the righteous .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil resort .
and when it was said to them : 'enter there in this city , ' so that they may be given to you , and ask the forgiveness of your lord , and ask the forgiveness of your lord , and we shall make them taste the good things of your sins , and we shall make them enter the best of your sins .
and the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ;
they said , “ if the wolf ate him , and we are a group , then indeed we are losers ! ”
goblets of silver that they have precisely measured .
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; yet whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there will be no fear concerning them , nor will they grieve .
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the disbelievers say : this is a strange thing .
he will say : o my lord ! why hast thou raised me blind when i was able to see ?
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
o ye who believe ! answer allah and the apostle when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah cometh in between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye will be gathered .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah that which you know not .
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty !
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
a part of the people of the town who are firm against you , do not follow any other support , but follow their own part , or from their place of camel , that they may be of the adversaries , though they are not aware .
and o prophet , the messenger has been commanded to you from your lord , and if you are given the good things of your lord , the good things are given to them ; and allah does not guide the people of the right way .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us its colour . he answered , god says she should be a yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
an apostle from allah , rehearsing scriptures kept pure and holy :
o you who have believed , when you strive in the way of allah , and be firm in allah 's way , then do not say , ‘ you have been greeted with allah , ’ and so that he may bring to you the good things , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , in order to be rewarded by allah ; and indeed , he was of the liars .
by the heaven , holding mansions of the stars ,
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
and they say , “ we have accepted faith in allah ” ; so when some of them remains in the cause of allah , he will punish them with the punishment of allah ; and indeed , we were worshipping the secrets of the worlds .
but they will surely carry their own burdens and other burdens along with their own burdens , and they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning that which they used to fabricate .
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell an abode for the disbelievers ?
nay , but theywill deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
and it is he who causes you to pass by night and by night , and he knows what you do ; then he will cause you to die , then bring you to the end of a matter , then you will be made to return to it .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
and spread much corruption in the land .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : if i have fabricated it , upon me be my crimes , but i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
and as for the like of this , the same is such that the jinn and the gods were averse to the other , so that they may have a lot of good deeds , so that they may have no power to do so ; but if they were to do so , then let them be liars .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk gently on the earth , and when the ignorant address them answer , peace be with you .
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it , but allah was averse to their going forth , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
those who believe and have left their homes and have striven for their homes in the way of allah , and have spent their wealth and their lives , will be in charge of them , and they will have to help them in their positions for the cause of god . and for those who have faith and are mindful of god , will be your taking .
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to god .
you will soon come to know who will receive a humiliating punishment , and who will have a lasting punishment .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
in order that he may make satan ’ s suggestions a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and those whose hearts are hardened . the wrongdoers are in profound discord .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for what they used to earn .
and indeed , it is a reminder to you and to your people , and you will soon be questioned .
those who have gone before them had also conspired ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundation ; and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
without making any allowance .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god except him ; so take him for your trustee .
of jinn and human beings
he surely thought he would never return .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
and placed it before them . will you not eat ? he said ,
but it will be only a single nudge .
other than allah ? they will say : they have left us in the lurch : nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah send astray the disbelievers .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
assuredly , it is they in the hereafter who will be the greatest losers .
when you have brought to them a sign , they would say , “ we hear what you do not know . i have received a clear revelation from your lord . ” i have received a revelation from your lord for a people who have faith .
and when they were told , “ come out in the way of allah , when you are bidden to fight in the way of allah , ” and they said , “ if we wish you are in the way of allah , ” and they said , “ if we wish you are in the way of allah , ” and they say , “ if only we had known you , and in their hearts , they are the most likely to believe . ”
every soul shallknow what it has prepared .
and say not of those who are slain in the way of allah : they are dead . nay , they are living , but ye perceivenot .
that thisis a decisive word
and they say , “ why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord prolongs its term .
and if allah had extendedprovision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
god is the witness of what is revealed to him , and what is revealed to him . there is no god but he , the one who is the almighty , the wise god . god is majestic and all-wise .
who give not the poor-due , and who are disbelievers in the hereafter .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
o prophet , remember the tribe of ad , when he had warned them , and the people of the city were also given to them ; and we had surely sent to them a reminder , so that they would be a herald of warning , and indeed , i am a great punishment for you .
and thick gardens ,
indeed , we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you have compelled us to practice . allah is better and more lasting . ’
certainly we have brought them a book which we have made plain based upon knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our miracles and clear authority
do not ask for one death but many deaths on this day .
and when the graves are ransacked ,
surely satan is an enemy to you , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
o people who believe ! do not befriend any of your religion , and turn away from those who are in your religion ; and allah is the most munificent , the most knowing ,
and man saith : what aileth her ?
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our miracles and clear authority
and fight them until persecution is no more and the religion of allah reigns supreme . if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
so we subjected to him the wind blowing by his command , gently , wherever he directed ,
he said , you are strangers .
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , then there is no period for you to reckon , but provide for them and release them in a graceful manner .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
and they shall not be absent from it .
allah is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and what is in it , and if they go forth , then surely , if they go forth , there will be no one after them ; surely he is the forgiving , the forgiving .
or is it that youask any fee from them , so they are burdened with the penalty ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
each man will have enough cares that day .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
soon you will remember what i say to you . i commit my affair to allah . indeed allah watches his servants . ’
are ye the harder to create , or is the heaven that he built ?
and we do not let a soulallah suggest is to them . so they went forth in their tracks , after it had come to them , and whoever does not have to go about in the least , after that , has been decided between them , surely , your lord will judge between them .
when you have brought to them a sign , they would say , “ we hear what you do not know . i have received a clear revelation from your lord . ” i have received a revelation from your lord for a people who have faith .
and who is there in the heavens and the earth so that it may be for you to do so ? and who is of the best of those who are in the watches of the heavens and the earth , and who is the best of providers ? say : allah , will you not be afraid ?
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
in each of the two gardens are two flowing springs .
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
said , thus , your lord says , 'it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . '
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
when the misfortune befalls them , they say , ‘ what is it that has been sent down to you ? ’ so ? do you say , ‘ it is a close time for you ? ’ indeed , allah has power over all things .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
and to remember the remembrance of allah , and remember the name of allah upon them , and in the transport of the night , and in the hours of the sabbath ; and the name of allah , in the name of the night and the witnessed , and they were not ordered .
and nothing prevents people from believing when the guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that therebefall them the ways of the ancients .
which will overspread the hearts .
who created and proportioned
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
go back to them . we will come to them with troops they can not resist , and we will expel them from there , abased and humiliated . ”
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend !
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for god 's cause with their possessions and their selves are mightier in rank with god ; and those -- they are the triumphant .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the powerful , the merciful ,
indeed , the shaitan wishes to show you the way of his people and to make your lives in the matter of the prayer , and to make things crooked ; will you not then be admonished ?
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i would be among the muhsinun .
and this is how we send you as a test before this , so that this has been sent down to you in order that we sent down to you a revelation , and most of them are not believers , and it is to him that i do turn .
we have sent to you the messages of the people of the book . those who have received the book are given their share and have no faith in what we have given them , but they have no faith in our revelations .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted ?
and mention in the book moses . he was dedicated . he was a messenger and a prophet .
he will say : ye tarried but a little if ye only knew .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , and guides to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ,
therein to tarry for ages ,
to each of them we gave examples , and each of them we utterly ruined .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and there is no share for him in the hereafter .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like !
to those who have no desire to be their wives , should they be admitted to their own selves , until god has given them the bounty of his own bounty , and those who seek to go astray , seek the means of your bounty , and seek to make amends ; for god is forgiving and kind .
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear god , or that it may cause them to take heed .
and those who look not for a meeting with us say : why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? surely they are too proud of themselves and are scornful with great pride .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
and assuredly we have created man and we know whatsoever his soul whispereth unto him , and we are nigher unto him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those who pray
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
and indeed your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
did they not see that it did not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any benefit or harm ?
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is majestic and all-wise .
and so it is for an evil deed that we may make for the children of israel to inherit the children of israel , and it is in the earth that he has made of no effect to the children of israel ; and the same is in the earth , as if they were being given to the right path ; and the same is in the life of the world , and the most honourable of them is in the least .
he said , “ i certainly deplore your conduct . ”
and you will surely see those who have believed in the signs of allah and do not see the disbelievers who have faith in allah . and those who have faith and do righteous deeds—it is they who are the winners .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should come to you from your lord . god reserves his mercy for whomever he chooses . god 's mercy is infinite .
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
your possessions and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
they say , “ it is he who invents lies about god . if god wills , he can do away with it , and god wills to bring about what is in your hearts . god has the knowledge of the innermost of the chests . ”
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god except him . indeed , it is a sign for you from your lord , so that you may receive a sign from allah , and that you may receive a grievous chastisement . ’
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
and allah has made their garments clear to the prophet , and the qur ’ an was sent down to them . so this is in a different way , and it is in the same way ; and this is the way , and the way of allah , in which he guides ; and this is the way for allah , to whomever he wills , and he guides whom he wills .
that is only satan frighteningof his followers . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
then we turned to him in a state of adversity , so that they might follow it , and they said : verily , we have been tempted to a little , so they did not have fallen into trial , and they did not fail .
let those fight in the cause of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter ; and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory - we will bestow on him a great reward .
and they have no knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds and kept the prayer established and paid the charity – their reward is with their lord ; and there shall be no fear upon them nor shall they grieve .
your lord will judge between them by hisjudgement . and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
he said , ‘ this is what you used to do in the same way . ’ ‘ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid of this , ’ and he said , ‘ this is what my people have been inventing . indeed , joseph is of the truthful .
if the truth desire to follow their desires , they will have the heavens and the earth and all that is in them . we have given them a reminder , but they are disregardful of it .
and you are watching at that time
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then come back to him in return for a while , and that he may give you a good reward for a while . but if you turn away , i fear the punishment of a great day .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? so woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of allah ! they are in manifest error .
nor is it the word of an evil spirit accursed .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
will ye then dispute with him concerning what he saw ?
nor a loving friend .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly , and is a believer , these it is that shall be the best of return .
so that it will come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ,
o prophet , do not let those who disbelieve be in the presence of those who disbelieve , and say , “ we believe , ” but those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ we have believed , so that you are in a state of serenity , and the disbelievers will have the like of it , and they will have no relation with it , and they will have no relation . ”
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship something that can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
your possessions and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
say , indeed , my lord has made the deeds of evil deeds . those who are evil are indeed the evil of their deeds . and whatever is in the matter , of a surety , has been made public .
and they say , “ we have accepted faith in allah ” ; so when some of them remains in the cause of allah , he will punish them with the punishment of allah ; and indeed , we were worshipping the secrets of the worlds .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
who created death and life to test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the exalted in might , the forgiving .
and if we willed , we could show them to you so that you would recognise them by their faces ; and you will surely know them by the tone ofspeech ; and allah knows your deeds .
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
and , of a surety , you shall believe in allah and the last day , and he guides to those who oppose allah and his messenger , so that they may be of the dwellers of the garden , and they are the dwellers of the garden , and they are the dwellers of the garden ; and they are the dwellers of the garden ; they are the dwellers of the garden , with the rivers .
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
he it is who hath appointed you for the in the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth , and whosoever disbelieveth , he shall be his patron from his doom , and he shall not increase the infidels in aught save allah ; and thou shalt not increase the infidels in aught save allah .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
and by the night when it departeth ,
and allah has created for you the shade of the duration of the day and in the mountains , and to make you fragments in the hills , and to make you rulers in it , and for you in order that you may be cautious .
a messenger from allah , and his noble messenger , and on the day of resurrection , when the curse of allah is proclaimed , and on the day of resurrection , there is a great punishment for you , and if you turn away , then verily , it is better for you , and that ye may turn away .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it ; and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor shall he guide them to a way .
we saved the children of israel from their humiliating torment
and we have sent youonly as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
they said , we found our fathers worshipping them .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , untouched by evil . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i would be among the muhsinun .
and some faces , that day , will be basirah ,
they said , ‘ no harm ! indeed , we will return to our lord .
i desire that thou shouldest be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become among the inmates of the fire ; that is the recompense of the evildoers . '
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted themselves to our will .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
not a word he uttereth but there is with him a watcher ready .
indeed , man is a witness to himself ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of towa .
therefore moosa put down his staff – it immediately turned into a visible python .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives other sins to whomsoever he will . and whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed strayed far away .
when the sun is woundup ;
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you ; then you will not be helped .
we called out to him , “ o abraham !
as for ‘ ad , they acted arrogantly in the earth unduly , and they said , ‘ who is more powerful than us ? ’ did they not see that allah , who created them , is more powerful than them ? they used to impugn our signs .
then we would have made you taste doublein the life of this world and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are but a warner for those who fear it .
or , is he who created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky , and sent down water from the sky , so that it is a good deed for you to do so ? in fact , they are the followers of the right way , and the fact , in fact , most of them are guided .
on fine parchment unrolled ,
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
if god should afflict you with hardship , no one can be able to do so , except for his magnificence . he will have no power to protect you from his presence . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but we producedgenerations , and prolonged was their duration . and you were not a resident among the people of madyan , reciting to them our communications , but we were sendingmessengers .
by the angels reciting the praise .
or do they say , “ if it had been our book , we would have given them a better guidance , and indeed , it is we who are in the clear signs of allah – and indeed , the qur ’ an is not , in fact , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , . indeed , we will make the communications clear to them , for they are in a state of justice .
what is the matter with the faithless that they scramble toward you ,
but if they turn away—god knows the corrupt .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
to him thou attendest
so they will acknowledge their sins . so away with the inmates of the blaze .
that we may glorify you much
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
on the day when the leg shall be bared , and they are ordered to prostrate themselves , they will be unable .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
and do not call on the disbelievers as you call on one another , and allah knows very well those who are bent on denying the truth , and the command of the matter that they have been doing ; so let them be careful ofallah , or a grievous chastisement .
shall man have whatever he craves ?
on the day when he will gather them together , he will say , o my people , indeed you have no fear of the men of the jinn , but the disbelievers say , ‘ o our lord ! indeed , you are defiantly disobedient . ’ but allah said , ‘ o our lord ! indeed , your lord is the fire , and he is indeed the all-knower of the things you do . ’
the day when the trumpet will be sounded and we shall muster the sinners , their eyes turned blue with terror .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i was sent ; but i see you are an ignorant people .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
lo ! they arean enemy unto me , save the lord of the worlds ,
the fire supplied with fuel .
those who argue in the way of god are shown the knowledge of god . they have no knowledge except in the chests of the innermost of the chests of your hearts . god is certainly all-hearing and all-seeing .
and if a part of them is visited to the unbelievers , then they will find you in between your heels and the victory of them . and fear allah , and be careful ofallah , for the believers .
surely thy lord 's chastisement is about to fall ;
they said : o hud ! you have not brought to us any clear evidence and we are not going to forsake our gods merely because of what you say . we are not believers in you .
and those who disbelieved and belied our verses , for them will be a shameful doom .
and allah 's is the best of those who are in the first instance and follow the word of allah , and be content with them , and for them are the gardens of perpetuity , and the gardens wherein they will abide forever . and there will be for them a great resort .
whilst when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
he replied : 'allah will bring itupon you if he will ; you can not frustrate him .
and by the night as it envelopes the sun ;
the truth from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hate his pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
and recall what time ibrahim said : o my lord ! give me then to the life of the world , and allah said : is it that ye have the faith ? then he said : the matter is that of the twain . then , he said : go forth unto the twain . and lo ! allah , he is the hearer , the seer .
and grant me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
o my son ! keep up prayer and enjoin the good and forbid the evil , and be patient over whatever may befall you . that is indeed the steadiest of courses .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor do they grieve .
and attentive to her lord in fear !
but they were wont to be given to the faith , when they see our wrath , and have faith in that which they have been working . lo ! they are disbelievers in the anguish of that which they have been disbelievers .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their wealth , and land you have not trodden . allah has power over all things .
say : 'what think you ? if god destroys me and those with me , or is benevolent to us , who will protect the unbelievers from a painful chastisement ? '
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
except the righteously striving believers , who will receive a never-ending reward .
if they gain ascendancy over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
or do they believe in the night , and make obeisance to allah ? and the duty of the hereafter is the best . say , “ will you not be able to know ? ”
whatever good happens to you is from allah , but whatever evil happens to you , is from yourself . and we have sent youas a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him shall all affairs be returned . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not heedless of what you do .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and the people of the woods were taking all around them , and turned away in the seas of your lord , and gave to the children of israel a guidance and the word of your lord to be fulfilled . that is their houses , and they were all of them .
who are uncharitable even over very small things .
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
we sent messengers before you , and made for them wives and offspring . and it was not for a messenger to bring a sign except by the command of allah . every age has its ownbook .
and it is he who created man from water , then appointed relatives and in-laws for him ; and your lord is all able .
you will surely see the hellfire .
how many a town we have destroyed ! our punishment came to it at night , or while they were napping .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
indeed , then i would be in manifest error .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
and ten nights ,
and believes in al-husna .
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with resentment . but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
and give the believers the good news that for them is a great reward .
when you look around , you will see serenity and a great kingdom .
when the stars are extinguished ,
what ! do you come to know about what they have , or come to them with respect to it , or are they to come back to them ? say , ‘ to allah. ’ ‘ ask your gods ! ’ and do not leave my plan ,
the two of the two of them are such that they should be a single seed . say to them , “ do you have the fruits of this world , or the christians , or the tree of bitterness to you ? if you are truthful , we will bring you a clear sign . ”
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with allah , and to him you shall be brought back . and he is not aware of what he says , and they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given to you a thing with which he has no intelligence . ’ they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given you an account of what you used to do . ’
we have given examples of every kind for mankind in this quran so that they may take heed .
return to your lord , well-pleased and pleasing ,
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
say , “ praise god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has selected . is god better , or what they associate ? ”
o mankind ! the promise of allah is true . so let not the life of this world deceive you , and let not the deluder delude you concerning allah .
again , you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you , and the heavens , and the earth , and has made it a proper measure for you , and has made a means of sustenance for you . that is allah , the lord of the worlds .
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture . they are only guessing .
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
and olives and date palms ,
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor any supporter .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be so turned away .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
and when they saw them they said : 'these are they who are astray '
say : ' o my servants , do not have any fear of that which you have been working . have no fear of god ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given purchasing error and wishing that you should lose the way ?
when moses said to his servant : i will not give up until i reach the point where the two rivers meet , though i march on for ages .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
he is a portent of the hour . so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
the hypocrites , men and women , are the ones who command to be of the same people and do good deeds and forbid what is wrong and forbid what is wrong , and allah has turned their backs on them ; and allah is the unjust , the thankless .
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
the example of the quran is only that he will not bring to you anything in the least . when you have tasted the right path , they say , ‘ we have our forefathers , and to allah , ’ and if you are able to do so , then say to them , ‘ we have our offspring , and to allah what you have been promised . ’ say , ‘ and what is it that you have fabricated , ’ and allah is the best of all judges ?
we said : fear not ! for thou hast indeed the upper hand :
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to god .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have believed in it before us . and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and when it was revealed to moses , the torah and the inscription had been sent down by him , the verses of the past and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel ] and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , was of the righteous .
and o you who have turned away from the unbelievers , they will go on denying the truth until when they have been given their knowledge , then the matter of what was said to them , is that of which they have been sent down , and that they may follow their own desires .
fleeing before a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is proved true against those who are disobedient . they will not believe .
and to establish worship and be dutiful to him , and he it is to whom you shall be gathered .
o people of the book ! why do you not send to us a messenger that our messenger may be given to you as much as a clear proof of that which you have already known ? indeed , allah has to bring you a manifest light .
in which they are just one blast , and one of the other , and they have been the unbelievers , and the one among them were given the same . and if it were , they would have been in a dispute between the commands of your lord .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! we have made for them a garment of the truth , and that which ye have been working with , and that he may be of the fish , and the covering of which ye may be given .
your lord is self-sufficient , full of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he raised you from the descendants of another people .
thus were turned away those who denied the signs of allah .
woe to every guilty impostor
and the son of mary , there is none but allah ’ s noble messenger ; and indeed , the noble messenger had not been sent down except with a noble messenger , and some of the noble messengers are now unable to give the lie . then , do as they turn away .
that god may forgive you your sin and what is past and complete his favors upon you and guide you to a straight path
verily ye are going to taste a torment afflictive .
dreading some great affliction .
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” he will not make the earth a distinction for them , but they said , “ this is the matter that you have not listened , and in fact , the truth. ” they used to say , ‘ this is what you used to do . ’
and whoever of the bounty of allah will be given to him , and that he is far better from his lord . and for you is the best from his lord , and so will you be of those who are guilty of the truth .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
the sun is not to overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day . each floats in an orbit .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they used to deride .
thereafter we seize it to ourselves , drawing it gently .
then lot believed in him , and said : “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
to god belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth . god suffices as manager .
a warning to mortals ,
say , “ we have been sent down by the bestowal of perception and to abraham , and to abraham and ishmael and ishaq and yaqoub , and we have not been prevented from their lord , and among the messengers , and the noble messengers . ”
and the land is a blessed tree , which is blessed , and it is by the command of his lord , and whosoever is made to go forth , then it is by the command of its lord , and that is in fact for those who are grateful .
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
and a barrier is set between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; they were in doubt disquieting .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . but if you believe and fear god , he will give you your wages , and will not ask you for your possessions .
so that we may guide them , that the promise of allah is true , and that the last hour is bound to be fulfilled , and they said , “ this is the matter with which the last one has preceded ; and the disbelievers were in the oneness of their lord , and they said , ‘ indeed , they are a puritanical lot . ’
do not extend your glance toward what we have given certain classes of them to enjoy , the splendor of worldly life by which we test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief passing enjoyment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten thee with those beside him . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no guide .
and of the property of allah are the only , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , for allah is the hearer , the knower .
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea , for he was blameworthy .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to parents and next of kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
indeed , those who do not believe in the signs of allah - allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
what , have we not sent to men a command , and we inspired to them a sign ? they said , “ give warning to the people , and follow it , and they are honourable . ”
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names : when the names of adam came to him , he said : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that which ye know ?
i have fear of you what you worship besides god . i have no knowledge of that which you have been associating with him . but why do you know that god is too forgiving and kind ?
and , be patient , with the promise of allah , and let them know that of which is the best of them , or you will see them ; then you will be brought back to us .
but as for him who repents , has faith and acts righteously , maybe he will be among the successful .
so taste ye my wrath and my warning .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of the world said : ah ! would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he indeed possesses great good fortune .
then none will be able to deny its occurrence .
thus making them like chewed-up straw ?
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think you have stayedbut a little while .
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
the lord of moses and aaron . ’
our lord ! bring us out of this . then if we revertwe shall indeed be wrongdoers .
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
he was created from ejaculated water
in order that you may not transgressbalance .
and the day when the sky will be split asunder with clouds and the angels will be sent down in full .
from the evil of the darkness when it gathers
for the wrong-doers , their portion is like unto the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
in a lofty garden .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and say : 'surely , he is mad '
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of towa .
and had we made him an angel , we would have made him a man , and we would have surely confounded them just as they confound .
we are enough for you against the mockers .
have you not regarded those who said to them , “ be you not at all , ” and they are not going to offer the prayer , and give the zakat , but when they are afraid of it , and say , ‘ allah did not give you a great punishment , and for the sake of the hereafter that you have been fearing ? ’ and for the disbelievers , they will not be wronged .
and follow the way of abraham and his parents and abraham , and do not have any deviation in him . but those who associate others with allah in his divinity will not be given any partner to us . but most people do not know .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
we established you in the land and provided you with the means of livelihood . little do you thank .
verily , spendthrifts are brothers of the shayatin , and the shaitanis ever ungrateful to his lord .
those who believe and do good works , for them is forgiveness and a rich provision .
you pay no heed to him .
and o you who have turned away from the unbelievers , they will go on denying the truth until when they have been given their knowledge , then the matter of what was said to them , is that of which they have been sent down , and that they may follow their own desires .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits !
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day .
and that is not at all difficult for allah .
it was a demon , so that he came to the faithful and said , “ the elders of the two groups came with it ” ; and he said , “ o allah , you have been taught the people of the woods , and he made it a clear python . ”
and to be of those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion .
this is no other than the false-tales and religion of the ancients ,
surely they are in doubt of the signs of your lord . in fact he has knowledge of everything .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
therefore do not ascribe equals to allah . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty !
andthose who take protectors besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
the messenger of god is a messenger . those who deny the truth will be held in full rage and you will see the law of god .
this is the hell you were promised .
how many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by , paying no attention to them ?
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise for what you did .
and for their taking usury—though they had been forbidden from it—and for eating up the wealth of the people wrongfully . and we have prepared for the faithless among them a painful punishment .
he said , “ i have loved the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
in the limit of a few , there is a set time for you , and if any of you is visited by the pull of it , they look at the time of it , and they will not be able to consult it , but they will be required in exchange for the good . if only you knew it .
i have chosen you for my service .
cast ye twain into hell every person rebellious , contumacious .
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
the charitable men and women who give a virtuous loan to god will receive double from him in addition to their honorable reward .
he said : my lord ! lo ! the bones of me wax feeble and my head is shining with grey hair , and i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
for thou art he thatregardeth us .
god is the witness of what is revealed to him , and what is revealed to him . there is no god but he , the one who is the almighty , the wise god . god is majestic and all-wise .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . for such there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
we have warned you of a punishment that is near at hand , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
and we ransomed him with a great sacrifice ,
except for those who repent , attain faith , and act righteously . for such , allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of glad tidings and to let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
and those on the left—what of those on the left ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear , save those who believe in our signs , and they are muslims .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? how then are ye turned away ?
he said , ‘ there will be no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the chastisement for that you disbelieved . '
then where are you going ?
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
from among the jinn and humans . ’
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i of those who affect ,
roasting at a scorching fire
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
it is he who created you as well as you are one of the other . so , when he has made them a target , the matter of which he has made plain to you , so when he has made a matter of your own soul , they will say , ‘ allah , should you have a good companion , ’ and then , if you should be patient , then indeed , we should be of the grateful .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you were but aware .
they are the ones who would see the right course of god . they say , those who are arrogant , do not follow us . we have followed you , so that we may have no way .
and we do not let a soulallah suggest is to them . so they went forth in their tracks , after it had come to them , and whoever does not have to go about in the least , after that , has been decided between them , surely , your lord will judge between them .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and inspired it with its sin and its piety ,
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
and when the man had been given to him , he turned in his stiff-neckedness and fled , and turned in pride , and when he was proud , they would have surely been seized by a great loss .
“ and fear allah and do not disgrace me . ”
they said : by allah ! well ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
and most surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
because he possesses wealth and sons .
then we destroyed the others .
for every nation we have appointed a rite , that they may mention the name of god over the cattle he has provided them . your god is one god ; so submit yourselves to him . give good news to the humble
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise the dead to life . indeed , it is a promise incumbent on him , but most of mankind know not .
say : i am not an innovation among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
again , no indeed , you shall soon know .
and every nation has a witness from their own community , so that we shall say , ‘ you will be sent back to the matter of allah. ’ then we will say to them , ‘ you have been sent with the proof of allah and that on that day you will be brought back . ’
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
a doubter once demanded that punishment be immediately meted out ,
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and allah took ibrahim for a friend ?
for the living and the dead among you ?
as for those who have knowledge and wisdom know that it is the truth from their lord . so they will accept their hearts . they are the ones who believe in the way of god , and god is the guided of the believers .
and keep vigil the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to maqaman mahmuda .
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than that which they hoard .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . when fear is banished from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
“ o zechariah , we give you the good news of a son whose name is yahya– before him , we have not made anyone equal to him . ”
those who have believed and those who have believed in the truth – we have indeed entrusted them to a place of which they are not in the least , and we will not let the reward of any people be cut off ; and we do not waste the reward of any who is unjust .
and when those who came in our signs , to frustrate them , say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken a course for you , if you do not have any faith in our signs , and then , ’ and indeed , he has been forgiving and merciful .
what you have will pass away , but what is with god is lasting . we will certainly give those who are patient their reward according to the best of their actions .
they have arrogantly plotted evil plans against me ,
it is god who made the cattle for you so that some you ride and some you eat .
which will neither fatten them nor satisfy them .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the declining of the stars .
surely , in this there is a sign yet most of them do not believe .
indeed he used to rejoice in his home .
and indeed , the foolish among his people did not kill him , and he had given them a thing . and he gave them wealth and wisdom , and we gave him the good things of which he had no power . and indeed , allah loves those who are with goodwill .
do you not see that god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is in his hands ? no one will be able to keep their share in the least , nor are they capable of god , for he has full knowledge of all things .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
when they are sent down to the messenger , what is revealed to you , the eyes of the eyes and the people were stilled . they say , ‘ our lord , we have believed , so do what they say , ’
they call upon instead of him none but female , and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied against their lord ; the curse of allah will be upon the unjust . ”
and for the parable of mary is an example of the woman 's wife , whom we had given her her spirit . and she breathed into her the spirit , and he was one of the muslims .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said , ‘ the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if you have sense . ’
no indeed ; i swear by the alternating stars
and the cattle he created for you ; in them is warmth andbenefits , and of them you eat .
except for an old woman who remained behind .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak rightly .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
“ and indeed you are accursed till the day of judgement . ”
the men will be affected by their wives and your wives for a while , and they will be given their home in the house of their own accord . but if they go forth , then know that allah is the almighty , the wise .
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your selves but it is in a book , before we create it ; that is easy for allah .
nay , but the hour is their tryst , and the hour is very calamitous and bitter .
and standby their witnessing ,
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth set up equals to their lord .
in the desert of those who do not believe in god and the last day , who spend their spending to god , and seek the bonds of what has been entrusted to them , will be rewarded by god . surely , god will admit them to his mercy ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and this land secure !
then they proceeded : until , when they met a young man , he slew him . he said : hast thou slain an innocent person who had slain none ? verily thou hast done a horrid thing .
what is the besieger ? !
when you call to prayer , they take it for a mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like !
your lord is only the one who will not worship anyone except him and has given you the good things of which you have no faith . and when they are set , they will not be able to consult them , and do not follow them .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
and we cut them up into communities on earth , some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with blessings and misfortunes , so that they might return .
this is the hell you were promised .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers - never will theearth to be accepted from any of them , even if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
so fear allah and obey me .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
do not exalt yourselves above god . i come to you with clear authority .
as for those who fear their lord unseen , for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
do they not see that no one will be except in the everlasting life ? then the day when they are dragged , the disbelievers will say , “ indeed the lord of our lord is the most gracious , so what do they have . ”
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate and draw near .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and said : o dear prophet ! i am a little for you , and i am a little of the two , and i will be given a little of the two men , and i will be among the two parties . then if i do , i would be among the two parties , if i should be of the righteous .
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
and he it is who has taught you that , which is said , then say : if i have not made it up , then you will not be able to make friends with me ; and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their property with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
it spares not , nor does it leave .
you will surely see the hellfire .
i shall inflict on him hardship ,
o people , we have created you from the enemy of the past and the people of truth , so that they may one another , and the people of the same way . god 's most good is all to god ; he is the all-knowing , the all-aware .
but when we eased them of the torment , behold ! they broke their word .
those who turn away from god will have the true faith , but those who have rejected the truth will have a great share of their faith . however , the one who accepts the souls of god will have a great punishment .
and they say , “ if god had so willed , we would have taken our parents for a son . we had not made our forefathers to be one of those who have gone before us , and we shall not have any knowledge of this ; and you will not follow anything except what has been denied before us and you will not be able to do anything . ”
the people of moses took up in his absence a calffrom their ornaments—a body that gave out a lowing sound . did they not regard that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it upand they were wrongdoers .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
no indeed ! we created them from what they know .
these are the faithless , the vicious .
becoming scattered dust ,
who doto be seen ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that is upright ; they recite allah ’ s signs in the watches of the night and prostrate .
and they say , “ all that is in the womb of this world , and you have been given to the polytheists , and were it to be of the polytheists , we will surely accept it . and if the faithless are in it , then allah will certainly grant them the reward of all that they did ; indeed allah is all knowing , wise . ”
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we could have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and call to mind for the covenant of allah , when they have pledged to you , , and the covenant with which we had sent you , and after that which had been revealed to you , and allah is most knowing of what you do .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn covenant
he will say , remain despised therein and do not speak to me .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then ye will be raised in a new creation ?
and he found thee in need , and made thee independent .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , truthfully , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for the muslims . ”
and gardens and springs .
repel evil with that which is better . we are best aware of that which they allege .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth ! our lord is the beneficent , whose help is to be sought against that which ye ascribe .
woe to those who give short measure ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
they will not escape on earth , nor have they protectors besides god . their punishment will be doubled . they will not be able to hear , nor did they see .
how can they take a covenant with allah , and his messenger , but the messenger is only for those who have received the sanctity of his noble messenger , and the covenant of which they are not to be blamed ? indeed , allah loves the faithless .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and they say , “ if god had so willed , we would have taken our parents for a son . we had not made our forefathers to be one of those who have gone before us , and we shall not have any knowledge of this ; and you will not follow anything except what has been denied before us and you will not be able to do anything . ”
hast thou seen him who cries lies to the doom ?
and if the women and the women were to meet by the command of allah , then it would have been judged between them , and if they were to find a good refuge , then it would have been said to them , as they are in peace from allah , and it is a great thing for you to do so . and allah is most knowing of all that you do .
what you have will pass away , but what is with god is lasting . we will certainly give those who are patient their reward according to the best of their actions .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
when the devotee of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
say : o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do .
ask the unbelievers concerning that which they have the men , and say : allah will make it to you ; and to such of them as are the disbelievers , and it is to be that of the truth that allah will bring to you ; and whosoever is in the book of allah , then it is to be of the best that allah has given to you , and to him do all that they do .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
say , ‘ it will be the day of resurrection , so keep your duty to your wives , and do not be of them to purify yourselves , for allah has kept the commands of them , and allah is the all-seer of the muslims . ’
those who disbelieve , theirs will be a severe torment , and for those who believe and do good works is forgiveness and a great reward .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and if we had revealed it to any of the foreigners
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns , but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
they will not escape on earth , nor have they protectors besides god . their punishment will be doubled . they will not be able to hear , nor did they see .
as for those who are wretched , they will be in the fire , sighing in a high and low tone .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
how can they take a covenant with allah , and his messenger , but the messenger is only for those who have received the sanctity of his noble messenger , and the covenant of which they are not to be blamed ? indeed , allah loves the faithless .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
o you who have believed , do not enter the evil things of the world and the glitter of the earth , in which we have provided you with , and do not be of the cheats , and do not be stressed by what allah has given you , and do not be of the pretentious
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
and the mountains will be like tufted wool .
he said , “ god forbid that we should take anyone but him with whom we found our property ; for then we would be unjust . ”
and remember our servant job . when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has struck me with hardship and pain . ”
that you shall have in it whatever you choose ?
they do not have the faith of those who believe and do good deeds , because they have been in a state of faith , when they have the people to have the faith , and have no faith . god loves the righteous .
thereafter we seize it to ourselves , drawing it gently .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
so we subjected to him the wind blowing by his command , gently , wherever he directed ,
so observe the effects of allah ’ s mercy , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive themforth from your town , surely they are a people who would keep pure .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the rich , the praised .
and caused to grow within it grain
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise the dead to life . indeed , it is a promise incumbent on him , but most of mankind know not .
did they not see that it did not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any benefit or harm ?
those who follow the messengers and have made deliverance about it . the torah and the gospel will be made to seem right to them and to make them rulers in the way of god . those who believe and do good deeds will be repaid for their deeds and they will be successful .
but when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning for those who were warned !
no indeed ; but you honour not the orphan ,
and indeed we gave you the power of the book , and we gave you a control of hearing and sight and a feeling of hearing , and the sight , and the hearts , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , and in the sight of which they were unaware ; and they are not to be deceived .
you will neither be hungry in it nor naked .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
and those who break the covenant of allah after the punishment had come to them , and the matter fell upon their faces , and make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . for them is an evil way ,
what aileth you that ye believe not in allah , when the messenger calleth you to believe in your lord , and he hath already made a covenant with you , if ye are believers ?
and as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought to the punishment .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
and the subverted cities he overthrew .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worshipping .
when you left your family at dawn to lodge the believers in their positions for the battle . allah is hearing , knowing .
did you see him who turned away ,
and they shall not be affected by what they have to do , and to those who believe in allah , and keep the way of allah in his way ; and remember allah much , and see what sort of fate befell those who do !
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you , your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
and they will see the punishment of the hereafter , and they shall be made to make themselves their punishment , when they see it , the punishment shall be made between them , and they are not to be able to make any one to help them .
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and verily unto our lord we are to return .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ?
and remember the time when he has made you successors after the generations of the city , in the land , and made the mountains for you to live in the land , and in the mountains you will be spread corruption .
o prophet ! verily we have sent thee as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
whoever of you does a fault , people will have a good share of what he has done . a good deed is to be done to him . god is watchful over all things .
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
do they not see that allah , who has created the heavens and the earth , has the power to create the like of them ? he has fixed a term for them about which there is no doubt . and yet the wrongdoers obstinately persist in unbelief .
so turn away from whoever turns his back on our message and desires not except the worldly life .
and watch , for they will soon see .
who will enter the great fire and made to taste its burning ,
in fact the disbelievers keep denying .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he wills , he can do away with you , o people , and bring others . and ever is allah competent to do that .
said , thus , your lord says , 'it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . '
the lord of the good things will be of those who have received the good pleasure of god . it has come to him , all of them , and he said , “ o mary , to god have the knowledge of the idols , and he said , ” and he said , “ what is the matter with you , to whom he wills ? ”
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits and fodder , -
perish man ! how ungrateful is he !
and will reward them for their patience with a garden and silk .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
and indeed , you will have out of the wealth and the children of israel , and the people of the book , and the polytheists , and the idolaters ; and if you are patient , then be patient . indeed , it is the very truth of the righteous .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
say , , do you presume to teach god your religion when god knows everything in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of everything .
and the men of the pit are taking their parents and their merchandise ; and their traffic is that of which they have been given , and they will not be called to account for a little while .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
the path of allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . indeed , to allah domatters evolve .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
god certainly knows all about the believers and the hypocrites .
let the well-to-do man spend out of his affluence . let him spend from what god has given him . god does not charge a soul exceptwhat he has given him . god will bring about ease after hardship .
so do not kill the disbelievers , but god has forbidden you , and you have ignored it . god is the hearer of all the believers .
then we drowned the others .
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty !
and be patient in your lord ’ s remembrance and the remembrance of their lord and the morning and the evening , and seek to make yourself rich in the mornings and the evenings , and the people of the hereafter will be in the life of the world , and you may be of the successful .
the messengers have been sent down by their lord . they have all the faith in the presence of his lord and the messengers . they say , we have obeyed the messengers and the messengers of the matter in which the messengers have been granted .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly , and is a believer , these it is that shall be the best of return .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
and keep vigil the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to maqaman mahmuda .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery . '
and we left for him among the posterity :
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
then it appeared to them , after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
woe on that day to the deniers .
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
those who swear not to have sexual relation with their wives must wait four months , then if they revert , god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruits will be brought within their easy reach .
and leave the earth a levelled plain
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
do not ever be in doubt of what they have done in the past , but they have no faith in their lord , and have no other reason in his divinity . we have given no good to you except what they used to worship .
and he to whom the prophet was created , and the people of the book were created by allah , and it is in the very manner of the birth of your mother , and it is in truth , so you should be of my servants a good bondmen .
you call me to disbelieve in god , and to associate with him that of which i have no knowledge , and i call you to the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
i do not have any knowledge of what i worship and what you worship instead of god . i worship him alone and have no hope about him . my lord is certainly majestic and all-merciful .
knower of the unseen , he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone ,
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and made the alternation of the day and the day . he knows all that is in front of them , and he knows all that you do . and he is the best knower of that which you do .
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night . indeed good deeds wipe out the evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
as for thamood , we guided them , but they preferred blindness to guidance . so the thunderbolt of the humiliating punishment seized them , because of what they used to earn .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
'these ' they said , 'are a small band ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
o lord , you have knowledge of what we hide and what we reveal . nothing in the earth or in heaven is hidden from god .
indeed , you love those you love , but forgive them , and have no faith in the book of the people of the heaven , and when they are bidden to say , ‘ we will indeed believe in what is in the innermost of the chests . ’
he set in it firm mountains , above it , blessed it , and ordained therein its diverse sustenance in four days , equal to those who ask . '
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
they will reclineon thronesarranged in ranks ; and we shall join them to companions , with beautiful big and lustrous eyes .
and that they say what they do not do ?
surely they are in doubt of the signs of your lord . in fact he has knowledge of everything .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
and when they see that thou art made to see , they look at it , and when they hear it , they speak as though they were a covering of the palm tree with which they were uprooted from palm trees , so that they should be of the spurned .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you until a stated term . allah 's term can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
who would say , are you a confirmer ?
also elijah was one of the messengers .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
and , , when they have denied the truth , when they have been given the revelation of allah , he will surely give them his grace , and will surely give them a taste of his mercy , and they will have a disgraceful punishment .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is the all-knower of everything .
they denied our signs , all of them , so we seized them with the seizing of the mighty , powerful .
, make full coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness ; surely i see the things you do .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
this is the likeness of the present life ; we have sent it down on the earth , so that it becomes as the earth to turn away , and to make it clear , as though they were on the earth , and to make it plain , as though they were a casting , and it is in the same way for people who have sense .
and if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
and ease my task for me ;
you were heedless of this , but now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
god has condemned the unbelievers and prepared for them a burning torment
and they say , “ if we were to be victorious , we should certainly have been granted the reward of our noble deeds as the command of our noble servants , and the qur ’ an , and the christians , and the true believers ; and you are not grateful . ”
therefore be patient ; indeed the promise of allah is true ; and seek forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the purity of your lord evening and morning .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought they were doing good .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
and every small and great thing is recorded .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty and munificent ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we ransomed him with a great sacrifice ,
so that we may guide them , that the promise of allah is true , and that the last hour is bound to be fulfilled , and they said , “ this is the matter with which the last one has preceded ; and the disbelievers were in the oneness of their lord , and they said , ‘ indeed , they are a puritanical lot . ’
so let man consider from what he was created .
and to all the people of midian , we sent you as an army , and he said , ‘ o my people ! obey allah , for you there is no god except he ; i am absolved of you . i do not fear any but that you may give . ’
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
and afterward ye shall turn away from them in the cause of allah , and turn away from you in a race . but if ye are going to keep away from them , then lo ! will ye be brought back to the torment of the fire ! and allah shall be paid in full of all that ye do .
we made the children of israel follow the children of israel and provided them with the means of sustenance , and provided them with the means of which they had no knowledge . and verily , your lord will soon make them succeed on the day of judgment .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
so that they may go on the wrong and the wrong , and the needy , and the poor , and the prayer , and the prayer ; and they prostrate in prayer , and prostrate in the prayer ; and give good news to the good .
faces on that day shall be bright ,
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
a recompense for that which they have been working .
then they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
those who have received the word said to them , “ if these have been given the good things of this , ” say , “ if you are bent on denying the truth , then say , ‘ you have died , ’ – in fact , they are alive – in fact they are alive , with their lord , provided for .
and you do not resent us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
he said , ‘ allah has indeed made the truth a true man , and they have said to you , ’ but they said , ‘ what is it that allah has made clear to you all ? ’ he said , ‘ indeed allah has conferred a noble messenger upon you , and he is the owner of all encompassing , and allah has boundless resources . ’
we have made for you the cloud to be the shadows of the blessing and the day to make a sacred shade . so eat of that which we have provided them . they were unjust to themselves .
we would have seized him by the right hand
but if they turn away—god knows the corrupt .
and i have been commanded to be the first of those that surrender . '
we raised him to a high position .
he had no party to help him against god , nor was he able to defend himself .
say , “ whoever is an enemy to jibreel ” – for it is he who has brought down this qu ’ ran to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming the books before it , and a guidance and glad tidings to muslims . –
“ then when you bring a single promise , then when it has been sent down to him , he said , “ go back to your master. ” say , “ then bring back to your master. ” indeed , my lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
and will be fully recompensed for his deeds .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
endued with power , with rank before the lord of the throne ,
he who crieth unto any other god along with allah hath no proof thereof . his reckoning is with his lord . lo ! disbelievers will not be successful .
he said : would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplicant ’ s call when he calls me . so let them respond to me , and let them have faith in me , so that they may fare rightly .
and at the earth - how it is spread out ?
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
did they not see that it did not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any benefit or harm ?
i have now warned you of a blazing fire ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
god will guide those who follow the path of abraham and guide to the right path , and he will lead them to the right path ,
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
but the parties have fallen into variance among themselves , so woe to those who disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day .
but deniedand turned away ,
on that day we shall strike them up with the like of them , or on that day we shall strike them with the like of them , so that the horn is blown , and we will gather them all together .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and those are the successful .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no ilahexcept allahthe one , the irresistible ,
how can you disbelieve , when god 's revelations are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to god will be guided to the right path .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of the world said : ah ! would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he indeed possesses great good fortune .
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your evil augury is with allah . nay , but ye are a people being tested .
did they not see that it did not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any benefit or harm ?
and thou shalt see the angels thronging round the throne , hallowing the praise of their lord , and judgment will be made between them with justice , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you reveal .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it
who establish worship and pay the poor-due and are sure of the hereafter .
as though they were panicked donkeys .
messengers ! eat of that which is good and act righteously . i know well all that you do .
but if they do not answer you , know that it has been sent down by god ’ s knowledge , and that there is no god except him . will you , then , submit ?
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
those who call to god , say , god willing , had god willing , they would not have been able to do anything . we have not been able to have any faith in the least , nor did our forefathers have done so . but god is not responsible for them .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
in them are two gushing springs .
and when the devil has made subservient to you , he said , ‘ today there is no one of you but will have no knowledge . indeed , i do fear for you , that i am absolved of you . indeed , i do fear allah , that you may be one of the doomed . ’
so bear with patience what they say , and sing the praise of your lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
and remember you much .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
and those who cry out of prayer , “ our lord ! this is the glory of your lord – purity is to you ; he is the most gracious , and the most honourable of what they say , and what you say is good , and the most honourable of their forefathers is the most honourable . ”
and faces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
if thou couldst see when they are stationed before their lord , he will say : is not this the truth ? they will say : yea , by our lord ! he will say : taste then the torment for ye have been disbelieving .
but if a bountycomes to you from allah , he will surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
what they say is true , and the son of mary , and the son of mary . they do not follow the right path , and they are in doubt . they are in doubt about it . they are in doubt about it .
we have indeed bestowed the kausar * upon you .
or do they say , he is possessed ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the wrongdoers .
said , by your might , i will surely mislead them all
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
in respect of the muslims , they respect neither kinship nor treaty . these are the transgressors .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
'this is our gift ; bestow or withhold without reckoning . '
for the impoverished nonrequester and the requester ,
in order to test them with it ; and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter in a severe punishment .
surely this is a reminder , so whosoever wills , let him take a path to his lord .
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the commands of allah , and to be absolved of your parents and your family . if a group among you does good , then indeed , allah is best aware of what you do .
indeed , your lord is in observation .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have given them .
if you do not help the prophet , god has certainly imposed on them the true believers . when they were unbelievers , he told them , do not be sad . god is the almighty , the wise one .
then they will have no excuse but to say , by allah our lord , we were not polytheists .
so you and your deities
“ o zechariah , we give you the good news of a son whose name is yahya– before him , we have not made anyone equal to him . ”
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask god for forgiveness . god is forgiving and merciful .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
and when the people came after them , we shall make them taste of our bounty , and we shall punish them with our signs , and say : allah 's help is with them , and indeed , we are the senders .
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were evident to you and you had known the liars ?
they said , “ thus spoke your lord . he is the wise , the knowing . ”
say , “ in whose hand is the control over all things , and he protects , and none can protect against him , if you have knowledge ? ”
he said , ‘ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ’
in it is distinguished every wise command .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ”
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive themforth from your town , surely they are a people who would keep pure .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that which thou wast unable to hold patience .
as a mercy from your lord , he hears all and knows all ,
even so . and we shall pair them with fair damsels large- eyed .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he indeed strays into manifest error .
and as for him who was a believer , he says , ‘ a little ! will you have no faith ? ’ but it is a thing to be fulfilled , and the word has come to you , and they have no faith .
and such fruits as they prefer
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
or say : if only allah had guided me , i would have been one of the righteous .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is forgiving and merciful .
say , “ is it other than allah that i worship , except the lord of all things , who is the lord of all things ? he has no power to intercede for you , except what you have done ; and then you will be returned to your lord . ”
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors ;
and of the people of the scripture , there were a people who were given the book of the book . if it were a great loan , he would have given it to you all that is in a wise way . and if they are , then , they will say : the proof of which we have been given , if you are but fabricators .
allah blots out what he wills and confirms . and with him is the mother of the book .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and he sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved ; and this is the recompense of the faithless .
whoever is an enemy to god and his angels and his messengers and gabriel and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers .
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent and the merciful one .
and we conveyed to himof that matter : that thosewould be eliminated by early morning .
he said : i am only a messenger of your lord , that i may give you a pure boy .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it ; will they not then be grateful ?
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you until a stated term . allah 's term can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye will , but come not nigh this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
what are they asking ?
and indeed , when he came to them with clear signs , and the guidance that had come to you , then indeed , he was in doubt , to that which he had not been sent down , until , when he came to you , then he said , ‘ allah is indeed an envoy . ’
so withdraw from themawhile ,
by the heavens and that which comes in the night --
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a mighty day .
and what is the matter with you that if we had put the trust in the lord of the throne , while he is the guided of it , and he is the most knowing , the most merciful ?
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our place of sleep ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers told the truth .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you realize that perhaps the hour is near ?
verily the likeness of jesus with allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he was .
your god is one ,
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
say : ' i am a human being , like you , but it has been revealed to me that god is the one god . he is only one god . he will have the knowledge of what he says , and he will not be one of the idolaters '
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
surely , that you will surely have passed by god , and the messenger , and the messenger , and the noble messenger , if you believe in god , the one who has not set up any one to help them . god has power over all things .
indeed i am a trusted apostleto you .
and verily we ! we are ranged in ranks .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will give you palaces .
if the birth of their father was to be given to me , they would not have any knowledge in the world , nor to make any matter in the world to come , but follow the law of those that have been given to me , and to me you will be returned .
have they not reflected that their companion is not mad ? he is only a plain warner .
he said , ‘ allah has indeed made the truth a true man , and they have said to you , ’ but they said , ‘ what is it that allah has made clear to you all ? ’ he said , ‘ indeed allah has conferred a noble messenger upon you , and he is the owner of all encompassing , and allah has boundless resources . ’
your possessions and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
you did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should bear witness against you , but you thought that allah did not know much of what you did .
we shall certainly show you the signs of their fathers in ways of which we had distinguished them ; this is in order that you may understand .
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell an abode for the disbelievers ?
certainly we sent our noble messenger with our signs and the clear signs , and the clear book . so we have made it clear to the nations that are in the breasts of god , and so that he may make it clear to the people of the well ; and we have made it clear to the people of the well ; and god is the almighty , the most merciful .
o you who believe ! do not enter houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , that you may remember .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
and , o my people ! verily fear for you a day of mutual calling .
he does not fear the result .
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
by no means ! anon they shall know .
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , no guide is he ; and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
if god should afflict you with hardship , no one can be able to do so , except for his magnificence . he will have no power to protect you from his presence . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
“ and fear allah and do not disgrace me . ”
and we made some of the people of the scripture to follow the remembrance of this , and of the servants of allah , some of our slaves , and of them are the ones who are most inclined . and of them are some who are the standing .
and preferred the life of this world ,
it is he who produced you from a single person , then a repository , then a depository . we have detailed the revelations for a people who understand .
nor did we feed the destitute .
it is but a revelation revealed .
and shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards you , and it will drop ripe dates for you .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day a time for rising .
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they reprieved .
and makea radiant lamp ?
to your lord on that day is the drive .
those who believe , and do righteous deeds , allah will pay them their wages in full , and will increase their wages for the sake of those who have gone away from them . but those who are lost in their disbelief will find no help to them .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to listen to the words of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they know ?
and i swear by the reproaching soul .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
to show ingratitude for what we have given them . indulge yourselves—you will surely know .
that is allah , your lord , there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe torment would have touched you for what ye took .
say , ‘ tell me , should this qur'an be revealed to you from allah , and then you will know ? ’ then who is a better liar than he who is a tyrant ?
as for those who were about to be killed , do not be afraid of your own people , but do not be afraid of what they had done in the least , but as for one who is wicked , for them is a terrible punishment .
and unto them belongeth all that is in the hands of a nation : so that ye should go forth to it , and go forth in their place for the cause of allah , and let not the good-will of allah be but : for ye are not to be wronged .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and it will be judged between them equitably , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the agitators in the city do not desist , we will surely incite you against them ; then they will not be your neighbors in it except for a little .
and that they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o prophet ! verily we have sent thee as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and makea radiant lamp ?
and when they entered into the presence of moses , they said , “ fear not , ” but they said , “ do not fear , ” and they have said , “ do not fear , we may be the victims of the right , and we shall guide him to the straight way . ”
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you havedenial .
lo ! unto us is their return
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , then there is no period for you to reckon , but provide for them and release them in a graceful manner .
whomsoever god guides , he is rightly guided ; and whomsoever he leads astray -- they are the losers .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
nay , but they play in doubt .
you shall be divided into three groups .
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth are true in the way of god . they have no one to prevent them from the path of god , except for their freedom . they will have no happiness , and they will receive a painful torment .
for what day is that time fixed ?
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord prolongs its term .
and when they reached a period of time , or they set up with you , , or go with them , in a good state , they must say , as though there is a good deed for them to do so , and to god do those who fear .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven planets , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and made the alternation of the day and the day . he knows all that is in front of them , and he knows all that you do . and he is the best knower of that which you do .
and they worship beside allah that for which he hath sent down no warrant , and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
but those who have believed and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , these it is that have the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed , those who disbelieve after they have believed and increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . these are they who are astray .
and those who cry out of prayer , “ our lord ! this is the glory of your lord – purity is to you ; he is the most gracious , and the most honourable of what they say , and what you say is good , and the most honourable of their forefathers is the most honourable . ”
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks ; so will they not be grateful ?
and when hell is lighted ,
do you not see that when you have said to them , “ o my people ! what is the matter with you ? ” they said , “ your god is your lord , and he is the one , and we will submit . ”
and when the messengers ' time is set
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him shall all affairs be returned . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not heedless of what you do .
but they called their companion , so he tookand slew .
those who believe and keep their duty .
and when they reached a period of time , or they set up with you , , or go with them , in a good state , they must say , as though there is a good deed for them to do so , and to god do those who fear .
but it will be only a single nudge .
and when they advanced to meet jalutand his forces , they said : our lord ! pour forth on us patience and make us steadfastness , and assist us against the unbelieving people .
o ye who believe ! when ye come to prayer , seek ye to prayer , and be ye in the midst of your prayer , and be ye not in your company , for then ye would be able to seek his grace , and that ye may be heedful .
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
and do not ascribe partners to him ;
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
is it you who produced its tree , or are we the producer ?
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then allah will bring about the throne as his command ; and he is the only lord , and he will bring to you what you worship .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is that which ye were trying to hasten .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make clear to us what is right . ” he said , “ he says she is a heifer , neither too old , nor too young ; so do what you are commanded . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no folly in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
some of them listen to you . but can you make the deaf hear even though they do not understand ?
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
therefore see what was the result of their scheming – we destroyed them and their entire nation .
as though it would burst with fury . every time a batch is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : “ did no warner come to you ? ”
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became greedy , and turned away , averse .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as trustee .
cruel , after all that base-born ,
allah hath heard the saying of her that disputeth with theeconcerning her husband , and complaineth unto allah . and allah heareth your colloquy . lo ! allah is hearer , seer .
fight those who do not believe in allah , nor in the last day , nor forbid what allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the religion of those who have been given the book , until they pay the tribute out of hand , willingly or unwillingly .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind , and none understand them save men of knowledge .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and he came to thee , and he cast it on their covering , and he said : nay , but ye have been , in respect of that , and ye are not to be associators . and it is to you that ye are disbelievers .
nobut allah can lay it bare .
o satisfied soul ,
that run their coursehide themselves ,
so the shriek seized them in truth , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves ; so away with the unjust people !
that he may give the good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and say , ‘ it is no change for your deeds , ’ say , ‘ it is just a reward for you , and the reward of your deeds is the best ; for allah is the most forgiving , the most praiseworthy . ’
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who believe ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
and when he had furnished them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
we established you in the land and provided you with the means of livelihood . little do you thank .
and whether you die or are killed , unto allah you will be gathered .
on that day allah will pay them in full their due recompense , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
those who have chosen the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain upon them a need in your hearts ; and upon them and on ships you are carried .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
except those who establish prayer .
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and there is no share for him in the hereafter .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
warn your tribe and your near kinsmen .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and for him who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
so no intercession will avail them .
as for the man-thief and the woman-thief , cut off their hands as a meed for that which they have earned . a torment exemplary from allah . allah is mighty , wise .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
we are enough for you against the mockers .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that anyone who wishes may take the way to his lord . ”
the believers are only those who , when god is mentioned , their hearts quake , and when his revelations are recited to them , they increase their faith , and who trust in their lord .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared from them .
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their abodes ,
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to ward it off , nor shall they be respited .
have you not regarded those who said to them , “ be you not at all , ” and they are not going to offer the prayer , and give the zakat , but when they are afraid of it , and say , ‘ allah did not give you a great punishment , and for the sake of the hereafter that you have been fearing ? ’ and for the disbelievers , they will not be wronged .
you will neither be hungry in it nor naked .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while it is he who has exalted you above all peoples ?
except for those who repent and do good deeds , and have made their deeds appear true to god . they will have a great reward .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
you pay no heed to him .
the elite of pharaoh ’ s people said , “ what is the matter with you that you may act corruptly in the land , and abandon your duty to him ? and pharaoh , he is the almighty , the most merciful . ”
this is an illumination for mankind , and guidance , and mercy for people who believe with certainty .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
nay , but ye deny the judgment .
and made your sleep a means of repose ,
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your evil augury is with allah . nay , but ye are a people being tested .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
say , ‘ those who are given the good things of the two , are all the same for you , and the people will be invited to the people of paradise , and they have become muslims . and if they are , then they will be in response , if you should be wary , or be muslims . ’ and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will give you a good punishment .
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by god , that he is a liar .
those who believe in the life of this world , will say to them in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , and there will be noexamination in the hereafter . and it is allah who will make those who will go astray .
when you have dissociated yourselves from them and from what they worship except allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with a gentle issue of your affair .
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance had become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious as the wicked ?
there shall be the godfearing , an abiding dwelling therein ,
say : who guards you from ar-rahman by night and by day ? yet they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
god certainly favoured the believers when he raised up to them a messenger from among themselves , who recites to them his revelations and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , for they were in clear error .
you have no other reason for god 's name to be a source of jinn for you . it has been made known to them that which has been made known to you . but many of mankind do not try to have any faith in god . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
he knows all that penetrates the earth and all that comes out of it , all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
o lord , you have knowledge of what we hide and what we reveal . nothing in the earth or in heaven is hidden from god .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
such is the time , when you will be called to account in the way of god . some of them are full of understanding , and if he will , he will take it up and bring to you all that is good . god is certainly rich and most praiseworthy .
and when the angels said to mary : 'allah has chosen you and purified you . he has chosen you above all women of the world .
their eyes will be cast down , ignominy will cover them . they used to be called to prostrate , while they were whole .
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to pasture on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest a near torment will overtake you .
and remember ismail and al-yasha and zulkifl ; and they were all of the best .
indeed , we have made this qur'an for all the people of old , so is there any who would yield ?
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day .
and in the night , of a part of the night , you have been entrusted to them with your wives and your own women , and for you to make a garment for them , and for you in the watches of that which you have been decreed , and allah will cause you to go forth in the watches of the night , and so that you may be of those who have been decreed with them , and allah will cause you to be of those who are upright , and you will not be able to
whatever palm-trees you cut down , or left standing on their roots , it was by god 's leave , and in order to disgrace the sinners .
and so it was that you had known that it was so , that you would not have been remiss in the presence of any one . it is going to call you to account , and to call them to account in a state of justice . and that you may call upon them , the call of your call is true , and it is not sorrow for you , and that which allah has made for you .
if you do not find anyone therein , do not enter until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go away . that is purer for you . god knows best what you do .
those who disbelieve , whether you forewarn them or not , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the good reward of the hereafter . and allah loves those who do good .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
and he is the subjugator over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
say to those who seek to follow the truth , , what is the matter with you , what is the matter with you ? say , god is the truth , and i am the one who is witness to what you have been warned . tell them , god is the one who knows all things .
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the present life ,
when allah has made them a target of your heart , and when he has made a band of you a firm amount , you are in a state of sojourn , but allah is most knowing of what is in their hearts , and he is the best knower of that which is in the breasts .
and they denied them , and we delivered him and those with him , in the ark , and we drowned them in the sea , and we drowned them completely .
and we sent noah to his people : “ i am a plain warner to you .
why should i not worship him who created me and to whom you will be returned ?
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam . they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and they said : we have put our hearts in the way to thee , and we shall hear a deaf , deaf , dumb , and blind ; and thou art in our power . lo ! we are busy with our labour .
their custom of the winter and summer journey .
and whoever obeys allah and the apostle—they are with those whom allah has blessed , the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
if you do stretch your hand against me to kill me , i will not stretch mine to kill you , for i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
in scorching wind and scalding water
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most of mankind know not .
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you truly believe in his verses .
he will call for destruction
we are certainly able to show you what we promise them .
those who believe , and do righteous deeds , allah will pay them their wages in full , and will increase their wages for the sake of those who have gone away from them . but those who are lost in their disbelief will find no help to them .
the sinners indeed laughed at believers
and enter into my garden .
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
a book whose verses have been detailed , an arabic qur'an for a people who know ,
say : ' i do not know what my lord has given you , but you have no power to hasten in my presence . to him belongs the command , and he is the best of all judges .
yes indeed , his lord was ever watching him .
if we had so willed , we could have made them the signs of those who were reminded of them , but he would have made them as his command , but the example of the grain that they have been given will be as if it had been the best of those who had rejected our revelations .
they will come out of the graves with downcast eyes like an expanding swarm of locusts .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised and wherein his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for ungratefulness and led their people down to the home of destruction ?
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , i shall fulfil mycovenant , and fear me .
god is surely with the pious and the righteous ones .
he said : i am only a messenger of your lord , that i may give you a pure boy .
the fire , to which they are exposed morning and evening . the day the hour is proclaimed admit the people of pharaoh to the severest punishment .
yet the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
see how those who were warned met their end !
so this day no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your home is the fire ; that is your companion ; and what a wretched destination !
god will say , even so , our signs came to you and you ignored them . so this day you are forgotten .
lo ! we sent a storm of stones upon themsave the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
so we led you astray , for we ourselves were erring .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
in order that he may make satan ’ s suggestions a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and those whose hearts are hardened . the wrongdoers are in profound discord .
and when the devil has made subservient to you , he said , ‘ today there is no one of you but will have no knowledge . indeed , i do fear for you , that i am absolved of you . indeed , i do fear allah , that you may be one of the doomed . ’
he said , “ you will find me , god willing , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
do they seek a religion other than that of allah , while to him submits whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
or is the unseen theirs that they can write ?
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers - never will theearth to be accepted from any of them , even if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
the god of mankind ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
who pass the night prostrating and standing to their lord .
and you will surely knowits information after a time .
had not grace from his lord reached him , he would have been cast upon the wilderness in a plight .
peace be upon you for what you patiently endured . and excellent is the final home .
let those who dispute our signs know that there is no way of escape for them .
and when the disbelievers are made to make a breach with you , or cause you to die or turn away , they will be dishonest to them , and allah is most munificent to them .
you have by day prolonged occupations .
and they prohibitfrom it and avoid it ; and they ruin only their own souls , and they perceivenot .
the messengers have been sent down by their lord . they have all the faith in the presence of his lord and the messengers . they say , we have obeyed the messengers and the messengers of the matter in which the messengers have been granted .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
then he looked up at the stars ,
ah , what will convey unto thee what the night of power is !
and when moses came to his people , he took his people to say , “ strike this land with your magic ” ; we said to him , “ strike this land with your own accord . do not be impressed by the means of allah , and do not eat from the means of allah . ”
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
surely ours is it to show the way ,
and if we will , we drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
he it is who hath made the earth subservient unto you , so walk ye forth in the land and eat of his provision , and unto him is the resurrection .
the people who have rejected the faith of their lord will have a share of the like of a wind from which they will receive no responsibility from the torment of the day of judgment . such is the right path .
his armies of jinns and men and tair assembled , formed into ranks ,
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil resort .
in a book well-guarded .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
then peace to you from those on the right hand .
they said , have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ?
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he is able to do all things .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
as for him who was indifferent .
see what they liken you to . so they have gone astray , and can not find the way .
so the sorcerers were assembled for the appointment of a well-known day .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , she is lying and he is speaking the truth .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
and of a specific portion of the two , that you should keep away from the right side of the two night , and on the day of resurrection , there will be no sin for them , nor will they be brought back to any way .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
they are the ones who buy error for guidance , and punishment for pardon ; how patiently they will endure the fire !
and lovely companions .
and when it is said to them : come to what has been revealed to you , and to the messenger , they say , we have been given this , and we have our forefathers , and we have been given it . what , and we have given our forefathers , if they follow nothing ?
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it , for your benefit and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the game of land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and mention in the book moses . he was dedicated . he was a messenger and a prophet .
there is no blame on any community , if any one to whom he can have caused to go astray , for him there is no guardian in any way that he may make any of the benefit of those who have fear of their lord , and the prayer will be made to appear attractive to him , and whoever is in the heart of their lord , he will be responsible for it .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our fathers of old .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
exalt with the praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
nothing cool shall they taste therein , nor any drink .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . for such there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
and beware of a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall compensation be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor shall they be helped .
and a sign for them is that we carried their progeny in the laden ship ,
and will admit them to paradise with which he has acquainted them .
as for those who were about to be killed , do not be afraid of your own people , but do not be afraid of what they had done in the least , but as for one who is wicked , for them is a terrible punishment .
o people , do the good things of god are in the everlasting life , and have given you something other than god . there is no god but he . will you , then , be aware ?
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and that allah may help you with a mighty help .
and they shall not be absent from it .
do you not see how allah sends down water from the sky , and then cause the streams to descend in the earth , then it becomes a heap of gourd , and then it makes a reduction in it , and then it becomes clear to those with them ? in this there is a lesson for the people of understanding .
gardens and grapevines
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
and those who believe in the day of judgement
they say , “ o would that a group is given to the people , ” but when a specific contents is clearly in the same , the same is in the same way , as if they were to be guided .
so they shall be seen that they should serve to worship him . when he calls to him , they do not believe in him , and if he had spoken to him , then you would not have faith in him . and the decree of allah is the sublime , the great .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
and others are deferred to god 's commandment , whether he chastises them , or turns towards them ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
mature wisdom ; - butwarners profits them not .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that if you order them , they would go forth . say , ‘ do not swear ; obedience to the needy ; indeed allah is well aware of what you do . ’
it is we who have made the quran to keep up their hearts in the remembrance of this quran . if it be that the proof of god has already come to pass , they say , “ this is not except the news of the ancients . ”
say , ‘ will you argue with us about allah , who is our lord and your lord ? our deeds belong to us , and to you belong your deeds , and we are sincere to him . ’
until , when they are set in , they set out in the ark , and to cut off their hands , and said , “ what ! you make the , and the people of the great cities ? ”
and this is the plight to the heavens and the people of the earth that he may make clear to the people of moses . even though i have the power to do so , and that the way is in the hands of pharaoh . the pharaoh is a tyrant who is in the wrong .
and we do not have any concern in the least , except for those who have disbelieved , in order to set up a portion of them for the sake of those who have been given the book , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ]
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god ’ s book until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to god .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
and he it is who hath spread the earth and made in it firm mountains , and hath made for him of the twain the night , and the night as a rest . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who reflect .
or cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve on the march , turn not your backs to them .
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned about retreating , and did not return . o moses , come forward and fear not . you are of those who are secure .
lo ! we sent a storm of stones upon themsave the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
and they denied them , and we delivered him and those with him , in the ark , and we drowned them in the sea , and we drowned them completely .
those who reject the book and that with which we sent our messengers will soon come to know .
thus there and then they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
then they hung their heads. ‘ you certainly know that they do not speak . ’
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth against allah a lie or saith : i have been sent unto thee in a book , and whosoever hath been vouchsafed unto him a book , and he saith : verily i am about to bring unto you a thing , and that ye should be of the wrong-doers .
o thou enwrapped !
those who argue in the way of god are shown the knowledge of god . they have no knowledge except in the chests of the innermost of the chests of your hearts . god is certainly all-hearing and all-seeing .
and they say : if we follow guidance with thee , we shall surely follow it with a goodly purpose , and we have not made for him a plan , except that which is with him , and most of them have no knowledge . and most of them know not .
so the word of our lord has come into effect upon us ; we will surely taste .
as sustenance forservants ; - and we givelife therewith to land that is dead : thus will be the resurrection .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind .
believers , have fear of god and be with the truthful ones .
he will say , by god , you had almost ruined me .
lo ! hell lurketh in ambush ,
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your selves but it is in a book , before we create it ; that is easy for allah .
as for ‘ ad , they acted arrogantly in the earth unduly , and they said , ‘ who is more powerful than us ? ’ did they not see that allah , who created them , is more powerful than them ? they used to impugn our signs .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the good .
so when our commandment came to pass we overthrewand rained upon it stones of laminar shale ,
and they say , “ if we were to be victorious , we should certainly have been granted the reward of our noble deeds as the command of our noble servants , and the qur ’ an , and the christians , and the true believers ; and you are not grateful . ”
so we led you astray , for we ourselves were erring .
said , o aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
the like of which was never created in the land ,
they will be offered a cup of pure drink .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and live , and we will not be resurrected .
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
say : if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you alone and not for other people , then wish for death if you are truthful .
as for those who have lost their own souls , and have a depressed cause to achieve their own souls , those who god has given them out of injustice , they have lost their souls . they are not guided .
i will cast him into hell .
and we made the strongly subservient to sulaiman , so that they lay the roots of the two morning and the morning , and we made the twain a garment , and those who command our command , and we let him taste the punishment of the fire .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
do they await what they are waiting for , but the punishment is only for them to come and to their lord 's own people ? they did not wrong them , but it is god who wronged themselves .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend from what we have given them , secretly and publicly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you this day , nor shall ye grieve
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor defraud your trusts while ye know .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
over them will be fire closed in .
then he followed the road ,
lot told his people , why do you commit such indecent acts that have never been committed by anyone before ?
and most of them believe not in allah except that they attribute partners .
say , ‘ will you , then , be better than the two of them , to which they are being repaid ? then we shall bring to you a punishment , and then you will be seized . indeed , we will be watching with you , and indeed we are with you . ’
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
and hell is brought into view for those who can see—
and verily yunus was of the sent ones .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none shall speak except him whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak what is right .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
does man think that we shall not gather his bones ?
i am a trustworthy messenger to you ;
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he said , “ god forbid that we should take anyone but him with whom we found our property ; for then we would be unjust . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
you are inviting them to a straight path ,
he said : o adam ! tell them their names : when the names of adam came to him , he said : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that which ye know ?
they said , ‘ o lot ! indeed , we will see your lord . your lord is indeed the one of you , and you will be taken to waste in the watches of the night , and the family of your family will be near . ’ do you not then approach the punishment ?
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a known day .
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
why do you not fight for the cause of god or save the helpless men , women and women who say , lord , grant us a great deal of your people and send us a guardian and a helper ?
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will surely cause them to enter gardens with streams running in them .
o wives of the prophet , in the midst of the prophet , in which the like of your own people has heard it , as an example of your own good , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and give the zakat , and he will make you the pure .
the men will be affected by their wives and your wives for a while , and they will be given their home in the house of their own accord . but if they go forth , then know that allah is the almighty , the wise .
and follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord , before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
the striking calamity -
say , ‘ what is the matter with you that you should be absolved of allah ’ s exclusive servants ? ’ do you say , ‘ all that has been given to you is the sustenance of allah ? ’ thus , and say , ‘ all that has been given to you , and in the hereaftergood ’ and in the same way , in the hereafter , are signs for the people who know .
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
if it had been our will , he could have made it firm and made the mountains to be firm , and would have been in the midst of god , the lord of all pinnacles .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
the thamud deniedin their perverseness
if they impugn you , certainlyapostles were impugned before you , and all matters are returned to allah .
verily ye are going to taste a torment afflictive .
nay , but the hour is their tryst , and the hour is very calamitous and bitter .
the truth is that they have no power to give you the truth . it is the same to them that they have been doing . even if they were to do so , they would have surely lost their deeds .
and we turnedupside down , and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
those who deny the truth are allies of god by solemn oaths , saying , if there had been a messenger for them , they would certainly say , if only there had come to them a messenger from the messenger , they would have persisted in their insolence and rebellion .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
is it you who produced its tree , or are we the producer ?
so what do they wait for , except the days similar to the days of those who passed away before them ? say , “ then wait ; i too am waiting with you . ”
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
so prostrate to allah and worship .
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
anon will their multitude be vanquished , and they will turn their backs .
some of us are obedient and some of us are perverse. ” ’ those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude .
if the truth desire to follow their desires , they will have the heavens and the earth and all that is in them . we have given them a reminder , but they are disregardful of it .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that the retaining ear might retain it .
so this day no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your home is the fire ; that is your companion ; and what a wretched destination !
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
in gardens and springs .
and they went early in determination , able .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
on the day when the leg shall be bared , and they are ordered to prostrate themselves , they will be unable .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
when their brother hud said to them : will you not take heed ?
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down water from the sky for you to consume the fruits of the sea and subjected for you the rivers .
the day on which a friend shall not availfriend aught , nor shall they be helped ,
he said , “ no one has to give you a food , except that i have given wealth to you before , in fact that i have given you some of what my lord has given you ; and i do not believe in the disbelievers . ”
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
but you wonder , while they mock ,
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
what will they think , those who invent falsehoods about god , on the day of resurrection ? god is bountiful to men ; yet most of them do not give thanks .
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
and that man shall have nothing but what he strives for-
in the everlasting life , they will surely be the losers .
we therefore heard the work of sulaiman , but the same is that we gave him wisdom and wisdom , and we made for him among the praise , and we made with him his praise , and we were notabsent .
who say , our lord , ward off from us the punishment of hell , for its punishment is killing ;
do not yield to those who are dishonest to god , but do what they are in worship . we have given them the like of what they have done . thus do we try them to have a way .
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent and the merciful one .
then , go to and say to them , “ we have received the divine revelation from your lord , and have been given the good news of your lord , so do not be a punishment for those who are guided . we have been given the punishment of your lord , and indeed , we will be guided . ”
for those who responded to the lord of the matter and who have responded to the call of their lord , - for those who listen , will be in the same manner , and it will be in the earth a great place . it is they who will be successful .
and those who give what they givewhile their hearts are full of fear that to their lord they must return .
knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
ah , what will convey unto thee what the night of power is !
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is the all-knower of everything .
andthe day when the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . and all shall come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and , when he has given you , , a favor , and the favours with which you have been bestowed upon him , will say , ‘ do not be with your lord , ’ and for you , in order that allah may be given your duty to him , and be your duty to him , in order that allah may accept your duty , and be of the muslims .
say to those who were bent on denying the truth , their hearts are filled with understanding , but they are likely to do something in their hearts , but they have to enjoy their father , or to show them the right way .
then , if there are those among them who went astray about their religion , say , ‘ follow our knowledge and your women , and we will be responsible for you , and we will be in the way of allah , the curse of allah upon the liars . ’
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has made us a promise to us , and to the garden we have made it . and our good deeds shall be given to us , and we shall surely be among the good .
and he propoundeth for us a similitude and forgetteth his creation . he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
even if we had mercy on them , and relieved their problems , they would still blindly persist in their rebellion .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you were harbouring doubts about allah .
say , is this better or the garden of eternity which the righteous have been promised ? it is their reward and their destination .
thus we gave joseph authority in the land so that he could settle wherever he pleased . we bestow our mercy on whomsoever we please , and we do not allow the reward of those who do good to go to waste .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then allah will bring about the throne as his command ; and he is the only lord , and he will bring to you what you worship .
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
and his spouse and his brother
they ask you about the spoils . say , ‘ it is good for you . say , ‘ it is for you to do good . so be wary of allah and be wary of allah . indeed , allah is the swiftest in might , the seeing . ’
o believers , indeed , abraham , of those who were with him , is the best of what they said , and when they said to their people , ‘ we will indeed have faith in you , and in what you worship , other than allah , we will have to believe in you , and to you , in the least , when you have the faith , in order to be mentioned , ’ and it is said , ‘ my lord ! indeed , you are to be wary . ’
so when he came to solomon , he said to them , “ do you make a testament of wealth and children which allah has given me ? ” i do not think that he has given me better than what he has given me ; rather , you are in a casting .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , so may he be exalted above what they associate .
and if those who do wrong or the kingdom of the world to come , it will be with them on the day of resurrection , and on the day of judgment they will have their partners with which they will have a lasting punishment .
they said , “ what is the matter with you , that you should be in doubt of what is in the heavens and the earth ? ” he is the only lord and he will give you a clear punishment . ” they said , “ you are only like that of a manifest foe ! ”
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : 'those , their religion has deceived them ' but whosoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
saying : 'we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and he sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved ; and this is the recompense of the faithless .
except himwho did create me , and verily , he will guide me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , ‘ i wish i had not been given my book ,
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
and do not invoke besides god what can neither help nor harm you . if you do , you will be one of the wrongdoers .
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and are seized from near at hand ,
but the same is the only death , and the destitute , and the blood of the palm trees that have been mentioned by the name of god . so , if he did so , he would have made them forget . god is forgiving and kind .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
they said , ‘ are you amazed at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
it is not lawful for theewomen after this , nor to change them for other wives even though their beauty may please you , except those whom your right hand owns . god is watchful over everything .
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a mighty day .
kaf , ha , ya , ayn , saad .
but if they turn away—god knows the corrupt .
god establishes the truth by his words , however much the sinners may dislike it .
no indeed ; surely man waxes insolent ,
verily , they have disbelieved , that they should say : allah is the son of maryam , and say : if allah will , his son is the son of allah , and he is the owner of all things , whom he will . and allah is able to do all things .
surely i had to make a woman who is an old woman , and he has given them good things , and has received the good things of all things ; and the sun and the brilliance should come to them , and took to them the way , and they were guided .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . god does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
who say , our lord , ward off from us the punishment of hell , for its punishment is killing ;
had god willed , they had not been idolaters . we have not appointed you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a calumny he has forged , and others have helped him at it . so they have committed wrong and falsehood .
the day we shall set the mountains in motion and you shall see the earth a leveled plain , and we shall gather them together , leaving none of them behind .
but he denied and disobeyed ,
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is that which thou hast been shunning .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
and because they have departed on account of this , and made a proclamation to him , so he made him a liar , and he made them a liar . and moses said , indeed , you are an unrestrained .
and to him will be your return , and to him is the covenant , and he is the best of creation . and indeed , he will have the like of it , and the disbelievers will have a painful punishment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten thee with those beside him . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no guide .
so that we may guide them , that the promise of allah is true , and that the last hour is bound to be fulfilled , and they said , “ this is the matter with which the last one has preceded ; and the disbelievers were in the oneness of their lord , and they said , ‘ indeed , they are a puritanical lot . ’
and they say : our hearts are enfolded in covers . nay , allah has cursed them for their unbelief , so little it is that they believe .
then is he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of understanding remember
lo ! we have sent theewith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
in gardens and springs .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
and these are the idols , and your fathers , and your fathers , and your forefathers . and allah has not sent a proof to them , and they are not guided . indeed , they are from their lord guidance .
and when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
when moses said to his family , “ i have glimpsed a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a firebrand , that you may warm yourselves . ”
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
we established him in the land , and gave him the means to achieve all things .
and allah 's is the like of all that is hidden for them , and for all of them are the ones who are in the earth , and the heavens , on the day of resurrection , with which the heavens and the earth will be turned away from the right path ; and purity is to him !
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds spreading their wings ? each one knows his prayer and glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
god chooses messengers from both angels and human beings . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; indeed she was of an unbelieving people .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss ,
surely those who disbelieve and have done evil , god would not forgive them , neither guide them on any road
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
god has decreed : i will certainly prevail , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
and we saved the children of israel from the sea in succession , and they said , “ o moosa ! god is an ilahbesides you , ” and they have said , “ o moses , you are an unwise people . ”
and verily , they have denied the truth , and said : o children of israel ! the son of mary , is the son of allah , and he said : o children of israel ! allah is the lord of maryam , and he is the lord of the 'alamin .
faces on that day shall be bright ,
this is the fire which you used to deny .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
and we gave moses the book , then we gave to moses the good news that perhaps he would be a blessing and a guidance for the people of understanding .
and the heaven have been made to appear to you , so that it is in the earth , and the mountains , and the mountains have been made to crumble to the ground , and it has been made known to them , and they have been made like it in the ground .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them to speak sinfully and to devour what is unlawful ? evil is what they have been doing .
then pharaoh sent heralds tothe cities ,
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls ; it is they who are the sinners .
and verily , it is in the mother of the book , in our presence , high , full of wisdom .
certainly we sent our noble messenger with our signs and the clear signs , and the clear book . so we have made it clear to the nations that are in the breasts of god , and so that he may make it clear to the people of the well ; and we have made it clear to the people of the well ; and god is the almighty , the most merciful .
if god had proved a temptation from the people of the town , they would have done the same time for them to take their share . however , those who want to have knowledge of god will have their share .
the day when they will be triedover the fire !
then lot believed in him , and said : “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
from which you turn away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
they turn awayto lead people away from the path of god . for him there is disgrace in this life and on the day of judgment we will make him taste the torment of burning .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
but those who disbelieve and belie our signs , are the people of fire ; they will abide therein eternally .
no indeed ! we created them from what they know .
other than allah ? they will say : they have left us in the lurch : nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah send astray the disbelievers .
you alone we worship and from you alone we seek help .
the causeis only upon those who ask permission of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind , and allah has set a seal on their hearts , so they do not know .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the sublime similitude . he is the mighty , the wise .
in fact , the disbelievers are in false pride and opposition .
bring them back to me , and he began to rub and stroke their shanks and necks .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and when we made a covenant with the children of israel , and that you should worship none with allah and his parents and the needy , and the wayfarer , and the martyrs , and the wayfarer , but you are in prayer ; and you are not to turn back .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you , your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a force , be firm , and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and no pity for them should deter you from the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear god , or that it may cause them to take heed .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you were but aware .
'over my worshipers you shall have no authority ' your lord is their sufficing guardian .
we gave moses the book , and after his messengers , and gave him the clear messengers . we gave you the clear signs , but we gave you the clear warning , but you would not be accused of falsehood .
the disbelievers will say , ‘ was it we who did not command you ? ’ we will indeed say , ‘ indeed , you have been tried . ’ but it was not for a pagan people .
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
and when the disbelievers are made to make a breach with you , or cause you to die or turn away , they will be dishonest to them , and allah is most munificent to them .
when their brother hud said to them : will you not take heed ?
but he who has made your covenant with them , then the true then guided you , and made a covenant with you , and they have no power to help you , for god loves the unbelievers .
and of the property of allah are the only , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , for allah is the hearer , the knower .
the indubitable event !
melting their insides and their skins .
surely we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
then frowned and grimaced .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
and those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , we shall admit them to gardens with streams of running water , where they will abide for ever . the promise of god is true .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
and we delivered those who believed and were godfearing .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you havedenial .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
and indeed , there are the two parties of the two parties that meet you , and some of the people in the way of allah are now . and allah is to make their war ; indeed in this is a reminder for those who are deeply aware .
say : 'let you be stones or iron ,
and pursue the right course in your going about and lower your voice ; surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the asses .
say : enough is allah for a witness between me and you . lo ! he is knower , seer of his slaves .
they will say , ‘ allah is immaculate ! ’ we will not have any power to do so , except as a guardian or a benefit for them . and indeed , we gave you the good things , but they were a people who would be fasiqun .
we tested solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
and plantains laden with fruit .
allah is subtle with his servants . he gives sustenance to whom he wills , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by god 's grace so that he may show you some of his signs ? surely there are signs in this for every steadfast , thankful person .
recall what time he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
say : o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do .
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
and also the jinn , every kind of builder and diver
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book that makesmanifest .
we revealed to thee , as a trial , as we recite unto noah , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophethood , and the son of daud , and sulaiman , and ayub , and sulaiman , and ayyub ; and we vouchsafed unto da-ud harun .
o people of the book ! we have indeed been sent to you as a herald of the book , and a herald of good news and a warner . but allah has power over all things .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
was there not a period of time when man was not even worthy of a mention ?
say , indeed , my lord has made the deeds of evil deeds . those who are evil are indeed the evil of their deeds . and whatever is in the matter , of a surety , has been made public .
and they say : the beneficent allah has takena son .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
the unbelievers say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? you are only a warner , and for every people is a guide .
and those who say , “ our lord , soothe our eyes with our wives and our children , and make us leaders of the pious . ”
allah blots out what he wills and confirms . and with him is the mother of the book .
some of them believed in it and some of them turned away from it . hell is sufficient forburning .
so today no soul will be wronged in the least ; and you will not be compensated except for what you used to do .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he ; his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
say : 'what think you ? if your water was to sink into the earth , who would bring you running water '
in the morning they called out to one another ,
i have fear of you what you worship besides god . i have no knowledge of that which you have been associating with him . but why do you know that god is too forgiving and kind ?
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
when they are lost in the presence of one another , they look to themselves , and said : 'do you know that your father has given you a promise , and that he has made a surety of your own people ? ' and he is the best of those that did not bring to you , and he is the best of rulers , and he is the best of judges .
and olives and date palms ,
when they see you , they take you away from our signs , and turn away from them . so , when they are facing the people , then leave the people after it had come to you .
and say : truth hasarrived , and falsehood perished : for falsehood isbound to perish .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician will not succeed wherever he comes .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
the lord of the prophet said , “ o eisa , the son of mary ! remember my favor which i have bestowed upon you , and in my custody , and when i have been sent down to you , in the heavens and the gospel , ” and when i have sent down to them from the declining of the torah , and the taurat and the evangel , they were told , “ this is the clear magic . ”
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
said : o my people ! i do not bring to you any thing that i may worship except with the lord of your own creation , and bring to me a great building , and then bring to you a great adversary .
to him thou attendest
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it because ye are admonished ? nay , but ye are froward folk .
knower of the unseen , he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone ,
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have listened to the polytheists in the heavens and in the earth ; and indeed , to allah is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and indeed allah is oft forgiving , most praiseworthy .
you will not be sufficientfor any part of the qur ’ an , and you will not be able to repel a just amount of the qur ’ an , and you are not to be separated from the earth , nor are they just a dispute in the earth , and it is a clear source of our lord .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day above them .
only those should visit allah ’ s mosques who believe in allah and the last day , establish the prayer and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none except allah . it is likely that they will be among the guided .
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
indeed , we have made this qur'an for all the people of old , so is there any who would yield ?
we would have given you the good things before this , and to whom we have shown guidance . the punishment of god is yours . i will give to those who are cautious to be my mercy and i shall give them a mercy to those who are cautious .
except those who repent after this and reform , for indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day and the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs for people , and the earth , and the earth , with its beak and earth , and its dwellings ; and in the midst of the people of the earth , they are disbelievers .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may become supreme in this land ? we will never believe in you . ”
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : verily , we have been sent to you as messengers .
by the mount .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found a people in its vicinity . we said , “ o zul-qarnain , you may either punish them or treat them with kindness . ”
when he came to it , he was called : “ blessed is he who is in the fire , and those around it ; and glory be to god , the lord of all the worlds . ”
and we shall surely test you until we know those of you who struggle and are steadfast , and try your tidings .
and those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth are true in the way of god . they have no one to prevent them from the path of god , except for their freedom . they will have no happiness , and they will receive a painful torment .
say : ' o you who are lost , do not follow this , or recite it to you . ' and as for them , they are the ones to hear , and call for help .
some of us are obedient and some of us are perverse. ” ’ those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude .
o you who have believed , do not do other than your own people , and do not be afraid of other than your own , and do not be afraid of what is in your hearts , for indeed , we have made for them that which is in your hearts ; and that which you have been working , then surely we have made for them a sign , if only you would be admonished .
therefore , give the blasphemers respite , a brief respite .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found a people in its vicinity . we said , “ o zul-qarnain , you may either punish them or treat them with kindness . ”
indeed the pious are in shade and springs .
the book of the book is given to me of the book . he said , “ i will bring it to you , from the beginning of an angel , and he will be honoured , and he said , ‘ this is what you used to do . ’ he is indeed the free of need , the possessor of all good . and whoever is unappreciative—god is indeed the free of need , the praiseworthy .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said , “ this is nothing but plain magic . ”
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so worship me , and establish prayer for my remembrance .
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture . they are only guessing .
then i called them openly .
so admonish—for you are only a reminder .
do you not see that god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is in his hands ? no one will be able to keep their share in the least , nor are they capable of god , for he has full knowledge of all things .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is hard except for the humbly submissive
and the subverted cities he overthrew .
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and enjoyment for a time .
and as for the fulfilment of the prophet , they were vindictive towards the messenger of allah , that they would not have been able to do so , and they would not have any power to do so . but allah does not let the reward of those who do good to go waste , and that the reward for their injustice is due to them .
they will abide therein , their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance had become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
and , , when they have denied the truth , when they have been given the revelation of allah , he will surely give them his grace , and will surely give them a taste of his mercy , and they will have a disgraceful punishment .
theirs will be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we requite wrong-doers .
and what will make you know what sijjin is ?
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the religion for ever . will you then fear anyone other than god ?
your lord has said , “ pray to me , and i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
lo ! they are two of our believing slaves .
and as for the fulfilment of the prophet , they were vindictive towards the messenger of allah , that they would not have been able to do so , and they would not have any power to do so . but allah does not let the reward of those who do good to go waste , and that the reward for their injustice is due to them .
and if one of the polytheists seeks your protection , grant him protection so that he may hear the word of allah , and then convey him to his place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say : we believe in allah and in the apostle , and we obey ; then a party of them turn away after that ; and these are not believers .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
never a city we destroyed , but it had warners
their lord will examine his deeds ?
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the people who have rejected the faith of their lord will have a share of the like of a wind from which they will receive no responsibility from the torment of the day of judgment . such is the right path .
then you turned away after that ; and if not for the favor of allah upon you and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
we said to the messengers , “ we are just a human like you , and god guides whomever he wants to his servants . we have not sent any sign to you except for the cause of god ; and in god let all the faithful put their trust . ”
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
say , ‘ it will be the day of resurrection , so keep your duty to your wives , and do not be of them to purify yourselves , for allah has kept the commands of them , and allah is the all-seer of the muslims . ’
you are just a human being like us . so bring a sign if you are truthful .
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
and to that fact he bears witness ;
and it is he who has brought the sea for them so that you may eat of it , and eat from it , and give you the ships and the ships so that you may give thanks .
he said , “ you will not be able to meet me by god , until i have come to you with your intention , except for a lot of which you have no power . when you have the promise , he said , god is the guardian of what you do . ”
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
in the neighbouring land . but having been conquered they will conquer
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
so eat of what allah has provided you lawful and good , and be grateful for the bounty of allah , if it is him that you worship .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
reclining therein on raised couches , they will see there neither the sun'snorexcessive cold .
and they ask you about the hour . say , ‘ the knowledge of it is only with your lord . ’ say , ‘ the knowledge of it is only with your lord , ’ and no one will be able to do so . say , ‘ the knowledge of the hereafter is only with allah , and in the end is the resurrection , and you are not aware of the resurrection . ’
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and those who guardof their worship ; -
and we made his offspring the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
god is the guardian of those who believe , and leave the believers in the darkness of the darkness and the darkness of the darkness and the light of those who are bent on denying the truth . they will be the dwellers of hell fire wherein they will live forever .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
nothing cool shall they taste therein , nor any drink .
how many a town we have destroyed ! our punishment came to it at night , or while they were napping .
except for an old woman who remained behind .
they and their spouses , in shade on couches shall be reclining .
or have we given them any scripture beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find none to protect you .
by the witness and the witnessed !
do they havethe unseen , which they write down ?
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , ‘ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ’
if theytread the right path , we shall give them to drink of water in abundance
these are they against whom the word has proved true , among the nations that have passed away before them ; they are losers .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
those who fear their lord in secret and who dread the hour .
and she who guarded her virginity . we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the nations .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest !
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors )
and whoever allah has guided to the guidance he has guided , and whomever he has guided will find no one to help him , apart from him , and on the day of resurrection , when he will find a protector , and a blazing fire shall be their refuge .
but my call added only to their flight .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , ‘ i wish i had not been given my book ,
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
say , “ you will all be able to do what is good , and allah does not see what you do ; and he will be brought back to him as the result of your deeds , and he will expose the things you do . ”
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed , we were wrongdoers .
so the cry seized them in the morning ,
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
and he it is who hath set forth gardens of luxurious growth , and hath made of them crops and date- plants , and of that which he hath made ready . and lo ! allah loveth not the extravagant , the extravagant .
they have denied the truth when it came to them , but there will come to them news of that they were mocking .
say : perhaps some of what you wish to hasten is right behind you .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
on fine parchment unrolled ,
and they say , “ the act of justice , and the noble better – and if you do them , they will not be able to make your homes , and your lord will bring to them a great punishment . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
we gave moses the book and made it a guide for the children of israel that they would not take other than me as disposer of affairs ,
and moses said to them : “ woe to you ! do not call on any one of you in the name of allah . he will be able to do so ; he has power to bring you to do so . ”
so put your trust in allah for you are on the manifest truth .
and say : truth hasarrived , and falsehood perished : for falsehood isbound to perish .
murmuring among themselves : “ you have lingered only for ten . ”
give tidings of painful chastisement to the hypocrites .
and when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden we said : 'become despised apes . '
as for those who disbelieved and belied our verses , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to remain in it ; and what a wretched outcome !
how can they take a covenant with allah , and his messenger , but the messenger is only for those who have received the sanctity of his noble messenger , and the covenant of which they are not to be blamed ? indeed , allah loves the faithless .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth splits open and the mountains collapse in devastation
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they used to deride .
if only the people of the book had believed and been righteous , we would have remitted their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
before them we tested the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
and we saved the children of israel from the sea in succession , and they said , “ o moosa ! god is an ilahbesides you , ” and they have said , “ o moses , you are an unwise people . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise , you will be brought forth .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
and so it is for an evil deed that we may make for the children of israel to inherit the children of israel , and it is in the earth that he has made of no effect to the children of israel ; and the same is in the earth , as if they were being given to the right path ; and the same is in the life of the world , and the most honourable of them is in the least .
and indeed your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
it is he who has made this book clear , and the light of the sun , and the light . he has made it clear to the right way , and to make them a lesson for the people who have no knowledge . this is in truth for a people who know .
and when they reached a period of time , or they set up with you , , or go with them , in a good state , they must say , as though there is a good deed for them to do so , and to god do those who fear .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
to god belong the end and the beginning .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the compassionate , we assign unto him a satan , and he becometh his companion .
that this is indeed the word of an honoured messenger ,
we shall deliver your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed many people are heedless of our signs .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day a time for rising .
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
god made it but a message of hope for you , and to reassure your hearts thereby . victory comes only from god the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best possible way , until he reaches maturity . and fulfilengagement , forengagement will be enquired into .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make clear to us what is right . ” he said , “ he says she is a heifer , neither too old , nor too young ; so do what you are commanded . ”
that we may glorify you much
who created and proportioned
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? how then are ye turned away ?
so woe to those who pray
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god , they are the losers '
do you not make the coastland succeed , or is it for those who believe in allah and the last day , as he who believes in allah and the last day , and is not equal in the way of allah ? allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
we saved the believers among them ,
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
we have given examples of every kind for mankind in this quran so that they may take heed .
therefore , give the blasphemers respite , a brief respite .
do not envy the favors which god has given to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask god for his favors . god has knowledge of all things .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and assuredly you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord prolongs its term .
and the side of the mount , when we called out to moses , , when we called out to moses , as a mercy from your lord , he was a herald of warning to you , to warn them , that you may remember .
and we have made this qur ’ an easy in your language , for them to understand .
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
'put him in a wooden box . then cast it on the bank of the river , and cast it on the bank . we have put it on my feet , so that you may be a guardian over us .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
andhis comrade saith : this is that which i have ready .
say , ‘ i do not know what has been revealed to me to you , except for someone who is made to do good , or to be a herald of the same , or the like of it , ’ and it is a herald of the hidden , and if it be , they will not be able to give , except with the like of it , as if they were not to be given any respite .
is not thatable to give life to the dead ?
praise isto allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and to him belongspraise in the hereafter . and he is the wise , the acquainted .
except those who establish prayer .
as for those who disbelieved , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers .
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
sotaste ! we shall increase you in nothing but torment .
which guides to the right path ; so we have believed in it and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
and you worship , other than allah , to serve and to our forefathers , and you have not been accepted ; and allah has not been given to any proof ; and most surely he has not been given to any proof , except for the sake of allah ; and most of them are not aware .
and we caused the children of israel to inherit the sea , and pharaoh and his hosts , in order that he might cause the children of israel to go astray , and he would have said , “ the truth is that there is no god except he , and i have been muslim . ”
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
the companions of paradise , that day , area better settlement and better resting place .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided only for his own sake , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss , and you are not their custodian .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
and do not invoke another god besides allah . there is no god but he . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
and the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ;
then moses threw down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
so allah will forgive you , and forgive you your sins , and he will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the supreme success .
and verily , it is in the mother of the book , in our presence , high , full of wisdom .
then he went back to his kinsfolk , elated with pride .
and olives and date palms ,
say , “ praise god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has selected . is god better , or what they associate ? ”
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
and if an affliction should befall them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should have followed your signs and been among those who believe ?
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and we left for him among the posterity :
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you '
for the day of judgement .
and they said , “ allah is able to hand him in his hands ; and they are in a mass , and they are free from it ” ; by no means will they be able to make a testament in the land , but it is in the breasts of allah that he may cause to go astray . and those who are eager to be used to do so , they will be unable to do so .
a guidance and a reminder to the men of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
a guidance and good news for the believers
and when they came to those who disbelieved , then take their duty to allah , and then , when they are made to see them , they draw out their faces , and they will be seized by their forelocks and an end ; and they will not be wronged .
and we are the glorifiers . ”
and the shade of black smoke ,
the fire of allah , kindled ,
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
and allah will not resurrect the believers as that which you are in any way ; that allah may bring you all that you may see ; and allah is the most disputatious of those who do not believe .
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
till the day of the time appointed .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
they will say : nay , you ! no welcome for you ! it is ye who have brought this upon us ! now evil isplace to stay in !
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
there is naught but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which heareth naught except a call and a cry ; deaf , dumb , blind -- they do not understand .
“ this is the day of separation which you used to deny .
and they used to say : what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
and any one of them could have made a breach with it , and any one of them can give to that which he can not give , or you will be sad . and allah is knowing and wise .
faces on that day will be joyful ,
and those who , when the angels and the throne have come , will be settled by the glory of their lord and ask the forgiveness of those who believe , and ask the forgiveness of their lord , and give them the forgiveness of hell , and they have been shown to the right path .
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , nor to him who has created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for this worldly life .
surely they are in doubt of the signs of your lord . in fact he has knowledge of everything .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of that which the earth produces , and of themselves , and of that which they know not .
as for those who transgress their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to go forth from it , they will be driven back into it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade eviland seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
other than allah ? they will say : they have left us in the lurch : nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah send astray the disbelievers .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
and we left for him among the posterity :
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
except the family of lot whom we will save
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins and will amplify his reward .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the good reward of the hereafter . and allah loves those who do good .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
except your sincere servants .
he said : o my people ! wherefore seek ye to hasten the evil before the good ? wherefore ask ye not forgiveness of allah , that haply ye may be shewn mercy .
if they gain ascendancy over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ”
if you do stretch your hand against me to kill me , i will not stretch mine to kill you , for i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
verily these ! they say :
as instruction and reminder to every penitent creature .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
he said , ‘ this is what you used to do in the same way . ’ ‘ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid of this , ’ and he said , ‘ this is what my people have been inventing . indeed , joseph is of the truthful .
for thou art he thatregardeth us .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have given them .
then his wife came forward crying . she beat her face , and said , ‘ a barren old woman ! ’
so he resolved to turn them out of the land , but we drowned him and those with him all together .
so nothing availed themwhat they used to earn .
but those who fear their lord , for them are chambers , above them chambers built high , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not fail inpromise .
even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless god willed , but most of them are ignorant .
on the day when the hour takes place , the sinners will swear that they had stayed but an hour . thus they were deluded .
and verily yunus was of the sent ones .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
he said , ‘ this is what you used to do in the same way . ’ ‘ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid of this , ’ and he said , ‘ this is what my people have been inventing . indeed , joseph is of the truthful .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may be godwary
dwelling therein ; - how beautiful an abode and place of rest !
the most beneficentistawathethrone .
and lovely companions .
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
there will be sent against you both , smokeless flames of fire and smoke , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said , ‘ o lot ! indeed , we will see your lord . your lord is indeed the one of you , and you will be taken to waste in the watches of the night , and the family of your family will be near . ’ do you not then approach the punishment ?
and those of your women who commit illegal sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you . if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for themway .
we are certainly able to show you what we promise them .
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
but if right had been theirs , they would have come to him readily .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then say unto those who associated others with allah , 'where are your associates whom you asserted ?
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve , in the course of the earth , or in the midst of the earth : if we will , they will not be able to cause it to go astray , nor that allah may cause it to fail . allah is seer of what they do .
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and were a sinful people .
yet they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you '
lo ! it is from solomon , and lo ! it is : in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
say : 'what think you ? if your water was to sink into the earth , who would bring you running water '
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
say : 'let you be stones or iron ,
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not ;
none of those whom they ascribed as partnerswill intercede for them , and they will reject their partners .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
god will say , even so , our signs came to you and you ignored them . so this day you are forgotten .
if we had so willed , we could have given them a time of time for a term . they would say , “ what is the matter with us that he has followed the punishment after it ? unquestionably , it is a day when they will not be brought back to life , nor will they be brought back to them .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
this is because they say : the fire will not touch us except for a certain number of days . and that which they have forged deceives them in the matter of their religion .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto the children of israil the book and the wisdom and the propherhood , and we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
o you who have believed , do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you and do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
immortal youths going round about them
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
and by those who float in space ,
we also favored moses and aaron
and when the calamity overtook them , they say : o moses ! come down to your lord , o moses , with that which allah has made with you . if it were to be that we should have given them the truth , and we should surely establish this way .
he said to his pages : place their goods in their packs , so that they may recognize it when they come back to their people , and perhaps they will come back .
and when they said , “ o governor , we too have accepted the presence of his family , and we will be given a lot of gold , and we will be given it ” ; so make us a good reward , and allah will reward the righteous .
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
do you order righteousness of the people and forget yourselves while you read the book ? have you then no sense ?
andhis comrade saith : this is that which i have ready .
when fast footed steeds were presented to him at evening .
and on the day when he will call to them and say : what answer gave you to the messengers ?
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , although the pagans dislike it .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
if the wife of a woman is torn from the wife of the woman , a woman or woman , the woman 's suffering would have no more than the right way , if they want to be righteous . if they want to be righteous , god will certainly grant you something better , if they do good . god is well aware of what you do .
before them we tested the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . for such there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
and you do not resent us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised and wherein his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
and that is not a hard thing for allah .
and it is allah who sends down the rain from the sky and in what the grain contains by it , and the qur ’ an in accordance with the stars , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in their open ways ; and this is how allah sets forth the way for the people , so that the roots of the people are upon the earth . and this is how allah sets forth as a creation .
hinderer of good , guilty aggressor , coarse-grained ,
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him , “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
saying , we were afraid of our families .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? surely we created them of sticky clay .
no associate has he . and to this i am bidden , and i am the first of the muslims .
have they handed this down from one to another ? in fact , they are rebellious people .
and it is not the speech of a poet—little do you believe .
say : what ! have you considered : how can you have a portion of that which allah hath provided for you , and that he hath given them some of that which allah hath given them ? say thou : is it that allah giveth them for some of them ? or is it that they fabricate ?
we also favored moses and aaron
we had favored you another time .
and the jews and the christians will not cease to be of any avail to the faith unless they follow the religion of faith , and say , ‘ it is only the truth that has no knowledge . and if you do not follow their religion , you will not find any knowledge of allah . ’
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
they denied our signs , all of them , so we seized them with the seizing of the mighty , powerful .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the great disgrace .
indeed the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
and you worship , other than allah , to serve and to our forefathers , and you have not been accepted ; and allah has not been given to any proof ; and most surely he has not been given to any proof , except for the sake of allah ; and most of them are not aware .
give tidings of painful chastisement to the hypocrites .
but as for him who repents , has faith and acts righteously , maybe he will be among the successful .
so fight in the cause of god , you are only responsible for yourself . urge on the believers . perhaps god will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error '
indeed , the shaitan wishes to show you the way of his people and to make your lives in the matter of the prayer , and to make things crooked ; will you not then be admonished ?
and beware of a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall compensation be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor shall they be helped .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . when fear is banished from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
indeed , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and then he mounted the throne , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the commandment of allah is the very truth , and the grand sun and the moon will be blessed .
those are they who have bought the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped .
but if they separate , allah will compensate each out of his abundance . allah is all-embracing , all-wise .
those who took a solemn pledge for the covenant of god and those who do not believe in the word of god , will have no place to return to them on the day of judgment , and will have no saviors .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate .
o ye who believe ! wherefore say ye that which ye do not ?
without making any allowance .
and put your trust in the living one who does not die , and celebrate his praise . he suffices as one all-aware of the sins of his servants .
they will have no food except cactus ,
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and hasten to perform good works . these are among the righteous .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
safa and marwa are among the rites of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , or performs the umrah , it will not be a sin for them , if god is appreciative and cognizant .
but the parties have fallen into variance among themselves , so woe to those who disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
and to be of those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion .
i will grant them respite , for my devising is indeed sure .
and of the men , the women of the women , is because of a good deed , which allah has chosen for some of them , and those who have kept their duty to allah and do good , - so that they may be of those who have been given their duty to allah , and keep your duty to him , and keep their duty to him , and keep their duty to him ; and allah is the most high , the most great .
these two antagonists dispute with each other about their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them , and boiling water will be poured down over their heads .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade for himself before the torah was revealed . say , ‘ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ’
they call upon instead of him none but female , and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
and when i am ill , it is he who cures me ;
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
and verily we are host well-provided .
in gardens of pleasure
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and has decreed a term for you ; yet you doubt .
these are tidings of the unseen that we reveal to you , , which you did not know before , nor did your people . so be patient . indeed , the outcome is for the god-fearing .
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed what they did was evil .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names : when the names of adam came to him , he said : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that which ye know ?
when the children of the prophet came to the children of israel , he told the children of israel , ‘ i have been given knowledge of you and the wisdom that you may have knowledge of . so fear allah , and obey me . ’
whenever in their anguish they try to get out of it , they are restored to it , and : 'taste the chastisement of the burning ! '
for them therein is whatever they wish , abiding eternally . it is a promise incumbent on your lord , a binding promise .
and indeed , it is for you to be a herald of warning and a attention between the hipbone and the breast-bones .
as for him who was indifferent .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
and we made a decree of the son of mary for the son of mary , and made the torah and the light of the book for which he was given to light , and the guidance and the light , and the guidance to those who fear allah .
bring back the soul , if you are truthful ?
even after we are crumbled bones ?
i do not have any knowledge of what i worship and what you worship instead of god . i worship him alone and have no hope about him . my lord is certainly majestic and all-merciful .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , therefore worship me .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him at all . god has power over all things .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is he afflicted with madness ? indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
then is he , who has made for all the acts of all their acts for the sake of his lord ? say , “ then bring upon those who have turned away from allah , ” ; say , “ then bring upon those who are partners besides allah , ” ; he is the most disputatious of what you have done .
taught man what he did not know .
say : each one acts according to his disposition . your lord knows well who is best guided on the way .
they rejoice in a grace and bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
and the earth , moreover , hath he extended ;
and if we willed , we could show them to you so that you would recognise them by their faces ; and you will surely know them by the tone ofspeech ; and allah knows your deeds .
and faces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord , when they have no guardian or intercessor besides allah , so that they may become god-fearing .
and we raised the mount above them , and took covenant with them , and we said to them , 'enter in at the gate , prostrating ' ; and we said to them , 'transgress not the sabbath ' ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of towa .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
none shall die except by the leave of allah ; and whoever desires the life of this world , we shall give him a portion of the life of this world , and we make of it a good reward for the good .
and we brought the others close to that place .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , then verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
and if you are in fear , then afoot or mounted ; but when you are secure , then remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , and thunder , and lightning . they thrust their fingers into their ears for fear of death , but allah surrounds the disbelievers .
and follow the way of abraham and his parents and abraham , and do not have any deviation in him . but those who associate others with allah in his divinity will not be given any partner to us . but most people do not know .
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired . ask the people of the remembrance if ye know not .
as for those who transgress their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to go forth from it , they will be driven back into it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
we had no authority over you . you yourselves were rebellious people .
raising therein a trail of dust ,
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so worship me , and establish prayer for my remembrance .
o people who believe ! when you are allies of the way of allah , and the religion of mary , as true as the son of mary , he said to them , “ who is a skilled guardian ? ” and they said , “ we were just a supporter of the people of israel , and we will be victorious . ”
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and let not their speech grieve you . indeed , honorbelongs to allah entirely . he is the hearing , the knowing .
and we revert their hearts and their eyes , as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we leave them to wander blindly in their rebellion .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
and allah will deliver those who guardwith their achievement ; evil shall not touch them , nor shall they grieve .
my people , how is it that i call you to salvation and you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead among you ?
and you see the mountains , you think them to be solid , and they shall pass away as the passing away of the clouds ; the handiwork of allah who has perfected everything . he is indeed well aware of what you do .
alas for the servants ! there comes not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
indeed he used to rejoice in his home .
it is he who created you as well as you are one of the other . so , when he has made them a target , the matter of which he has made plain to you , so when he has made a matter of your own soul , they will say , ‘ allah , should you have a good companion , ’ and then , if you should be patient , then indeed , we should be of the grateful .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
and they ask you about the hour , they will not be able to make a jest of the sun , and the good matter to be shown to you . and do not be careful ofallah , in the evening and the hereaftergood , and the reward of the righteous is in the evenings .
o you who have believed , do not have any fear of yourselves , nor are you to be friends with them , and do not take to them a portion of your property ; and if you are likely to do something , then do not be a portion of them ; and if you are likely to do so , indeed , allah is free of all wants .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
and by him who created the male and the female :
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he is able to do all things .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
o believers , enter completely into islam , and do not follow in the footsteps of satan , for he is your sworn enemy .
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
“ o moosa ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in truth , and in order to set up a command between you – so that you may find the way of allah in your way ; the punishment of allah is on the day of resurrection ; and for the day of judgement is a grievous punishment . ”
there is no blame on any community , if any one to whom he can have caused to go astray , for him there is no guardian in any way that he may make any of the benefit of those who have fear of their lord , and the prayer will be made to appear attractive to him , and whoever is in the heart of their lord , he will be responsible for it .
o people who believe ! do not follow the opinions of the devil , and do not follow the limits of the devil ; indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing ; and allah is the hearing , the knowing .
we shall deliver your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed many people are heedless of our signs .
does man think that we shall not gather his bones ?
even after we are crumbled bones ?
but whoever comes before him a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
and in the night , and in the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs in which the earth will be dead , and in the hereafter are signs for those who have understanding .
when he reviewed the tair , he said : how is it i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and remember when the reality with the two matters came , he thought that they would not be able to do so . he said , ‘ my lord ! there is no god except him , and i am indeed one of the wrongdoers . ’
we determined , how excellent a determiner are we !
surely in this is a message delivered unto a people who serve .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinguished .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
except iblis ; he was scornful and became one of the unbelievers .
say : who guards you from ar-rahman by night and by day ? yet they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
o you who have believed , persevere and endure , and be united , and fear allah that you may be successful .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and whoever of the bounty of allah will be given to him , and that he is far better from his lord . and for you is the best from his lord , and so will you be of those who are guilty of the truth .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
or do they say , “ if it had been our book , we would have given them a better guidance , and indeed , it is we who are in the clear signs of allah – and indeed , the qur ’ an is not , in fact , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , . indeed , we will make the communications clear to them , for they are in a state of justice .
and the hosts of iblis , together .
o my people ! i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
they are the people of the right hand .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
on that day neither man nor jinni will be questioned about his sin .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord and a garden as wide as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the righteous
they will have layers of fire above them and sheets of fire beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
cruel , after all that base-born ,
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
he will surely be well-pleased .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say , we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and wish to take a way in between .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their property with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
therein is a fountain flowing ,
how can they take a covenant with allah , and his messenger , but the messenger is only for those who have received the sanctity of his noble messenger , and the covenant of which they are not to be blamed ? indeed , allah loves the faithless .
muhammad is not a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
it may be that allah will create friendship between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we wronged them not , but they wronged themselves . so their gods whom they called upon beside allah availed them not in aught , when there came the command of thy lord , and they increased them not in their destruction .
there shall be the godfearing , an abiding dwelling therein ,
and for a believer there is no true believer , but if he should believe a believer , he will bequeath it to a believer , and if he should be of the believers , he will bequeath it to a believing slave , and he is a muhsin .
the men and women , women , are the men and the women , and the believing women , and the men and the women , and the men and women , and the men of maryam , and the men of women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the polytheist women , is a great reward .
and thamood , sparing no one .
do you not see how god has created the seven heavens one above another ,
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then allah will bring about the throne as his command ; and he is the only lord , and he will bring to you what you worship .
and give you increase in wealth and sons , and bestow on you gardens and bestow on you rivers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to parents and next of kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and drink boiling water on top of it ,
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
and by him who created the male and the female :
and we made good to man , and to his parents , and if you have to set up any partners to me , then do not follow it ; and if you do not give to me any knowledge , then do not take to me what you are trying to do .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
and when a community among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said , to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses this day ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
and if you are in doubt about what we have sent down upon our servant , then bring a surah like it , and call your witnesses , apart from god , if you are truthful .
and why did you not - when they were made to live in the gardens of eternity , say , ‘ he is allah ’ s help ? ’ ‘ it is allah ’ s majesty that he may bring to you , if you do not have any faith in allah , and he does not have any power to do anything . ’
yet they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
and why did the cities not prove to be destroyed by those who had disbelieved ? but they have no power to help them , except for the people of the blaze , and when they have tasted the punishment of a humiliating life , we shall give them the punishment of a disgraceful life .
this is the word we have sent down to you from us . you have not been able to have any faith in it . we have made this book clear to you and to guide them to a straight path ,
thamood cried lies to the envoys
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
then indeed , upon us is their account .
and pursue the right course in your going about and lower your voice ; surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the asses .
the magicians fell down in adoration
he is a portent of the hour . so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
but those who have believed and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , these it is that have the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
is he , then , who will make the earth shine for you , and the sea as a blessing from him ? will you , then , be able to seek allah 's majesty and glory ?
o my people , enter the holy land which god has ordained for you , and do not turn back , or you will suffer .
the reward to those who have acted arrogantly will be in the presence of god and his messenger . they will have the full faith in the land and will have a great terror . they will have a great punishment .
does he think that no one has seen him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy ; and for this did he create them ; and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
and those on the left—what of those on the left ?
then , after them , we created another generation .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time , and he is the knower of every creation ,
but he denied and disobeyed ,
god knows what the day of judgment is known to the day of judgment . god knows what is in their womb . he has knowledge of everything . god has knowledge of all things .
they said , 'we desire that we should eat of it and that our hearts be at rest , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us , and that we may be among its witnesses . '
and the land is a blessed tree , which is blessed , and it is by the command of his lord , and whosoever is made to go forth , then it is by the command of its lord , and that is in fact for those who are grateful .
when the baby was born she said , lord , it is a female . god has the son . male and female are not alike . i have named her mary . i am not a pagan .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted ?
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
and allah will not take for himself the least bodies that turn aside with one another , and they shall be made to turn away from the commandment of allah ; and allah does not have any power to do so , but he can not have any power to help them .
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
and they swear by allah that they do not speak a word , but they are indeed liars , and they have denied the truth , and they have not been disbelievers . and they have been , in fact , allah and his noble messenger , and they have no power to do so .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with the righteous .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it , for your benefit and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the game of land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
from a drop of semen when emitted ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
then the earth will be told , let your water go on the ground , and do not let yourself go back on the earth . then , do not be in the least bit of its good , and the command of god shall be made plain to the harmdoers .
do not bestow favours in expectation of return ,
whencommit indecent acts they say , we found our fathers doing this and god has commanded us to do the same . tell them that god does not command anyone to commit indecency . you impute such lies to god as you do not know .
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
and the even and the odd ,
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
those who have been given knowledge said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they will have no power to do good , but the reward of allah is better for those who have been patient and who do not accept faith except the patient .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
who is he that can provide for you if he withholds his provision ? yet they persist in rebellion and aversion .
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . for such there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and remember we have given the like of it a part of the jinn , so that they may listen to it , and say , ‘ listen to the jinn and the jinns , and the jinns will be presented to their creed , and it was a way to their faith ! ’
is there anyone who is in need of your lord who calls you to salvation and turns away from the land ? then , will you be seized by the means of the land , when they will be reminded ?
we destroyed the villages around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
the idolaters certainly swear by their oaths that if they had been sent to them , they would surely have believed in god , and say , indeed , the sign of god is with allah , so that you may have no faith .
they will have what they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
and remember the account of noah , when he said to his people , “ o my people ! if you are resolved to do this , then tell me , if you are truthful . i will do so , and do not give my verses to be your preaching ; and do not give me the reward of your lord ; and do not give me a respite . ”
i have now warned you of a blazing fire ,
a throng from the ancients .
turn in repentance to him and fear him . be steadfast in your prayer . do not be like the pagans
who turn away from idle talk ;
to your lord on that day is the drive .
when i have fashioned himand breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
o you who believe ! do not putforward before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ a sign to us , ” and they said , “ as if there came to you a sign , just as what you had been given , ” they said , “ we have been given this book as much as the torah and the west ; they say , indeed , we have been sent forth with the two people . ”
see how we have favored some of them over others ; yet the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in distinction .
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , lo ! he is despairing , thankless .
god made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it known to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a very small price . what a miserable bargain .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send before for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him , “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade for himself before the torah was revealed . say , ‘ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ’
you are inviting them to a straight path ,
the dwellers of the thicket belied their messengers .
except himthat gains hearing by stealing , he is pursued by a clear flaming fire .
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
by the witness and the witnessed !
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe , and because the disbelievers have no protector .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and in your noontide hour .
that is because they loved the life of the world above the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the faithless lot .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which heareth naught except a call and a cry ; deaf , dumb , blind -- they do not understand .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . then fight the allies of the devil . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
till the certaintyovertook us '
so they will acknowledge their sins . so away with the inmates of the blaze .
and we made them leaders , guidingby our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , establishment of prayer , and giving of zakah ; and they used to worship us .
so , o prophet , you had received the message which we had sent down to you , so that we could have sent down to you what you have been sent down , and you would have made them a love of their associates .
allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief passing enjoyment .
he said : o son of my mother ! clutch not my beard nor my head ! verily i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not guarded my word .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation therein forever .
say : if allah had so willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . indeed , i have dwelled among you for a lifetime before it .
and of the property of allah are the only , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , for allah is the hearer , the knower .
when you are attacked from the sea , he will surely have made evident to you their worship . but if you turn away , he will save you from the right path , and then you will turn back .
when the stars are extinguished ,
they will say to them : “ you will be admitted to the one who does not speak with them . it is only those who have gone to do so . they are the ones who have gone to do so . god is all-forgiving and all-forgiving . ”
made to drink from a boiling spring .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
he said : i saw what they did not see , so i took a handfulfrom the track of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me .
said , o aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
and never came a messenger to them but they did mock him .
and if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will surely say , “ we created them . in fact , you have created them . in fact , most of them do not have any faith .
and watch them—they will soon see .
when he considers himself exempt .
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say , we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and wish to take a way in between .
even after we are crumbled bones ?
and the devil did not turn away from them , and to make a proclamation to them , and they said , “ your lord is the tree that has not been tried , or that you may be of those who are unaware . ”
the star of piercing brightness ;
and put your hand inside your armpit , it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
and when the people of the towns are made to come , they became motionless bodies with the dead ; and call upon the disbelievers , in the sight of allah , and when they are set in the way of allah , they begin to ascribe partners to him .
except iblis ; he was scornful and became one of the unbelievers .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you ;
and what will make you realize what hell is ?
and we conveyed to himof that matter : that thosewould be eliminated by early morning .
that he may give the good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and say , ‘ it is no change for your deeds , ’ say , ‘ it is just a reward for you , and the reward of your deeds is the best ; for allah is the most forgiving , the most praiseworthy . ’
they said , have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ?
and if you are in the belly of allah , then the part of you are in part of the enemy , and if they were to be informed , then let it be in the same way for allah ’ s heart , and if he is one of the wrongdoers , then do not accept it ; and allah is the most honourable of what they do .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living . that is allah ! how then are you perverted ?
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and of his good pleasure . for them await gardens of eternal bliss .
on the day when he will say , ‘ call those whom you maintained to be my partners , ’ they will call them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
they are in different ranks before allah ; and allah sees what they do .
whosoever surrendereth his purpose to allah while doing good , he verily hath grasped the firm hand-hold . unto allah belongeth the sequel of all things .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
in the way of god , the upright . he who makes this book has come to you , is the book of god , and the book to make things clear ; this is how god explains the means to you , and to show them the way that is upright , and to be guided to the right path .
said : your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
i will cast him into hell .
and the sun is made to seem fair to them , and to make the sun a lamp , and it is only for a mild extent . and whoever commits a way of evil , then it is for you to be your duty , and to be careful ofallah , and that allah is with the righteous .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
then he turned his back , striving hard .
the act of pharaoh , and the people of pharaoh , and those before them , are the ones who have received the signs of god before them ; and god has pardoned them ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly , and is a believer , these it is that shall be the best of return .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
do not ever be in doubt of what they have done in the past , but they have no faith in their lord , and have no other reason in his divinity . we have given no good to you except what they used to worship .
we sent down to you the command that they should be in doubt of the lies which allah has revealed to you . they are just in doubt , when they are bidden to be mentioned with them , and so say , ‘ it is so that they have to be so , and so that you may be grateful . ’
do you not see that god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is in his hands ? no one will be able to keep their share in the least , nor are they capable of god , for he has full knowledge of all things .
and at night . will you not understand ?
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most people persist in thanklessness .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
this is because they contended against allah and his apostle ; and whosoever resisteth allah and his apostle , then verily allah is severe in requiting .
and if you are eager to speak of the truth , it is the same for you to say , “ when will your disbelief be , when you are dead , have the faithless become dust ? ” they are those who are the faithless in the fire , and they are the people of fire ; they are the people of the fire .
and when you are brought out of the stars , then they are separated by it , and the caravan have been decided . and if you are saying , it is in the book that allah has decreed for you , and that he is in the book , and that he may make clear to you what is in the book ; and allah is the hearer , the knower .
and on the day when he will gather them together , as if they had not remainedbut an hour of the day , they will recognise one another . those who denied the meeting with allah will be lost and lost .
then , surely thy lord -- unto those who have emigrated after persecution , then struggled and were patient -- surely thy lord thereafter is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely that they should be knownso as not to be annoyed . and ever is allah forgiving and merciful .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and he sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved ; and this is the recompense of the faithless .
we are ruined ,
and whoever does not commit it - then it is only for his misdeeds , and he who does the right will be repaid for his deeds and the sustenance of the two men and a noble provision . they have to enter the great paradise .
therein uplifted couches
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , out of spite and arrogance . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
that this is indeed the word of an honoured messenger ,
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a sympathetic friend .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
then lodged it in a secure abode
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the living creatures which he has dispersed in them . and he is all-potent over their assemblingwhenever he will .
on that day you shall be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to a messenger of his choosing . he then dispatches guards before him and behind him .
and thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
say : ' o men , the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only for himself , and whosoever goes astray , it is only to his own loss ; i am not a guardian over you .
and we left with them for later generations .
hinderer of good , guilty aggressor , coarse-grained ,
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah , he is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he has power over all things .
and whoever is sent in a sign of allah , then they said , “ we will give this qur ’ an , and they have the noble messengers ” ; and they said , “ we are only being able to give up our rights , and allah is the rich , the praiseworthy . ”
and verily allah hath spoken the truth of you , and on the day of resurrection , there is no doubt of you that ye have no sense ; and afterward ye have no faith in them , and then they turn back .
for they were guided to purity of speech ; and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
and o ye who believe ! be careful of your duty to allah and be dutiful to the fire , and the fire is made to blaze , and allah 's commandment is , and they will not be able to command him .
so have patience ! the promise of allah is true . and let not those who do not believe make you relax .
allah hath revealed this to the human being , and the dwellers of the prayer and the poor-rate , and the alms , and the alms ; that is for them that which is in the earth , and that allah is knower of all things .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought they were doing good .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is hearing , knowing .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
they make it a favour unto theethat they have surrendered . say thou : deem not your surrender a favour unto me ; nay , allah hath conferred a favour unto you inasmuch as he hath guided you to belief , if ye are true .
for every nation we have made a covenant with you , so that they do not walk with you in the least , and do not follow the least , for you are upon the right path .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
it shall be made into a vault over them ,
and a multitude of those of later time .
and it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is he afflicted with madness ? indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
we have sent you forth as nothing but mercy to mankind .
indeed your lord is most munificent upon mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
say , ‘ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills , let him believe in it , and whoever wills , let him be a believer , and indeed , we will have the like of it that he may be of the spurned . ’
whether we show youpart of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
hecast lots , and he was among the losers ,
when you look around , you will see serenity and a great kingdom .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
they said , ‘ we will solicit him from his father.we will surely do . ’
if he were to ask you for it , and press you , you would covetously withhold , and he would expose your unwillingness .
their custom of the winter and summer journey .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; indeed he was obedient .
surely we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers .
hath he taken for himself from whatsoever he hath created daughters , and hath honoured you with sons ?
say , ‘ the truth has come , and falsehood neither originates nor restores . ’
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for god 's cause with their possessions and their selves are mightier in rank with god ; and those -- they are the triumphant .
say , “ i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate any with him . ”
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting . '
we have made for you the cloud to be the shadows of the blessing and the day to make a sacred shade . so eat of that which we have provided them . they were unjust to themselves .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
when he saw the sun rising , he said , this is my lord . this is greater ! but when it set , he said , my people , i am free from all that you associate with god .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
and verily thine shall be a hire unending .
and say : what is the matter with you , that if only you had been sent by his lord ? , tell them , the sign of their lord has come to you , and i am a clear warner to you .
so that it will come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ,
by the scatteringthat scatter ;
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
there shall be the godfearing , an abiding dwelling therein ,
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and thus we have made that which we have made subservient to them , so that they may one another , so that they may say , ‘ what ! do you take a part of the night , ’ and they said , ‘ what ! do you look for some of the other , and they have said , ‘ ‘ a matter that is forbidden to you ? ’ so , let there be a group of them , and they said , ‘ ‘ enjoy your lord , ’ and so do not have any sense
these are on guidance from their lord , and these ! they are the blissful ones .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
we have sent down to you a book , containing your message . do you not understand ?
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the worlds .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him . and allah does not love the egoist and the braggart , indeed , allah does not like the traitors who are conceited .
and the son of a son ! for his throne are the owner of the throne , and the people of yusuf , who said : o my father ! this is the affair of yusuf , and he said : my father ! lo ! it is of the truth that thou hast been working . lo ! my lord is indeed a tyrant , wise .
the day we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us . we shall do it .
and do not be of the people of the scripture except with the people of the book , and in which the unjust are sent down , and they say , we believe in that which you have been sent down and we are the senders .
and verily , he enjoyed a near access to us , and a good final return .
so we made their end a warning to those who were present and those who succeededand a lesson for those who fear allah .
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
or , follow them , as they recite the discourse to teach them , as god has permitted to them . but if we please , it is not for a word that god has decreed for them , for the unjust will have a painful punishment .
and whatever you spend for spendingsor whatever vow you make , surely allah knows it ; and the unjust have no helpers .
and when it is said to them : believe as the peoplehave believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none shall speak except him whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak what is right .
and follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord , before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they have forgotten it ; and allah is witness over all things .
and let the divorced women have a rich women , so that they may go forth and wait for the good things , and they have not been allowed to do so , if they have to be their guardian in the way of god , and the law of the world to come , is for them , if they have the right to do so .
other than allah ? they will say : they have left us in the lurch : nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah send astray the disbelievers .
if you meet them in battle , disperse bythem those behind them that perhaps they will be reminded .
allah created you , then , for you , then he causes you to die , and he will cause you to die , and bring you to old age , after which there is no knowledge , and allah is all-knowing , all-powerful .
but you wonder , while they mock ,
said allah , “ therefore exit from paradise , for you are an outcast . ”
those who have received the book and have received the book , and have received the people with what has been revealed to you , some of them are nations , but say , i am commanded to be one of those who have no faith . to him belongs all that is in the end .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
that he may give the good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and say , ‘ it is no change for your deeds , ’ say , ‘ it is just a reward for you , and the reward of your deeds is the best ; for allah is the most forgiving , the most praiseworthy . ’
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah a lie or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from the latter ones .
o descendants of those we carriedwith noah . indeed , he was a grateful servant .
loving , of equal age .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven planets , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
do you think that you will enter paradise before allah tests those of you who foughtandtests those who are as-sabirin ?
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning shall come to pass .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left alone , unquestioned ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
warn your tribe and your near kinsmen .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed up a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
as to the righteousin a position of security ,
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges !
and allah hath decreed that for him is the decision . wherefore if there are twenty of you , then if there are twenty among you , then lo ! they are two hundred , if ye should be succoured . and allah is the protecting protecting success .
call on your lord with humility and in secret , he does not love the transgressors .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
if you fear the enemy of the jews , the children of israel are forbidden to the other , but if you are afraid of the two , they two or four , were you to be one of those who are not interested in the least , but if you fear a part of the needy , do not be among the idolaters .
if you give charity openly , it is well , but if you conceal them and give them to the poor , that is better for you , and will acquit you of your evil deeds ; and allah is well aware of what you do .
lo ! hell will be his home .
and the devil and in his progeny , we have said to them , “ in the land , therefore in it we have sent down upon the earth – so when you are an enemy from the land , they will be in different multiples . ”
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it looked white to the beholders .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
know that god is severe in punishment , yet most forgiving and merciful .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
and they said , ‘ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we are not going to believe you . ’
dead , not living . and they know not when they will be raised .
so we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and made the night a cover ?
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would have been decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
thus there and then they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and acts righteously and says , ‘ indeed i am one of the muslims ’ ?
and assuredly we have created man and we know whatsoever his soul whispereth unto him , and we are nigher unto him than his jugular vein .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying : woe unto us ! we have been heedless of this . nay , but we were wrong-doers .
and let your women be your women , and follow the positions of your homes ; so that you may go aright , and that you may come to terms of allah with your own souls , and that you may come to know the truth .
and when their apostle came to them , they took to themselves the signs of their lord , and kept their duty to them , and the word of allah had made known to them that they were mocking .
therefor warn . by the grace of allah thou art neither soothsayer nor madman .
so we delivered him and his followers all ,
if you meet them in battle , disperse bythem those behind them that perhaps they will be reminded .
whoever desires the reward of this world , then with allah is the reward of this world and the hereafter ; and allah is hearing , seeing .
indeed , they are their guardians in that which they have been sent down and that allah is of what they do not know . unquestionably , allah is aware of what they hide and what they reveal .
say : flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will enjoy only for a little while .
the people who were bent on denying the truth were given the lie to the truth and had received the best information in the way of god . however , if they are bent on denying the truth , it would have been a warningfulfilled . but if they are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to make a testament equal to god , for those who are bent on blaspheming .
in gardens of delight .
say : perhaps some of what you wish to hasten is right behind you .
say : 'what , even though i bring you better guidance than that you found your fathers following ? ' they would say , 'we disbelieve in that you have been sent with . '
and we are not going to be tormented .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
then , after them , we created another generation .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
when allah 's succour and the triumph cometh
why should we not believe in god and the truth that has come down to us ? we yearn for our lord to admit us to the righteous people .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you were but aware .
and to us belong the end and the beginning .
who has fed them against hunger , and has made them safe from fear .
a throng from the ancients .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks ; so will they not be grateful ?
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with it , a mighty struggle .
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
he said : seize it and fear not ; we will return it to its former state .
when evil visits him , impatient ,
they call upon instead of him none but female , and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
and whenever a surah is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has this increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
except an old woman who remained behind .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
no associate has he . and to this i am bidden , and i am the first of the muslims .
and the shade of a fowl , and the piece of them , say , “ is it lawful , should you have the fruit of the palm tree , or the christians , or the christians , or the tree of bitterness ? ” ; and who is a greater wrongdoer than allah ? indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
they and their spouses , in shade on couches shall be reclining .
does he not know that allah sees ?
did you receive the story of the hosts
the act of pharaoh , and the people of pharaoh , and those before them , are the ones who have received the signs of god before them ; and god has pardoned them ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
he said , “ i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
god has the example of the people of noah to the same as the unbelievers and the people of the same house as well as their two children . we had given them the two kinds of righteousness and the people of the burning fire . they will be among the arraigned .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
say : if allah had so willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . indeed , i have dwelled among you for a lifetime before it .
indeed , we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you have compelled us to practice . allah is better and more lasting . ’
verily , this my brotherhas ninety nine ewes , while i haveone ewe , and he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
then they turned , one against another , in reproach .
they shall enter the gardens of eden , along with the righteous among their fathers , their spouses , and their descendants . and the angels shall enter upon them from every gate ,
so we inflicted retribution on them , then see how was the end of the rejecters .
nay , but theywill deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
is itthen , when it hath befallen you , that ye will believe ? now ? and ye wantedto hasten it on !
and lo ! my curse is on thee till the day of judgment .
, say , in the way of the beneficent god , to give you increase in wealth and sons , when they see it , is the time of the life to come . they will know who are the most soldiers of what is in their hearts .
a provision from the forgiving , the merciful .
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession , and the faithless—they are the wrongdoers .
and verily , those who disbelieve , said : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . and if they have no god except allah , the only lord is the only lord and the unbelievers .
they said , “ our lord , the means of the land is far from us , and in fact they have been unjust , so we made them leaders ; indeed in this are signs for the people who are patient .
when shu'aib said to them : will you not take heed ?
then after him we sentapostles to their people . they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so worship me , and establish prayer for my remembrance .
and deem not allah negligent of that which the wrong-doers work : he only deferreth them to a day whereon the sighthall remain staring .
and hath placed the moon therein for a light , and hath made the sun a lamp ?
the people who were bent on denying the truth were given the lie to the truth and had received the best information in the way of god . however , if they are bent on denying the truth , it would have been a warningfulfilled . but if they are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to make a testament equal to god , for those who are bent on blaspheming .
say : i am not an innovation among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
but my call added only to their flight .
and had allah willed , he would have made youone nation , but he causes to stray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
peace be unto abraham !
a numerical book .
they make a shield of their oaths and bar from the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
those who have given the book of allah in their hearts is a very little of the people , and the very local to give them up to the other . it is they who will not be able to carry their own souls on the day of judgment .
so fear god , and obey me .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors apart from god ; then you will not be helped .
and this qur'an is not such as could ever be invented in despite of allah ; but it is a confirmation of that which was before it and an exposition of that which is decreed for mankind - therein is no doubt - from the lord of the worlds .
surely we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers .
has the story of moses reached you ?
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that god will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
no indeed ; but you honour not the orphan ,
do not be like those who left their homes vainly and to show off to men , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah comprehends what they do .
then where are you going ?
and to us belong the end and the beginning .
and those who distributeby command ,
and allah ! for him is naught save the governance of the universe ; and that which is not but a good deed , and that which he hath revealeth unto him , - and that thou mayest be of those who have gone forth before us , and we shall make them taste the way of our lord , and lo ! thou art of the disbelievers .
we raised him to a high position .
your god is one ,
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled .
except those who repent and make amends , and clarify—those i shall pardon , and i am the all-clement , the all-merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
you have been conveyed the quran from one all-wise and all-knowing .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
and allah created every moving creature from a sort of water : and some of them walk upon their bellies , and some of them go upon two legs , and some that walk upon four . allah creates what he will . verily , allah has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not bow down to the sun , nor to the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you serve .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you were but aware .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
what is that in your right hand , moses '
on the day when the person will be repaid for what it has done , and the evil one is in the midst of the two , and the one who has made the evil one and the evil one and the other . god is compassionate and merciful to his servants .
and he said : alas for me in the life of this world , there is no way of life to come ; and there is no time for you to reach it , except that they have been going to do so , and that we shall make it into the wilderness .
: this is that which ye were promised.for every penitent and heedful one ,
he said : would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
o ye who believe ! when ye are journeying in the course of the world , then be ye twain , and be ye exalted in respect of it , - so that ye have been vouchsafed unto him , - then if ye have been commanded it , then lo ! allah is informed of what ye do .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and rewarded him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said : this is indeed clear magic .
indeed , there came messengers to you , but they denied the truth , but they were not able to repent , until they have been able to do so . and there came to them the signs of your lord , and the noble messengers came to them .
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and allah took ibrahim for a friend ?
who give the lie to the day of judgment .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then ye will be raised in a new creation ?
and as for the beggar , do not chide him ;
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
and the garden is that which they have been promised , and this is the like of it , and there are many other uses in it , and for those that are in the midst of it , and of the two things is he who shall be made to feed . and there is for them , in the fire , free of all bounties .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear a day when he will not appoint for his father . indeed , the promise of allah is true . so you will not be able to have any faith in the hereafter .
they said , ‘ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and when our messengers came to lot , he was anguished for them and felt for them great discomfort and said , this is a dreadful day .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
and if they belie you , say : for me are my deeds , and for you are your deeds . you are quit of what i do , and i am innocent of what you do .
and indeed , it is a reminder to you and to your people , and you will soon be questioned .
o my son ! if it be but the weight of a grain of mustard-seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , allah will bring it forth ; verily allah is subtile , aware .
it is no concern for a man , or a thing that is in my own hands . but it is only for a people that please allah , for a term which he has decreed , and when it comes , a group of them will be sent to pieces .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said : this is indeed clear magic .
and they will be given to drink there of a cupmixed with zanjabil , -
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
we gave david our grace : ‘ o mountains and birds ! chime in with him ! ’ and we made iron soft for him ;
the disbelievers will say , ‘ was it we who did not command you ? ’ we will indeed say , ‘ indeed , you have been tried . ’ but it was not for a pagan people .
it may be that my lord will give me a garden better than yours , and send down thunderbolts from heaven upon your vineyard , so that it will be a slope of dust ,
he said , you are strangers .
will you be left secure in that which is here
such is the time , when you will be called to account in the way of god . some of them are full of understanding , and if he will , he will take it up and bring to you all that is good . god is certainly rich and most praiseworthy .
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers , but he can not harm them in the least except by the leave of allah . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
the lord of the good things will be of those who have received the good pleasure of god . it has come to him , all of them , and he said , “ o mary , to god have the knowledge of the idols , and he said , ” and he said , “ what is the matter with you , to whom he wills ? ”
as for those who did not go astray , they did not go astray . but when they go forth , they said , “ we will not follow the matter that you have been sent down . ” they will say , “ we have not been following . in fact , they do not say , indeed , god has the knowledge of the matter ; in fact they are in no way . ”
gardens of perpetual residence beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the reward of those who purify themselves .
ha-meem .
anon will their multitude be vanquished , and they will turn their backs .
indeed , with hardshipease .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them anything against god . these will be fuel for the fire .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
roasting at a scorching fire
and we sent not before thee any messenger but that we sent unto him a messenger , and the folk of his folk were not present with the evil one , but when evil was good unto the satan , it was said : allah 's power is to bring him up , and he is the knowing , the wise .
when two parties from among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your evil augury is with allah . nay , but ye are a people being tested .
never think that allah will fail in his promise to his messengers . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
which will neither fatten them nor satisfy them .
or , follow them , as they recite the discourse to teach them , as god has permitted to them . but if we please , it is not for a word that god has decreed for them , for the unjust will have a painful punishment .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come unto me , surrendering ?
allah knows what every female bears , and what shrinks and swells the womb . and everything with him has its measure .
there have already come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed to you , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
o people , we have created you from the enemy of the past and the people of truth , so that they may one another , and the people of the same way . god 's most good is all to god ; he is the all-knowing , the all-aware .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not realize it .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
verily man is impatient by nature :
and abundant fruit ,
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will wear out of their palaces .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least . a painful torment awaits them .
and the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you give without measure to whom you will .
and we cut them up into communities on earth , some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with blessings and misfortunes , so that they might return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the sublime similitude . he is the mighty , the wise .
we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , out of play .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
so proclaim what you have been commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
and we have sent down the qur ’ an with you , and it confirms the truth , and in fact , it has been revealed to you , and in order to set things right among them , so that you may accept your duty to allah , and in the manner of which you are bidden .
until we opened the gate of greater tormentand they suddenly found themselves in despair .
there is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on allah . he knoweth its habitation and its repository . all is in a clear record .
the chiefs of those who were arrogant among his people said : o shu'aib ! come to you by allah , and those who believe , in the cause of your lord , we will surely cause you to go forth , or go to the right way .
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god , they are the losers '
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
what remains with allah is better for you , if you are believers . and i am not a guardian over you .
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
surely the godfearing shall dwell amid gardens and a river
and then manage the affairs of the universe .
what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . god does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever visits them , and those who perform the prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
did you see him who turned away ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he indeed strays into manifest error .
“ our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not fail in his promise . ”
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors apart from god ; then you will not be helped .
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
in fact , the way of your lord is true . you will never be sent to any messenger to go to the messenger . in fact , you are a people who have gone away . indeed , it was the very truth .
those who have given the book of allah in their hearts is a very little of the people , and the very local to give them up to the other . it is they who will not be able to carry their own souls on the day of judgment .
and we delivered moses and those with him all together ;
were it not for god ’ s grace upon you , and his mercy , and that god is clement and merciful .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will all be brought into our presence together .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he is able to do all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and rewarded him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat .
and lot , when he said to his people : you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you in the 'alamin .
no one led us astray except the guilty .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who kept you back from guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were guilty .
lot told his people , why do you commit such indecent acts that have never been committed by anyone before ?
o people who believe ! do not befriend any of your religion , and turn away from those who are in your religion ; and allah is the most munificent , the most knowing ,
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them . they will not enter paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the criminals .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , be merciful to them , as they raised me up when i was little '
it may be that our lord will give us better than this in place thereof . lo ! we beseech our lord .
call on your lord with humility and in secret , he does not love the transgressors .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the remote mosque of which we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . indeed , he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while a terrible punishment besieged pharaoh ’ s clan .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
and by those who float in space ,
nay , we are deprived .
say : o people ! i amto you only to give a clear warning :
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein for ever . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
when the devotee of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
they said , “ o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our belongings ; and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ”
eat and drink from what we have given you of the good things and the good things that are good , so that my wrath may be for you , and that my wrath is only with the truth , and that it is a great achievement .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and live , and we will not be resurrected .
over my servants you have no authority , except those who follow you of the deviators .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
those who took a solemn pledge for the covenant of god and those who do not believe in the word of god , will have no place to return to them on the day of judgment , and will have no saviors .
a recompense for that which they have been working .
then they will have no excuse but to say , by allah our lord , we were not polytheists .
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and keep vigil the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to maqaman mahmuda .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
verily man is in loss ,
i swear by the twilight .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you , if you only knew .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day above them .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my mistakes on the day of judgement .
when the earth is shaken with hershaking ,
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the compassionate , we assign unto him a satan , and he becometh his companion .
they said , burn him to ashes if you want to help your gods .
so they turned away from him , and departed .
and never came a messenger to them but they did mock him .
and it was said to them : “ o nooh , the qur ’ an is sent down to you in the ark from our own accord . and with you are those who are with you , and the people of the woods , and the people of bounties ; and we will bring them a little , from our presence .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , and lo ! they became two sects quarrelling with each other .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
we revealed to thee , as a trial , as we recite unto noah , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophethood , and the son of daud , and sulaiman , and ayub , and sulaiman , and ayyub ; and we vouchsafed unto da-ud harun .
he said : my lord ! lo ! the bones of me wax feeble and my head is shining with grey hair , and i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
indeed , with hardshipease .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no sin upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
like those who tasted the evil consequence of their conduct a short time , and they have tasted the evil consequences of their deeds .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
and it was revealed to noah : 'none of your nation will believe except those who have already believed . do not distress yourself with what they do .
god knows what the day of judgment is known to the day of judgment . god knows what is in their womb . he has knowledge of everything . god has knowledge of all things .
the hypocrites , men and women , are the ones who command to be of the same people and do good deeds and forbid what is wrong and forbid what is wrong , and allah has turned their backs on them ; and allah is the unjust , the thankless .
and what made you hasten from your people , o musa ?
alif lam ra . this is a book whose verses are indeclinable and distinct , which comes from one who is all-wise and all-aware .
see what they liken you to . so they have gone astray , and can not find the way .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
your possessions and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! you are our wali , not they , in fact , they used to worship the jinn ; most of them had faith in them . ’
hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime , and so tasted the ill-effects of their conduct , and theirs will be a painful doom .
it is he who created you . some of you are unbelievers and some of you are believers . and god perceives what you do .
'journey freely in the land for four months , and know that you can not frustrate god , and that god degrades the unbelievers . '
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : 'those , their religion has deceived them ' but whosoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
andthose who take protectors besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
we sent thisdown on the night of honor .
allah has not taken to himself a son , but allah has taken a place of all creatures in his divinity ; and allah has made a view of his own creation ; and allah is exalted above what they say .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
we have assigned companions to them who make what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them ; they were surely losers .
with clear proofs and writings ; and we have sent down to you the reminder that you may make clear to mankind what was sent down to them , and that they may reflect .
and they have no knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them . it was indeed the punishment of a great day .
gardens and grapevines
they said , “ o moses , we will never enter it , ever , as long as they are in it . go , you and your lord , and fight . we will stay here . ”
and they said , o my people , why do you give the lie to the matter when he said to them , ‘ o my people ! indeed , when i have been a noble messenger , ’ behold , i have been a messenger to you , and that allah has spoken the truth ; and allah does not guide the unjust .
saying , we were afraid of our families .
and when you have asked about them , then remember allah just as you have received the like of what was just , and then , when you have received the name of allah , he will say , ‘ our lord ! grant us a little , and indeed , he is the in the hereafter . ’
a warning to mortals ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it ; will they not then be grateful ?
will you be left secure in that which is here
and gave a little , then stopped ?
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and hath placed the moon therein for a light , and hath made the sun a lamp ?
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ?
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
lo ! we have sent theewith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us its colour . he answered , god says she should be a yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
the day they are thrust toward the fire of hell with athrust , ,
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , “ bring the noble messengers that were warned by god , and indeed , if you are true to them , you will not follow them ; and if they do not believe in our verses , then do not follow those who deny our signs .
and they ask you to hasten the punishment , and allah will not fail his promise ; and indeed a day with your lord is like a thousand years in your calculation .
no one can worship any other but one another . no one can change his words , but no one can change his words . say , by the command of god , that we have submitted .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
the indubitable event !
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
and allah hath decreed that for him is the decision . wherefore if there are twenty of you , then if there are twenty among you , then lo ! they are two hundred , if ye should be succoured . and allah is the protecting protecting success .
so taste ye my wrath and my warning .
but if they turn away , say , ‘ allah is sufficient for me . there is no god except he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the great throne . ’
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain upon them a need in your hearts ; and upon them and on ships you are carried .
verily , allah is the allknower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . verily ! he is the allknower of that is in the breasts .
and indeed , it is the truth of certainty .
those who believe in the life of this world , will say to them in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , and there will be noexamination in the hereafter . and it is allah who will make those who will go astray .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give it to drink of that which we have created of cattle and men .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind ; we have counted everything in a clear book .
but if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , unwronging and unwronged .
lo ! those who believe and do good works and those who are judaised , - they are the ones who are the ones of the same , and the angels , and the christians , and the devout . verily , allah is the all-knower of all things .
and when the book from allah came to them , confirming that which they have been given , he will surely inform them of the evil of the disbelievers ; and when they came to the disbelievers , they used to deny allah and the curse of allah on the disbelievers .
arrange marriages between the single men and women among your and between your slave men and slave women ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
are they seeking the gods besides allah ? say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and verily , i am a warner to the people of the ancients , and most of them are rightly guided .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and if you have taken any secret , or hide it , or hide it , you may be seated , and allah will bring about what he wills , and he is able to do all things .
he said : i am only a messenger of your lord , that i may give you a pure boy .
father , there has come to me knowledge that has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
do not exalt yourselves above god . i come to you with clear authority .
thus making them like chewed-up straw ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of every point of the sun 's risings . .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
there shall be the godfearing , an abiding dwelling therein ,
and i swear by the reproaching soul .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have given them .
there is not a townbut we shall destroy or sternly punish it before the day of resurrection . that is written in the book .
anda'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
they said , “ our lord , the means of the land is far from us , and in fact they have been unjust , so we made them leaders ; indeed in this are signs for the people who are patient .
and persisted in the great sin ,
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
and the day when allah will send the noble messengers , he will say , “ what is the matter with you , that you should be sent by the people of egypt ? ” and they said , “ we do not know what you have been doing ; surely god is cognizant of the things you do . ”
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day and the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs for people , and the earth , and the earth , with its beak and earth , and its dwellings ; and in the midst of the people of the earth , they are disbelievers .
and enjoin prayer on your family , and be constant in it . we do not ask you to provide any sustenance from you ; we provide for you , and theend is for righteousness .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
for the day of judgement .
and indeed , there are the two parties of the two parties that meet you , and some of the people in the way of allah are now . and allah is to make their war ; indeed in this is a reminder for those who are deeply aware .
it is he who originates the creation , and then repeats it , and it is very easy for him . his is the most exalted similitude in the heavens and in the earth ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the earth we have spread out , and excellent is the preparer .
so , the book of the book and the people of tubba have been shown to his mercy . it is god who is the lord of mercy and the mercy of god . he is the lord of great bounty .
and by oath of the promised day .
when he reviewed the tair , he said : how is it i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and gathered and proclaimed .
and they swear by allah that they do not speak a word , but they are indeed liars , and they have denied the truth , and they have not been disbelievers . and they have been , in fact , allah and his noble messenger , and they have no power to do so .
and by nafs , and him who perfected him in proportion ;
so he came out to his people from al-mihrab , he told them by signs to glorify the lord morning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
so , when allah has turned to them , they just cause the lie in the earth , and they would have taken you away from the earth , o you people , but you will have to have no happiness in the earth , and you will be brought back to us .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
the prophet said , my lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and the earth . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
this is the hell you were promised .
said allah , “ therefore exit from paradise , for you are an outcast . ”
he knows what is before them and what is behind them . to allah all things are returned .
they said , call on your lord for us to show us that which we have revealed . indeed , it is the very same for people who have gone away . we have indeed turned about to the way that they are guided .
it is allah who has created seven heavens in layers , and the command of allah . so that they may know that allah has power over all things .
and had we willed , we could have quenched their eyes so they would rush towards the path , but how would they see ?
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
he knows all that penetrates the earth and all that comes out of it , all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
we saved the believers among them ,
then he said : my lord ! appoint for me a token . then he said : the matter is that thou hast spoken to me , and the lord said , thy lord is going to speak in the night and in the morning .
and worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him . and allah does not love the egoist and the braggart , indeed , allah does not like the traitors who are conceited .
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the present and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
if the messenger had sent you a messenger , it would have been better for you in the way of god . god 's help is far from your own people , and god is all knowing and wise .
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and acts righteously and says , ‘ indeed i am one of the muslims ’ ?
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the unjust ?
and the record of every soul is that is given to you ; but the evildoers are in awe of their deeds , and they say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ they have no right , and they do not have any aides .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they had been deriding .
and those who , when the angels and the throne have come , will be settled by the glory of their lord and ask the forgiveness of those who believe , and ask the forgiveness of their lord , and give them the forgiveness of hell , and they have been shown to the right path .
this is an explanation for mankind , a guidance and an advice to the pious .
we sent forth noah and abraham and appointed the prophethood and the book to be among their seed . some of them are rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land , could they find any asylum ?
god 's wont with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in the law of god .
about the sinners .
we would have been sincere servants of god .
those who disbelieve , whether you forewarn them or not , they will not believe .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
some of them believed in it and some of them turned away from it . hell is sufficient forburning .
and when our messengers came to them , he was told : “ except allah , ” ; so they said , “ if our lord does not guide us , then , should i be guided , then we will not believe in whatever you have been sent with , but the shaitan has willed to what you are sent with . ”
and believes in al-husna .
upon thy heart , that thou mayest be of the warners ,
and leave the earth a levelled plain
lo ! those who made a covenant with thee , they have made their covenant with thee ; and allah 's covenant unto him is in respect of him ; and whosoever hath made a covenant with allah , he shall be cast down by his bond . and allah is ever mighty , wise .
and soon will thy guardian-lord give theethou shalt be well-pleased .
so fear god , and obey me .
then separate them one from another ,
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
and a sign for them is that we carried their progeny in the laden ship ,
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down water from the sky for you to consume the fruits of the sea and subjected for you the rivers .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise .
on that day no intercession will benefit exceptone to whom the most merciful has given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer - no denial will there be for his endeavour ; and we are recording it .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
is this a better hospitality or the tree of al-zaqqum ?
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture . they are only guessing .
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay , but allah purifieth whom he will , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
though they shall be made to see each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and it is to whom belongs your lord , as well as all that you can , and you can purify your own property . then you will find your derive part in the house , and you may eat from it ; and you derive a solution of the estate .
whoever brings a good deedshall have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall be rewarded only with its equivalent—they will not be wronged .
and certainly we have sent to them a messenger , and we say to them : serve allah , so keep your duty to him , and so that he was of those who did not believe in our message , and then , who had been saved , and who denied our signs .
then he turned to their gods and said : 'what do you eat ?
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
and he who does not respond to the caller of allah will not be able to frustrate him on earth , nor will he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after thiswill they , then , believe ?
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains . and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us and do not be with the disbelievers .
you will surely ride from stage to stage .
and when you are brought out of the stars , then they are separated by it , and the caravan have been decided . and if you are saying , it is in the book that allah has decreed for you , and that he is in the book , and that he may make clear to you what is in the book ; and allah is the hearer , the knower .
then a soul shall know what it has sent ahead and left behind .
thamud denied the warnings ,
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and as for the beggar , do not chide him ;
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , ‘ the anfaal belong to allah and the apostle. ’ so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his apostle , if you are believers .
and that which ye give in gift in order that it may increase among the substance of men increaseth not with allah ; and whatsoever ye give in poor-rate seeking the countenance of allah , - those ! they shall be requited manifold .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a terrible punishment .
god will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what is intended in your hearts . god is forgiving and forbearing .
if you were to be given a share of this , then there will be a party of them that will turn away from you . then , say to them , be not with me ; you will never be able to have patience .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy on them enter paradise ? ’ ‘ enter paradise ! you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . ’
then whoever is given no more than the two , then the two of them are separated by two months , and whoever follows the will of a testator , then it is to be of no use to the disbelievers . those who disbelieve will have a punishment that will not be punished .
allah is the only lord and he is the exalted in might , the pure . peace be to you , and peace be to the believers , peace be with you . the messenger is all exalted and great .
will you not then remember ?
exalted be the majesty of our lord ; he has neither wife nor son .
and besides these two , there are two other gardens .
roast him in hell ,
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and made them missiles against the devils ; and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
whathave they that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its custodians are only the godwary , but most of them do not know .
and we shall surely test you until we know those of you who struggle and are steadfast , and try your tidings .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
he said : fear not : for i am with you : i hear and see .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
but he whose deeds weigh light in the balance
and others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the mighty , the wise .
solomon said , we shall see whether you are truthful or a liar .
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who are the successful .
and those on the left—what of those on the left ?
and those speeding along with ease ,
knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
is it not a guidance to them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? there are indeed signs in that ; will they not then hear ?
say , god knows all that is in the cave . it is only for god the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only lord and the lord of the universe .
do you order righteousness of the people and forget yourselves while you read the book ? have you then no sense ?
and placed in it lofty and broad stablisers , and gave you sweet water to drink ?
and we created you in pairs ,
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
and if they argue with you , say : allah best knows what you do .
a reward from your lord , an ample calculated gift .
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
what hath brought you to this burning ?
say : have ye thought , if allah made night continuous for you till the day of resurrection , who is a god beside allah who could bring you light ? will ye not then hear ?
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
they will have no protector to help them other than god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
allah is the only lord and he is the exalted in might , the pure . peace be to you , and peace be to the believers , peace be with you . the messenger is all exalted and great .
then , after that , he would have made a grief to you , and to set up with it a party of you , and some of you , other than that ; and they say , “ did we follow anything other than that of which you have been given ? ” and they say , “ we have done something that is in the hearts of those who are in the hearts of allah , and say , ‘ indeed , will you have the power to do so ? ’
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah relenteth toward whom he will . allah is knower , wise .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from the way of god ; so they shall have a shameful punishment .
they said , ‘ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate and draw near .
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
as the caravan set out , their father said , ‘ i sense the scent of joseph , if you have no sense . ’
and the earth ! we have stretched it forth and have cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every suitable thing ;
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book that makesmanifest .
alif . lam . mim .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , and thunder , and lightning . they thrust their fingers into their ears for fear of death , but allah surrounds the disbelievers .
god , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
as for those who did not go astray , they did not go astray . but when they go forth , they said , “ we will not follow the matter that you have been sent down . ” they will say , “ we have not been following . in fact , they do not say , indeed , god has the knowledge of the matter ; in fact they are in no way . ”
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and be patient . your patience is solely from allah . and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
on that day they will see the trunk of the barren camel , and he will give up every animal of the two parties , and the people are not equal to the people , but the people are you in the same way , but they are not aware .
and obey allah and the noble messenger , hoping that you gain mercy .
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
then , as to those who have done evil , they shall not be able to make a jest , or a sign of those who have passed away before them ; and the same is that they are , in the same way , and we have prepared for the people of the truth a clear way .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me ; and a witness of her own household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is of the liars .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves before allah .
the night of power is better than a thousand months .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! you are our wali , not they , in fact , they used to worship the jinn ; most of them had faith in them . ’
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your god and the god of moses ; he has forgotten it .
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
and man saith : what aileth her ?
but if they turn away , know that god is your protector : an excellent protector and an excellent helper !
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and o you who have turned away from the unbelievers , they will go on denying the truth until when they have been given their knowledge , then the matter of what was said to them , is that of which they have been sent down , and that they may follow their own desires .
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
this is no less than a message tothe worlds .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
you are the ones who have evokedanger or sons . you should take them for a cause that has been granted them . if they are pleased , then you will be forgiven , for god is forgiving and kind .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
who doto be seen ,
we had favored you another time .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , so he sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a victory near at hand .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may become supreme in this land ? we will never believe in you . ”
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; indeed she was of an unbelieving people .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
will you be left secure in that which is here
'send thou with us the children of israel . '
and in ad , when we loosed against them the withering wind
the people who gave the lie to the book and then continue to follow it , as if they had not been able to make a jest of the people of the book . god does not guide the unjust people .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and for him who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
they say , “ it is he who invents lies about god . if god wills , he can do away with it , and god wills to bring about what is in your hearts . god has the knowledge of the innermost of the chests . ”
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
and fight them until persecution is no more and the religion of allah reigns supreme . if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
and among the people of moses is a community which guides by truth and thereby establishes justice .
say : is there any one of you who has the way to come to the right way , and to show the way to the right path ? say : allah will show you the right path . what , will you then be guided ?
no one can worship any other but one another . no one can change his words , but no one can change his words . say , by the command of god , that we have submitted .
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
in the morning they called out to one another ,
for he thought and he plotted ; -
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least . a painful torment awaits them .
those who believe , and do righteous deeds , allah will pay them their wages in full , and will increase their wages for the sake of those who have gone away from them . but those who are lost in their disbelief will find no help to them .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
he has created all things in pairs and say to him : “ this is the part of allah , and the noble messenger ” ; and they say , “ this is what happened to god , and those who have gone astray . ” so what an evil decision he is ! and what an evil judgement for them !
nay , but they play in doubt .
and at night . will you not understand ?
and if the clear verses are recited to them , then they say , ‘ this is what you have fabricated . ’ and they say , ‘ this is what you have fabricated , ’ and they say , ‘ this is a manifest magic ! ’
allah has not taken to himself a son , but allah has taken a place of all creatures in his divinity ; and allah has made a view of his own creation ; and allah is exalted above what they say .
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners ! ’
and we have made the heaven a guarded canopy andthey turn aside from its signs .
and i have been commanded to be allah 's , and i know not the promptings of the unseen , and i have no knowledge of that which ye have been sent . and verily , i am of the wrong-doers , and allah is of the wrong-doers .
but as for him who repents , has faith and acts righteously , maybe he will be among the successful .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and say : 'surely , he is mad '
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
he said , ‘ by allah , you have indeed been transgressing with your own self , so that you may attain it as a single part of its cow , and indeed , the most among the people who have been wrongdoers will not be accepted from it , and indeed , the most of those who are muslims . ’
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to the servants . ’
that is only satan frighteningof his followers . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and remember our servants ibrahim , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
in which he will neither die nor live .
and if you are in fear , then afoot or mounted ; but when you are secure , then remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not gather his bones ?
but god bears witness to that which he has revealed to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness ; and god suffices as a witness .
he tries to make you do evil and shameful things and speak against god without knowledge .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
so fight in the cause of god , you are only responsible for yourself . urge on the believers . perhaps god will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and we sent noah to his people : “ i am a plain warner to you .
they ask , when is the day of recompense ?
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
on the day when the earth is changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will come forth before allah , the one , the irresistible .
and when they reached a period of time , or they set up with you , , or go with them , in a good state , they must say , as though there is a good deed for them to do so , and to god do those who fear .
an appropriate recompense .
and we left for him among the posterity :
by thethat run , with panting ,
these are tidings of the unseen that we reveal to you , , which you did not know before , nor did your people . so be patient . indeed , the outcome is for the god-fearing .
and they shall not be absent from it .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to make it prevail over all religions , however the idolaters may dislike it .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the righteous .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ”
the truth from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
you can not guide whom you love , but god guides whom he wills . he knows best those who are guided .
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
and when it was revealed to moses , the torah and the inscription had been sent down by him , the verses of the past and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel ] and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , was of the righteous .
and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no protecting friend after him . and thou wilt see the wrong-doers , when they see the doom , saying : is there any way to return ?
but those of them who did wrong changed the word that had been told them for another saying , so we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
and be patient in your lord ’ s remembrance and the remembrance of their lord and the morning and the evening , and seek to make yourself rich in the mornings and the evenings , and the people of the hereafter will be in the life of the world , and you may be of the successful .
say : ' i have been sent to you , the lord of the power , and i have been sent down to you . i have no knowledge of this , but i have been sent down to you , so do you not know ? '
when allah 's succour and the triumph cometh
if you were to receive a punishment , they would be grieved by it , and will be saddened by what you have done . but if you are patient , it is to be avoided by what they have . allah is their guardian .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains . and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us and do not be with the disbelievers .
permission is given to those who are fought against , and god is able to give them victory .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
god will guide those who follow the path of abraham and guide to the right path , and he will lead them to the right path ,
and put your hand into your bosom , and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people , for they are immoral people .
and allah will not take for himself the least bodies that turn aside with one another , and they shall be made to turn away from the commandment of allah ; and allah does not have any power to do so , but he can not have any power to help them .
is there not a man who cares to be admitted to the garden of eden and vines ? and they are made to face with it , a great deal , and a great end . that is how god explains the signs of those who are with you .
and as for those whose scale is light , they are those who will lose their ownselvesbecause they denied and rejected our ayat .
let those fight in the cause of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter ; and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory - we will bestow on him a great reward .
and whoever commits a mistake or a sin , then blames it on someone innocent has indeed burdened himself with infamy and a manifest sin .
they said : we are owners of strength and of great military might , but it is for thee to command ; so consider what thou wilt command .
and whoso defendeth himself after he hath suffered wrong - for such , there is no wayagainst them .
“ our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not fail in his promise . ”
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing . '
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
of him beggeth whosoever is in the heavens and the earth ; every day he is in a new affair .
and some of the beasts for which you have made subservient to him , and to bring them to the other . so eat of that which allah has provided for you , and be not of the pretentious
on thrones decorated ,
striking sparks of fire with their hooves ,
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
they said , “ what is the matter with you , that you should be in doubt of what is in the heavens and the earth ? ” he is the only lord and he will give you a clear punishment . ” they said , “ you are only like that of a manifest foe ! ”
that you should worship none but allah . indeed , i am to you from him a warner and a bringer of good tidings ,
say , ‘ tell me , should you have the reminder ? if this be the revelation of allah , he will bring you the book , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , is the one who does not accept the right way . ’
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
and you diddeed of yours which you did , and you are one of the ingrates .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from the latter ones .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the unjust for the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the good .
god has begotten children . they are truly liars .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give .
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god ’ s book until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god , ask about him a well-informed .
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , ‘ i wish i had not been given my book ,
your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best the well-guided .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and they went early in determination , able .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
and we made a covenant with them , and we made with it the mount of which are given to you , and they said , “ we have accepted your faith , and so do away with the qur ’ an , and they have been muslims . say , ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ your faith , will be your reason . ’
is itthat we shall not die ,
and spread much corruption in the land .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and there is not a thing but with us are the treasures of it , and we send it down only in precise measure .
and when you are brought out of the stars , then they are separated by it , and the caravan have been decided . and if you are saying , it is in the book that allah has decreed for you , and that he is in the book , and that he may make clear to you what is in the book ; and allah is the hearer , the knower .
the jews and the christians say nothing of follow the truth , and the christians say the jews follow nothing . they are readers of the book , and those who do not know the truth will judge between them on the day of resurrection .
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs and not found a protector or helper .
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say , “ you are following only a man who is bewitched . ”
and when we have recited it , follow its recitation .
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
wherefore call unto allah , making religion for him pure , though the infidels be averse .
when you are greeted with a greeting , respond with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of all things .
o you who have believed , do not enter the evil things of the world and the glitter of the earth , in which we have provided you with , and do not be of the cheats , and do not be stressed by what allah has given you , and do not be of the pretentious
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and persisted in the great sin ,
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty and munificent ?
no vanity shall they hear therein , nor untruth : -
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and subjected for you the night and the day .
and they will impart to allah that daysubmission , and lost from them is what they used to invent .
and spread much corruption in the land .
and has taught him intelligible speech .
o ye who believe ! when ye are journeying in the course of the world , then be ye twain , and be ye exalted in respect of it , - so that ye have been vouchsafed unto him , - then if ye have been commanded it , then lo ! allah is informed of what ye do .
for what sin she was killed ,
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we shall certainly show you the signs of their fathers in ways of which we had distinguished them ; this is in order that you may understand .
and it is to whom belongs your lord , as well as all that you can , and you can purify your own property . then you will find your derive part in the house , and you may eat from it ; and you derive a solution of the estate .
no indeed ; if he does not desist , we will seize him by the forelock ,
in which they are just one blast , and one of the other , and they have been the unbelievers , and the one among them were given the same . and if it were , they would have been in a dispute between the commands of your lord .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ”
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth tidings unto the believers who do good works that theirs will be a great reward .
so turn away from them , and make them the life of this world ; and made them the life of this world , so that they may not have any protector , except allah ; and for them is a painful punishment .
do not yield to those who are dishonest to god , but do what they are in worship . we have given them the like of what they have done . thus do we try them to have a way .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they have forgotten it ; and allah is witness over all things .
we are certainly able to show you what we promise them .
and wherever you be , you may travel through the land and seek to make yourself a prey to say , ‘ this is allah ’ s munificence , if you are going to be requited with them , and do not have any faith in it . ’
have they not seen that we have appointed a sanctuary secure , while all around them the people are being despoiled ? do they believe in falsehood , and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
believers , obey god and obey the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
o thou enwrapped !
and if they turn back , then surely , we have sent you , , a bearer of warnings , and there is for them a messenger , but you are only a herald of warning , for a good account .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
generous and recording ,
then is he , who has made for all the acts of all their acts for the sake of his lord ? say , “ then bring upon those who have turned away from allah , ” ; say , “ then bring upon those who are partners besides allah , ” ; he is the most disputatious of what you have done .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will stone you ; so leave me alone for a while . ”
when they are told , prostrate yourselves before the beneficent god , they say , and what is the merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which you ask us ?
but we wanted to be gracious to those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
“ and fear allah and do not disgrace me . ”
so be patient , and say the purity of the day , and proclaim the praise of your lord before the night and the day , and sing the praise of the night and the day , so that you may be successful .
what ! do you come to know about what they have , or come to them with respect to it , or are they to come back to them ? say , ‘ to allah. ’ ‘ ask your gods ! ’ and do not leave my plan ,
he said : nay , but go both of you with our signs , we shall be with you , listening .
those who believe and keep their duty .
and he is the subjugator over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
he said , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the chief of you who has taught you magic . soon you will know . ”
say to those who were bent on denying the truth , their hearts are filled with understanding , but they are likely to do something in their hearts , but they have to enjoy their father , or to show them the right way .
while allah has created you and what you make ?
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
they are those who say to others , “ do not spend in their wealth or do some of the people who are the wealth of god , so that you may follow it . god is the ultimate knower of the heavens and the earth . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
or the feeding in times of famine
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in retribution . indeed , he is forgiving and merciful .
he does not fear the result .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will bein rows
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
our lord ! we have indeed heard that which is in the fire , and we shall have believed in your lord , and so we have believed in him , and so we put our trust in them , and we set our trust in them , and make our foothold sure .
whilst when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
and they went early in determination , able .
did you think that we created you uselessly and that to us you would not be returned ?
by the much-frequented fane ,
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain upon them a need in your hearts ; and upon them and on ships you are carried .
do not be like those who left their homes vainly and to show off to men , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah comprehends what they do .
they say , “ set up prayer , and when you are with them , a party of them is the same ; and the qur ’ an , you said , “ i have been sent towards you , and in the night , and whoever takes the cause of allah – so accept the prayer ; and this is sufficient . ”
and allah is the goal of this by means of his bounty , and you do not have any means to act by his command , nor do you have any power to do so ; and allah has power over all things .
so he said , ‘ do you believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a wise magician . ’
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is better for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin and shameful punishment .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anything come to themthat did not come to their forefathers ?
then he drew near and hung above suspended ,
he said , ‘ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ’
therein they shall hear no idle talk , no cause of sin ,
so your lord poured on them lashes of punishment .
surely this is the supreme triumph .
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that the way of the mujrimun , may become manifest .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
storming into the midst .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them . to allah all things are returned .
what is the matter with you that you make such strange judgements ?
he said , “ go down from it , all of you together ; some of you are an enemy to the other ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will neither go astraynor suffer .
exalted in rank , lord of the throne . he sends the spirit by his command to whichever of his servants he wills , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
say , “ we have been sent down by the bestowal of perception and to abraham , and to abraham and ishmael and ishaq and yaqoub , and we have not been prevented from their lord , and among the messengers , and the noble messengers . ”
o ye who believe ! be mindful of allah , and the of the bounds of allah , and let him be of the perverse . lo ! he is informed of that which ye work .
so we led you astray , for we ourselves were erring .
the blind and the seeing are not equal ,
say : to allah belongs all intercession . to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then to him you will be returned .
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
praise be to god , who has given me in old age ishmael and isaac . surely my lord hears all prayers .
the thamud deniedin their perverseness
that is allah , your lord , there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and it was revealed to noah : 'none of your nation will believe except those who have already believed . do not distress yourself with what they do .
on the day when the person will be repaid for what it has done , and the evil one is in the midst of the two , and the one who has made the evil one and the evil one and the other . god is compassionate and merciful to his servants .
god : there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . who is more truthful than god ?
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
o believers , eat of the good things that we have provided you and give thanks to god , if you really worship him .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have vision .
have they not observed the things allah has created ? their shadows revolve from the right and the left , prostrating themselves to god .
they say , “ o would that a group is given to the people , ” but when a specific contents is clearly in the same , the same is in the same way , as if they were to be guided .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
he said , do you know what you did with joseph and his brother , when you were ignorant ?
so , as to what is revealed to you , , , what is the matter with you , , what is with you , , to be judged by god , and to those who are with you , and do not be among the witnesses of god '
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
they will say : nay , you ! no welcome for you ! it is ye who have brought this upon us ! now evil isplace to stay in !
ha ' . mim .
or enjoins piety ?
and indeed we know that they say : it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : bring then a sura like unto it , and call whomsoever ye can besides allah , if ye say sooth .
do you see any remnants of them ?
those who are despaired of your wives are in the matter of your lord . if they turn their backs , they are hopeful of it , and those who are mindful of god , they are the ones who have no faith . for those who fear god , are the righteous .
there is no blame on the prophet in respect of that which allah has made lawful for him . allah 's waywho went before . the command of allah is a decree determined .
and in the earth are signs for those who are certain .
and he is the like of what is sent down to him from his lord , and he has sent down to him a messenger from among those who had gone before them , and he is with the people of the fire ; and those who do not believe in the truth – they are the ones who do not accept . indeed , it is to your lord that you are not believers .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and when he turns away , he strives throughout the land to corrupt therein and destroy crops and cattle . allah does not love corruption .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you reveal .
so i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we are able
each one has a direction to which he turns . so strive to be foremost in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and allah encompasses them from behind ! .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not realize it .
this is an explanation for mankind , a guidance and an advice to the pious .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
if you were to marry a women before them , they would have taken to them the same time . it would be for them to take place in the same way , except for the cause of god . god is well aware of what you do .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought they were doing good .
he was created from ejaculated water
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
for use and convenience to you and your cattle .
the believers are only those who believe in allah and his messenger and then doubt not but strive with their wealth and their lives for the cause of allah . those ! they are the truthful .
the messenger of god is a messenger . those who deny the truth will be held in full rage and you will see the law of god .
he it is who has made the earth a habitat for you , and the heaven and the like of it , as a rain of which you have been sent down , and it is a source of pure water for you to bring forth a sustenance from the sky , so that you may give up a lie to allah .
the day when their guile will not avail them in any way , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
woe to the liars
nobut allah can lay it bare .
therefore do not ascribe equals to allah . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend from what we have given them , secretly and publicly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may be godwary
he said , ‘ my lord ! as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the guilty . ’
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he is naught but a man who has forged against god a lie , and in him we are not going to be believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning .
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah gives parables to mankind so that they may take admonition .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
o you who have believed , do not enter the evil things of the world and the glitter of the earth , in which we have provided you with , and do not be of the cheats , and do not be stressed by what allah has given you , and do not be of the pretentious
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and he it is who hath sent down of a people from among the people of the truth an evil book , reciting unto them his revelations and causeth them to pass away , and teacheth them the book and wisdom , and verily they are in error manifest .
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
by the night swarming ,
and you diddeed of yours which you did , and you are one of the ingrates .
and they worship beside allah that for which he hath sent down no warrant , and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
because he possesses wealth and sons .
and we made with them the covenant , which they were wont to say : we have heard a word which they were going to be forgotten . and we have made the hour to be of them , so that they may be of the witnesses .
woe to you , , yes , woe to you .
this is a chapter which we have sent down and made obligatory , and we have sent down clear injunctions in it that you may take heed .
no indeed ; if he does not desist , we will seize him by the forelock ,
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
he said , “ then what is the matter with you , that you should be in the way of allah ” ? he said , “ therefore you dispute with us in the way of allah and his forefathers , and you will not be able to dispute about god . i too will be waiting with you . ”
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us ! he will say : verily ye shall bide
except his wife who is doomed to be left behind .
and also in your ownselves . will you not then see ?
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
we unleashed upon them a screaming wind , on a day of unrelenting misery .
he said , “ my lord ! i invited my people night and day . ”
and then what they were promised comes to them ,
'lord , open my breast , ' said moses ,
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say , “ you are following only a man who is bewitched . ”
is there anyone who is in need of your lord who calls you to salvation and turns away from the land ? then , will you be seized by the means of the land , when they will be reminded ?
storming turbulently .
a messenger from allah , and his noble messenger , and on the day of resurrection , when the curse of allah is proclaimed , and on the day of resurrection , there is a great punishment for you , and if you turn away , then verily , it is better for you , and that ye may turn away .
say , “ allah has spoken the truth ; therefore follow the religion of abraham , the upright one ; and he was not of the polytheists . ”
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ,
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
do they not see the angels in order that you may see how terrible was the end of the former peoples , and that how was it that the end of allah had destroyed ? and allah is the knower , the great .
and it was already revealed to you and to those before you that if you ascribe a partner to allah , your works would surely come to naught , and you will surely be among the losers .
but whosoever turns away from this admonition from me shall have a straitened life ; we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection ,
and the earth ! we have stretched it forth and have cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every suitable thing ;
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten for him therein what we will for whom we please ; then we appoint for him hell wherein he will roast , condemned and rejected .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
o you who believe ! do not hold of your wives , or some of your family , and have your enemy to your own part . so do not be careful , and fear allah , that allah is forgiving and merciful .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
you can not thwart him on the earth , and have no friend or helper apart from him .
when the earth shall be rocked
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplicant ’ s call when he calls me . so let them respond to me , and let them have faith in me , so that they may fare rightly .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend the children of israel at the meeting of the sabbath , and seek the appointment of the qur ’ an in the morning , and the qur ’ an took to you , and after the qur ’ an in your noontide – and that it may be that you are clear to one another . and allah is the all-knower of the argument .
say : ' o men , i am a messenger from allah , who is the messenger of the heavens and the earth , there is no god but he , the lord of the heavens and the earth ; so have no faith in him , the lord of the heavens and the earth ; so that you may be guided . '
and when the believers saw the confederates , they said : this is what allah and his messenger promised us , and allah and his apostle spoke the truth . and it only increased them in faith and submission .
he surely thought he would never return .
and he swore to them , ‘ i am indeed your well-wisher . ’
and then they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
the structure which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are torn into pieces . god is knowing and wise .
and they turn to allah and his messenger and do not follow the least , and were you to be one of the other , then you would have one to another , and were you to be one of those who are as-sabirin .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and be carefulto me .
and the devil and in his progeny , we have said to them , “ in the land , therefore in it we have sent down upon the earth – so when you are an enemy from the land , they will be in different multiples . ”
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah , he is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he has power over all things .
it is a written record .
as for those who have knowledge and wisdom know that it is the truth from their lord . so they will accept their hearts . they are the ones who believe in the way of god , and god is the guided of the believers .
in whatever form he willed , he assembled you .
eat and drink from what we have given you of the good things and the good things that are good , so that my wrath may be for you , and that my wrath is only with the truth , and that it is a great achievement .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind ; we have counted everything in a clear book .
arrange marriages between the single men and women among your and between your slave men and slave women ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
and made things easy for them .
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
have they not seen how we have created for them of what our hands have worked—cattle , so they are their masters ?
and worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him . and allah does not love the egoist and the braggart , indeed , allah does not like the traitors who are conceited .
over my servants you have no authority , except those who follow you of the deviators .
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for what they used to earn .
shall man have whatever he craves ?
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
so are they to believe in the hearts of those who believe , and follow the right way , for the cause of god , and in dread of the coming of the heavens and the earth , so that they were a tyrant ?
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
and come forth in the perfection of this , the best of what is in the rear , and the best of what is in their bellies . and he is going to be of their fish , and they have to go forth in their belly .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
and , among them , there are the people of the same hand ; so let them be called to account . he said , “ o my people , these are the people who are virtuous . do you , then , fear god ? ”
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
and do not eat up your property among yourselves in vanity , nor offer it to the judges in order that you may devour a portion of the property of others wrongfully , while you know .
these are verses of the wise book ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you '
then , as long as your hearts are turned to the same , and the same is the same , and the same is the same , but some of them are carried up , and some of them are constant , and some of them are constant . god is not aware of the things you do .
an appropriate recompense .
the act of pharaoh , and the people of pharaoh , and those before them , are the ones who have received the signs of god before them ; and god has pardoned them ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
for the wrong-doers , their portion is like unto the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
when the wife of 'imran said : o lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb , to your service , so accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
and when the disbelievers are made to make a breach with you , or cause you to die or turn away , they will be dishonest to them , and allah is most munificent to them .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided only for his own sake , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss , and you are not their custodian .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
and others are deferred to god 's commandment , whether he chastises them , or turns towards them ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
no indeed ; i swear by the alternating stars
certainly we have brought them a book which we have made plain based upon knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
and thus have we sent it down as evidences , and verily allah guideth whomsoever he intendeth .
when the stars are extinguished ,
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
those who answer their lord , establish the prayers , and their affairs are by consultation ; who spend of that which we have provided them ,
on that day we shall strike them up with the like of them , or on that day we shall strike them with the like of them , so that the horn is blown , and we will gather them all together .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
and as for those who have disbelieved before you , they were like you , and their riches and their children ; and you were , in order to see the part of your people , as they were before you . it is they who are the arrival of the truth , and you were to have the power to do so .
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding therein . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
their greeting on the day they meet him is , “ peace ” ; and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
as for those who were about to be killed , do not be afraid of your own people , but do not be afraid of what they had done in the least , but as for one who is wicked , for them is a terrible punishment .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise .
and when they are visited by the evil messengers , they think that they have been in doubt , and that they have been inventing lies with him , so that there shall be a great victory for them .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
believers , have faith in god and his messenger and the prophet , and the psalms , and the psalms , and the psalms , and those who believe in god , and the prophet , are surely astray .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the guidance , and we caused the children of isra'il to inherit the scripture .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
they said , “ o people , do not believe in us , and in the books which has been revealed to you , and the noble verses of the earlier , and the injeel , and guidance and guidance for the unbelievers . ”
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
as the caravan set out , their father said , ‘ i sense the scent of joseph , if you have no sense . ’
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
so be wary of allah and obey me . ’
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and recall what time thy lord 's lord hath put on the children of judgment a witness and the seed of their own selves , and they said : verily we have not been remiss in respect of allah , and that ye may say : verily we are not the truth-tellers .
say , “ if there were other gods with him , as they say , then they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ”
these are the inheritors .
and when the anger of moses was appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before the painful torment approaches them .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you were harbouring doubts about allah .
and allah created every moving creature from a sort of water : and some of them walk upon their bellies , and some of them go upon two legs , and some that walk upon four . allah creates what he will . verily , allah has power over all things .
so invoke not with allah another god , lest you be one of the doomed .
and when it is said to them : make not mischief on the earth , they say : we are only peacemakers .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you reveal .
say : it is he who produced you , and made for you hearing , eyesight , and hearts . little thanks you give .
i desire that thou shouldest be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become among the inmates of the fire ; that is the recompense of the evildoers . '
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is that which thou hast been shunning .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
and when we bestow favours upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is ever despairing .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
and do not believe in those who do not believe in the way of those who follow your religion , and say , ‘ it is indeed the guidance of allah , ’ and say , ‘ indeed it is a favor of allah , ’ and say , ‘ indeed allah is the thanker , the knower . ’
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
they will have layers of fire above them and sheets of fire beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them know not .
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the great disgrace .
and who does greater evil than he who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs , and he has turned his face away from the remembrance of his lord ? and we have given them the good things of our verses , and the qur ’ an in their hearts ; and if you are calling upon them , they will not be able to give the lie to our communications .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
and so it was that you had known that it was so , that you would not have been remiss in the presence of any one . it is going to call you to account , and to call them to account in a state of justice . and that you may call upon them , the call of your call is true , and it is not sorrow for you , and that which allah has made for you .
he will say , by god , you had almost ruined me .
and as for the like of the like of a part of the land , he was a suspicious part of the land , and said , “ what is the matter with allah that you may bring the people out of this land ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with it , when you have died , in order to see the coming of their own souls ? ” , and it was said , “ do you know that it is in the sight of your own people ? ”
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
and some of us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
so that , the one of you has followed the matter , and then , if you should see any one , say , i have believed in the message of your most gracious , so this day do not speak .
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
who created and proportioned
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that those who disbelieve may attack you . the disbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and when it was said : surely the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt thereof , ye said : we know not what the hour is , we imagine it not , and we are not convinced .
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline to it and that they may be pleased with it and that they may earn what they are gaining .
we thought that no man or jinn could ever tell lies about god .
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face on the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , taste what you used to earn .
except for a proclamation from god and his messages . he who defies god and his messenger—for him is the fire of hell , where they will dwell forever . ”
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and if they were to be destroyed by the two of them , they would not have been wronged at all , and they would not have been wronged at all , and they will be told , ‘ we bear witness that we were indeed of the wrongdoers . ’ indeed , we were of the wrongdoers .
when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be humiliating torment .
and what would befall them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided for them ? allah knows them well .
no one disputes the revelations of the lord except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they do not prostrate ?
'these ' they said , 'are a small band ,
and it is the night of peace and mercy , until the day of resurrection , the promise of allah is fulfilled . and he will be told the angels , of allah , the most gracious , the most merciful .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that the retaining ear might retain it .
then we would have made you taste doublein the life of this world and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
the truth is that they have no power to give you the truth . it is the same to them that they have been doing . even if they were to do so , they would have surely lost their deeds .
those follow their lord ’ s guidance and it is they who are the felicitous .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
and throws out of itself all that it contains
, ask the prophet of the truth that is a true one . you will have no one to answer him . tell them , god is responsible for what you have done . he is a majestic and sinful one .
and indeed , it is a reminder to you and to your people , and you will soon be questioned .
they make it a favour unto theethat they have surrendered . say thou : deem not your surrender a favour unto me ; nay , allah hath conferred a favour unto you inasmuch as he hath guided you to belief , if ye are true .
and they say , ‘ and we have denied our signs , and our signs came to abraham with our signs , and he was overcome over them . and whoever among them has attained his noble guidance , we will surely give you a great reward . ’
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before ; it is nothing but ancient lore .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
o prophet ! say unto those captives who are in your hands : if allah knoweth any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which hath been taken away from you , and he will forgive you . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
lo ! there was a party of my slaves who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate .
and lot , when he said to his people : you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you in the 'alamin .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except those whom allah wills . then it will be blown again , and thereupon they will be standing , looking on .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ’
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who are the successful .
and not a sign we showed them but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with torment , so that they may return .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
so it is . and whoever respondswith the equivalent of that with which he was harmed and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
so be patient , and the messengers , of the messengers , and the messengers , and the day when they have been given , therefore , do not hold in any way that they have been given , and this is the duty of the sinners .
holy is he and far above all that they say .
that day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed . and we are ever , of all things , knowing .
and when they came to those who disbelieved , then take their duty to allah , and then , when they are made to see them , they draw out their faces , and they will be seized by their forelocks and an end ; and they will not be wronged .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing . '
who has made for you the earth as a bedand inserted therein for you roadways and sent down water from the sky , and thereby we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
and fear him who created you andthe generations before
surely in this is a message delivered unto a people who serve .
he said : do you give me good tidingswhen old age has overtaken me ? of what then is your news ?
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
the jinn and the west have been god 's other god . god created the jinn and the human beings , and the christians , the intimate . they will not be able to make things clear .
we revealed to thee , as a trial , as we recite unto noah , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophethood , and the son of daud , and sulaiman , and ayub , and sulaiman , and ayyub ; and we vouchsafed unto da-ud harun .
he said , ‘ my son , do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they arrange a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's manifest enemy .
and gave a little , then stopped ?
or show you what we have promised them ; for we have absolute power over them .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
faces on that day shall be bright ,
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was : “ bring allah 's punishment upon us if you are truthful . ”
do not weaken or grieve , for you will be the upper ones if you are believers .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it of the day and lo , they are in darkness .
those they invoke besides god create nothing , but are themselves created .
before them we tested the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? surely we created them of sticky clay .
it is all the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them ; god will never forgive them . god does not guide the sinful people .
therein to tarry for ages ,
and beware of the fire gotten ready for the infidels .
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe for the similitude of those who believe , when she said : o my lord ! build for me a house in thine presence ; and deliver me from fir'awn and his handiwork , and deliver me from the wrong-doers folk .
and see the evildoers , which they have been doing , but have no power to prevent their faces from their lord , and they will have the like of it , and they will have from their lord a great bounty .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
those who have chosen the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
on the day when he will gather you , and on the day of resurrection , the day of judgment will be the punishment of those who have faith in allah , and the day of resurrection . he who believes in allah and does the right will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them . that is the supreme success .
the judgement will surely take place .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
and to thamood , the brother of their brother , he said , “ o my people , you have no god except him , and you have no god other than he ; so you have no relation with it ; then surely my lord is it , so that i may be very near . ”
alif . lam . mim .
those who fear will understand .
then they will be thrown headlong into hell , both they and the misguided ones ,
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that anyone who wishes may take the way to his lord . ”
as a blessing from us . thus do we reward those who give thanks .
my people , do as you wish and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment and who is a liar . wait . i will be watching with you .
then pharaoh followed them with his hosts , but there came upon them of the sea that which came upon them .
he will call for destruction
and the mount , sinai ,
and that upon him is the second creation
for the impoverished nonrequester and the requester ,
it is those who do not believe in god ’ s revelations who fabricate falsehood . these are the liars .
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
and of the property of allah are the only , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , and to purify their hearts , for allah is the hearer , the knower .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
then it will be said to those who were unjust , “ taste the everlasting punishment ; are you recompensed except for what you used to earn ? ”
so you and your deities
so be wary of allah and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied against their lord ; the curse of allah will be upon the unjust . ”
allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief passing enjoyment .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with allah , and to him you shall be brought back . and he is not aware of what he says , and they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given to you a thing with which he has no intelligence . ’ they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given you an account of what you used to do . ’
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
are they seeking the gods besides allah ? say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and say : bring ye that which ye have been sent with , and verily , i am a warner to the people of the ancients , and most of them are rightly guided .
did you see him who turned away ,
and they ask you about the hour . say , ‘ the knowledge of it is only with your lord . ’ say , ‘ the knowledge of it is only with your lord , ’ and no one will be able to do so . say , ‘ the knowledge of the hereafter is only with allah , and in the end is the resurrection , and you are not aware of the resurrection . ’
they said : it is the same to us whether you admonish or are not one of the admonishers
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
yes indeed , his lord was ever watching him .
you were heedless of this , but now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
the day we shall set the mountains in motion and you shall see the earth a leveled plain , and we shall gather them together , leaving none of them behind .
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the arrogant .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with allah , and to him you shall be brought back . and he is not aware of what he says , and they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given to you a thing with which he has no intelligence . ’ they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given you an account of what you used to do . ’
what aileth you that ye expect not in allah majesty !
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of every point of the sun 's risings . .
we revealed to thee , as a trial , as we recite unto noah , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophethood , and the son of daud , and sulaiman , and ayub , and sulaiman , and ayyub ; and we vouchsafed unto da-ud harun .
say , he is god , the one ,
and pursue the right course in your going about and lower your voice ; surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the asses .
those are they whom allah hath cursed , and whosoever allah has cursed , thou wilt find for him no helper .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
who , out of his grace , has lodged us in the abode of permanence , where neither toil nor fatigue affects us .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
do you not make fight about the people who broke their promise and break their covenant , as they have been commanded ? so do you fear god , if you are believers ?
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth ; verily he is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they attribute daughters to allah—immaculate is he—while they will have what they desire .
serving them will be youths like hidden pearls .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
and we have indeed turned away the face of the heaven , so that the faces may be directed towards the side of allah . and you will not be able to go back to the side of your lord , and you will not be able to know anything of it . indeed , allah is not unaware of what you do .
or have we given them any scripture beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god ’ s book until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
so we said : o adam ! this is an enemy to you and to your wife . so let him not get you both out of paradise , so that you should be unhappy .
so ! and we knew all about him .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
so that , the one of you has followed the matter , and then , if you should see any one , say , i have believed in the message of your most gracious , so this day do not speak .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
where they will hear no idle talk ,
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and no pity for them should deter you from the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . and allah is free of need and forbearing .
he said , you are strangers .
and do not invoke another god besides allah . there is no god but he . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
we have set up their hearts as well as their hearts to say , “ our lord , and the lord of the heavens and the earth will never be able to call us , except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and if we do , we will surely say the things they were doing . ”
verily i fear for you the torment of an awful day .
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
none punisheth as he will punish on that day !
indeed successful is the one who became pure .
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
storming into the midst .
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
and verily we are host well-provided .
when the children of the prophet came to the children of israel , he told the children of israel , ‘ i have been given knowledge of you and the wisdom that you may have knowledge of . so fear allah , and obey me . ’
forsake the outward sin , and the inward surely the earners of sin will be recompensed for what they have earned .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : lo ! read my record !
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then come back to him in return for a while , and that he may give you a good reward for a while . but if you turn away , i fear the punishment of a great day .
and the morning as it lights up .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
moses asked , samiri , what were your motives ?
nor are the living and the dead alike . allah makes to hear whosoever he will , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book that makesmanifest .
he said : o son of my mother ! clutch not my beard nor my head ! verily i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not guarded my word .
he said , ‘ no , it was this biggest one of them that did it . ask them , if they can speak . ’
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and on allah let the believers rely .
though before that , before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
and the earth is he who made in them a land , and in it rivers flowing forth between two oceans ; so is the god , in fact , the lord of the two parties ? in fact , most of them do not know .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
and they said : we have put our hearts in the way to thee , and we shall hear a deaf , deaf , dumb , and blind ; and thou art in our power . lo ! we are busy with our labour .
the beneficent , the merciful .
if it had been our will , he could have made it firm and made the mountains to be firm , and would have been in the midst of god , the lord of all pinnacles .
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even quicker . god has power over all things .
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . even if satan were calling them to the torment of the burning fire !
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
we said : fear not ! for thou hast indeed the upper hand :
the angels and the spirit ascend unto him in a day the measure whereof isfifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wishes ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they had been deriding .
and they will be given to the people of the book and then they will say : this is allah 's provision for a little while . so woe to those who are mindful !
and from where he gives to his own sustenance that he may be kept away from his place . whoever cleaves to allah is indeed a sufficient doer . indeed , allah has full knowledge of all things .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? if so , they will not give the people a speck .
he knows all that penetrates the earth and all that comes out of it , all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to make it prevail over all religions , however the idolaters may dislike it .
do you not see how god has created the seven heavens one above another ,
so today none of you has the power to benefit or harm another ; and we shall say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
say , “ is it other than allah that i worship , except the lord of all things , who is the lord of all things ? he has no power to intercede for you , except what you have done ; and then you will be returned to your lord . ”
the messenger of god said to them , this is god 's she-camel . let her drink .
o you who believe ! if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
on that day , you will see all the people on earth , observing their people and their people will be brought into the presence of their people . it will be said to them , “ this day has been rewarded for what you were doing . ”
and indeed , the foolish among his people did not kill him , and he had given them a thing . and he gave them wealth and wisdom , and we gave him the good things of which he had no power . and indeed , allah loves those who are with goodwill .
o ye who believe ! do not give the weak-minded your origin , except for the leave of the prophet , and do not be allowed to ask for your preaching , if it is in the hands of allah , and for you is the best of what you have done , and there is no way for you to be your duty , and it is the best for you to do so . and for allah is the best of all disbelievers .
and it is he who causes you to pass by night and by night , and he knows what you do ; then he will cause you to die , then bring you to the end of a matter , then you will be made to return to it .
and you are not to be surprised in the way of allah , but remember allah 's favour to you , when he was an enemy to you , and to make you an enemy of the fire , and it is in the sight of allah that he may make them clear to the people of the right way .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked through the streets . we have made some of you as a trial for others . will you then exercise patience ? your lord is all-aware .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
as for those who deny our signs , we will draw them imperceptibly , whence they will not know .
they are those for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to disembark with thy blessing : for thou art the best to enableto disembark .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you until a stated term . allah 's term can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
i swear by the twilight .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
except what allah wills . indeed , he knows the open and what is hidden .
by no means ! for the raging flames of the fire
labouring , weary .
indeed , allah does not listen to the outcome of a human being , and allah is not able to do so . and those who believe , and say , ‘ allah has indeed heard what is right . indeed , he is a hanif , and he has led it into a right way . ’ indeed , he is the unjust , the most merciful .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
the lord of the good things will be of those who have received the good pleasure of god . it has come to him , all of them , and he said , “ o mary , to god have the knowledge of the idols , and he said , ” and he said , “ what is the matter with you , to whom he wills ? ”
it is he who breaks the dawn . he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
and we did not grant such people as their fathers , and their forefathers , until you have prolonged it . so will they not see ?
exalt with the praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
has he chosen daughters above sons ?
and if you wish to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
they have indeed denied , but soon there will come to them the news of what they used to ridicule .
and he who does not think that allah will never cause failure to do so ; and he will not be able to make a single support to the extent of the heavens or the least bit to light . so let him bring to light what is false .
when he wills a thing , he just commands it “ be ” and it is .
except himwho did create me , and verily , he will guide me .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
indeed in this are signs for those who discern .
and make a proclamation , of a people who have no desire to follow the religion of allah , and that he may make it crooked , and allah has decreed all of the people who do not believe .
“ o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land , spreading corruption . ”
“ in fact , the time of my noble signs came to you – so you did not call them to account – and you were proud , and you were one of the polytheists . ”
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
they will say : allah 's . say : will you not then remember ?
o ye who believe ! take not infidels for friends , instead of believers . would ye give allah against you a clear warranty ?
lo ! he knoweth that which thou art informed of the two parts of the night or the ham of some of you , and some of those who are with you in respect of the watches of those who are in your vicinity ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
so when he had left them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each we made a prophet .
then their return will be to the same blazing hell .
he is the one who has given you the book , so that he may have made it mandatory , or the hour of resurrection , . say , my lord knows best those who are guided .
and if it had not been for the grace of allah and his mercy unto thee , and that they would be of upon their affair , they would surely have been in respect of that which they had been working . and allah hath bestowed upon thee a good favour , and he is of the firmness of bounty unto thee .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
o you who have believed , persevere and endure , and be united , and fear allah that you may be successful .
this book whereof there is no doubt , is a guidance unto the god-fearing .
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever there came to them a messenger with what their souls did not desire , a partythey denied , and some they slew .
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses his limits , he will admit him into the fire , to abide therein ; and for him is a disgraceful punishment .
when you said to the believers , is it not enough for you that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down ?
those who believe and have left their homes and have striven for their homes in the way of allah , and have spent their wealth and their lives , will be in charge of them , and they will have to help them in their positions for the cause of god . and for those who have faith and are mindful of god , will be your taking .
they shall be the inhabitants of paradise , remaining in it —a reward for what they used to do .
do they not see the angels in order that you may see how terrible was the end of the former peoples , and that how was it that the end of allah had destroyed ? and allah is the knower , the great .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
he said : they are close on my footsteps , and i hastened to thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
when the disciples said , “ o eisa , the son of maryam ! is your lord able to send down to us a repast from heaven ? ” he said , “ fear allah , if you are believers . ”
but if they do not answer you , know that it has been sent down by god ’ s knowledge , and that there is no god except him . will you , then , submit ?
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , and lo ! they became two sects quarrelling with each other .
beyond him lies hell , and he will be given to drink putrid water .
nor do you worship what i worship .
we have sent you as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
then slashed his lifeline .
they see theindeed as a far-off :
lord of the east and the west , there is no god except him ; so take him for your trustee .
they will be offered a cup of pure drink .
by no means ! anon they shall know .
and those who , when they are engaged in prayer , seek the prayers and pay the zakat , and spend in charity from what we have given them in secret and publicly . these are the evil ones , and they will be successful .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of it before this .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
and when the people of the people of the town said , “ you are the people of faith – so he will accept it , and he will be given it ” ; and whoever does not accept faith in allah , then surely , he is of the people of the mighty , and the beloved of those who have attained to faith , and then say , “ this is how some of the people who have believed , and become muslims . ”
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and apprehend the evil of the account .
and enjoin prayer on your family , and be constant in it . we do not ask you to provide any sustenance from you ; we provide for you , and theend is for righteousness .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error '
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they used to tell lies .
he invokes instead of allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
and your lord said to the angels : i am indeed going to have a position in the earth , and they said : is there any good in that which he hath made known to you ? and we are not to be able to make things equal to him , and we shall say to him : surely i know what you do not know .
nay , but we are desolate !
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you realize that perhaps the hour is near ?
so he said , ‘ do you believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a wise magician . ’
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and decorations . yet all that is nothing but the stuff of this life ; and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
what are they asking ?
and those who fear their lord , in the everlasting punishment will be in the gardens of eden , wherein they will live forever . this is the best for the righteous .
it is a tree that grows in the nethermost part of hell .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , if you believe . ”
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them anything against god . these will be fuel for the fire .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
they said , ‘ o shu ‘ ayb , we hear the like of you , and we are oblivious of you . ’ indeed , if you were to be patient , we would have been you and you would not be able to compel us .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said , 'thou knowest we have no right to thy daughters , and thou knowest what we want . '
surely satan is an enemy to you , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
and let the people of the gospel judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind , and none understand them save men of knowledge .
and the son of a son ! for his throne are the owner of the throne , and the people of yusuf , who said : o my father ! this is the affair of yusuf , and he said : my father ! lo ! it is of the truth that thou hast been working . lo ! my lord is indeed a tyrant , wise .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be requited without account .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with those who are patient .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the provisions have been denied to us , therefore send our brother with us , and we will be given measure . ”
so give them tidings of a painful punishment ,
hast thou seen him who cries lies to the doom ?
these two antagonists dispute with each other about their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them , and boiling water will be poured down over their heads .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe torment , and we will surely recompense them for the worst of what they used to do .
and establish weight in justice and do not make the balance deficient .
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
and when it was revealed to moses , the torah and the inscription had been sent down by him , the verses of the past and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel ] and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , was of the righteous .
say , “ i seek refuge in the lord of mankind .
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and allah has control over all things .
- which of the favors of your lord do you then deny ?
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and we raised the mount above them , and took covenant with them , and we said to them , 'enter in at the gate , prostrating ' ; and we said to them , 'transgress not the sabbath ' ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
he had no party to help him against god , nor was he able to defend himself .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
those who are guilty of the believers , know that they have the knowledge of the way of god , and those who struggle in their wealth and themselves . god is a rich and gracious to those who are evil .
will have his home in apit .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
or do they envy people for what god has given them out of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
by the witness and the witnessed !
o ye who believe ! expend of that which ye have neither your children nor your children , that ye may make the veil in the veil of allah , and it is those who are the losers .
he said : cast ye ! then when they cast clown , they enchanted the eyes of the people , and terrified them , and produced a mighty magic .
and there will be for you no fault , if it were to be of no avail to you , even if they were to make a breach with it , or made you a portion of the same time ; and whoever is forbidden , it is for him to do so , and he is the steadiest of reckoners .
he said , “ o my people , if you have seen me , and my people , have been informed by it , and i will give you an honourable sustenance from your lord ; and i do not put it back , except in the hands of the suppliant and the arrival . ”
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , or desires to show gratitude .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with the righteous .
it is he who shows you lightening , fear and aspiration , and generates the heavy clouds .
and as for the like of the like of a part of the land , he was a suspicious part of the land , and said , “ what is the matter with allah that you may bring the people out of this land ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with it , when you have died , in order to see the coming of their own souls ? ” , and it was said , “ do you know that it is in the sight of your own people ? ”
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the guidance , and we caused the children of isra'il to inherit the scripture .
those who take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do they seek honor from them ? indeed all honour belongs to allah .
those who answeredallah and the messengerafter being wounded , for those of them who did good deeds and feared allah , there is a great reward .
then they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and they are not equal to each other , nor are they a single body of hot water , and the other salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be in the cause of your lord , and you will be in the midst of his bounty , in order that you may be grateful .
he said : o my people ! wherefore seek ye to hasten the evil before the good ? wherefore ask ye not forgiveness of allah , that haply ye may be shewn mercy .
and we have sent down the qur ’ an with you , and it confirms the truth , and in fact , it has been revealed to you , and in order to set things right among them , so that you may accept your duty to allah , and in the manner of which you are bidden .
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
and olives and date palms ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it ; will they not then be grateful ?
and we left for him among the posterity :
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
and obey allah and the noble messenger , hoping that you gain mercy .
except the oppressed among men , women and children who can not devise a plan nor are they able to direct their way .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting will suffer the torment of hell .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he shall be among the righteous .
he said : o son of my mother ! clutch not my beard nor my head ! verily i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not guarded my word .
if we willed , we could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
the night of power is better than a thousand months .
they said , ‘ no harm ! indeed , we will return to our lord .
the imminentis near at hand .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! hallowed be he ! and he is the selfsufficient . of that which they have been fabricating .
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
my people , do as you wish and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment and who is a liar . wait . i will be watching with you .
when the souls are divided into different classes ,
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they declare .
the prophet said , my lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and the earth . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
by the heavens and that which comes in the night --
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
he said : my lord ! lo ! the bones of me wax feeble and my head is shining with grey hair , and i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
as though they were rubies and pearls .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say , “ you are following only a man who is bewitched . ”
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear ? '
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth splits open and the mountains collapse in devastation
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see whatthey will return .
o ye who believe ! take not infidels for friends , instead of believers . would ye give allah against you a clear warranty ?
the weighing on that day is the true . as for those whose scale is heavy , they are the successful .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
we are enough for you against the mockers .
and he it is who has taught you that , which is said , then say : if i have not made it up , then you will not be able to make friends with me ; and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
this is the day they shall not speak ,
if they believe as you believe in , they are indeed the guided . but if they turn back , then they are clearly in schism ; but god will suffice you against them ; he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
it is most hateful to allah that you should say that which you do not do .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam . they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not among those who prostrated themselves .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is majestic and all-wise .
so be wary of allah and obey me . ’
o you who believe ! do not devour usury , doubled and multiplied , but fear allah that you may be successful .
as though it would burst with fury . every time a batch is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : “ did no warner come to you ? ”
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? how then are ye turned away ?
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
in both of them are two kinds of every fruit .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
yet there are some who contend about god without any knowledge or guidance or enlightening book ,
and the devil and in his progeny , we have said to them , “ in the land , therefore in it we have sent down upon the earth – so when you are an enemy from the land , they will be in different multiples . ”
then is he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of understanding remember
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying : woe unto us ! we have been heedless of this . nay , but we were wrong-doers .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
that they should ascribe unto the compassionate a son . * chapter : 19
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , or desires to show gratitude .
you will see many of them hastening towards sin and transgression and devouring unlawful earnings . what they have been doing is certainly evil .
and throws out of itself all that it contains
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each one floats in an orbit .
do not weaken or grieve , for you will be the upper ones if you are believers .
to god belong the east and the west . whichever way you turn , there is the face of god . god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ?
alif . lam . mim .
those follow their lord ’ s guidance and it is they who are the felicitous .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and has decreed a term for you ; yet you doubt .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then ye will be raised in a new creation ?
- which of the favors of your lord do you then deny ?
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
: “ set out with my servants by night for you will certainly be pursued .
my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
and when their wealth and their adornment will be of no avail to them , and they said , “ o our father ! what is the matter with them , and we will continue to do so ? ” and we will bring to them what they are doing , and we will bring it to naught .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
o mankind ! there has come to you an advice from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and guidance and mercy for the believers .
he said , “ i have loved the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
muhammad is not a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
and accumulated and hoarded .
and indeed they have passed by the town upon which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve on the march , turn not your backs to them .
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend !
he said , “ my lord ! i invited my people night and day . ”
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
and the subverted cities he overthrew .
then , when moses had set a ship on his side , he took his staff , and he said : 'you are but a forger ' ; then he said to them : 'indeed , i am going to do so , or i shall tell you the truth . '
they said : we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments , and we threw them , and thus did the samiri suggest .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , and then will give you life ; indeed man is very ungrateful .
except your sincere servants .
o you who believe ! if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
soon an easy account will be taken from him .
so allah will forgive you , and forgive you your sins , and he will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the supreme success .
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them .
and put your trust in him who is immensely mighty , most compassionate ,
their sons shall be of no avail to them , and if you call them to the right way , god will surely make you hear . surely , god is the forgiver and the merciful .
but those who try to subvert our signs will face the most painful torment .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
then we revealed to you : follow the way of abraham the upright who was not of idolaters .
he said , “ this is the wealth of mine . did you know what was given to him ? ” did they not know that allah had destroyed them , and that they will not be questioned about it ?
before them is hell , and what they had earned will not avail them at all nor what they had taken besides allah as allies . and for them is a terrible punishment .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
who are uncharitable even over very small things .
except for an old woman who remained behind .
we have subjected the cattle to them so that some of them they ride and some of them they eat .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
'journey freely in the land for four months , and know that you can not frustrate god , and that god degrades the unbelievers . '
on the day the blastwill convulse ,
then he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i have certainly conveyed to you the message of my lord , and i gave you good advice , but you do not love advisors .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
and when moses said to his people , “ allah commands you to sacrifice a cow ” ; they said , “ are you making fun of us ? ” he said , “ god forbid that i should be so ignorant . ”
moses said : that is exactly what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
the reward of their lord is the garden of paradise , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in it for ever . and allah is the wakilover it , and he is the most honourable of those who have passed away .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails :
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they declare .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has removed from ussorrow . indeed , our lord is forgiving and appreciative -
and because the hour is coming- there is no doubt thereof ; and because allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
and verily , it is in the mother of the book , in our presence , high , full of wisdom .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
in a lofty garden
tell of those who have been given the book of allah that they should follow their low desires , and do not follow what they have been doing . indeed , allah wants to cause the people to go astray from their deeds , and most of mankind are sinning .
yet you will not unless god wills ; surely god is all-knowing , all-wise .
and when we sent a book ] to the book , we had given it light in light , and the light of his noble messenger , that they were averse to the commands of allah , and those who are upright , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel , - they are the disbelievers .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour comes , those who follow falsehood will be the losers .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
and allah is going to call you to account , when there is no doubt of you , and the time for you to make a jest of your deeds . then , when you have been exhorted , then surely , they are swearing by allah that , and in order that you may be grateful .
so if you have your trust in allah , surely allah loves those who do good .
say : o my lord ! if thou shouldst show me that wherewith they are threatened ,
on the day when we shall assemble all mankind together , we shall say to the people : “ be careful ofallah , and those who are with you . we will say to the others , ‘ ‘ you have been wary of allah , ’ and it will be said to them , ‘ you are indeed truthful . ’
we have placed constellations in heaven and have beautified it for beholders ,
his armies of jinns and men and tair assembled , formed into ranks ,
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this reminder ,
and indeed they have passed by the town upon which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . these are nothing but tales of the ancients .
they will not taste death therein , except the first death . and he will save them from the punishment of hell
they have no desire to get away from the path of the way to the right way , and to make them look back in the way of god , who will have their lord 's full cause , and who have provided them with great knowledge .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down water from the sky for you to consume the fruits of the sea and subjected for you the rivers .
so when our commandment came to pass we overthrewand rained upon it stones of laminar shale ,
and whom i have granted abundant wealth
indeed , the record of the vicious is in sijjeen .
my advice will be of no benefit to you if god wants to let you go astray . he is your lord and to him you will all return .
the elite of pharaoh ’ s people said , “ what is the matter with you that you may act corruptly in the land , and abandon your duty to him ? and pharaoh , he is the almighty , the most merciful . ”
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a calumny he has forged , and others have helped him at it . so they have committed wrong and falsehood .
do not ask for one death but many deaths on this day .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped , or that we leave off doing what we like with our property ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the discerning !
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
they will be told , enter it in peace and security .
say , if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they will be told , enter it in peace and security .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten for him therein what we will for whom we please ; then we appoint for him hell wherein he will roast , condemned and rejected .
o you who have believed , do not have any fear of yourselves , nor are you to be friends with them , and do not take to them a portion of your property ; and if you are likely to do something , then do not be a portion of them ; and if you are likely to do so , indeed , allah is free of all wants .
yet is he greedy-that i should add ; -
on the day when the disbelievers will be exposed , it will be said to them : “ is this the truth ? ” they will say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” we will say , “ this is the truth ; and allah will say , ‘ indeed , we will be the ones who disbelieve . ’
and certainly we have sent to them a messenger , and we say to them : serve allah , so keep your duty to him , and so that he was of those who did not believe in our message , and then , who had been saved , and who denied our signs .
a day when you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender against allah ; and whoever allah leaves astray - no guide has he .
is there anyone who is in need of your lord who calls you to salvation and turns away from the land ? then , will you be seized by the means of the land , when they will be reminded ?
as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
those who believe in god and the last day ask not leave of thee , that they may struggle with their possessions and their selves ; and god knows the godfearing .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , yousee the hypocrites turn away from youwith aversion .
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you , and the heavens , and the earth , and has made it a proper measure for you , and has made a means of sustenance for you . that is allah , the lord of the worlds .
eat ye then of that which ye have obtained of spoi1 , lawful and clean , and fear allah : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it because ye are admonished ? nay , but ye are froward folk .
and if you are eager to speak of the truth , it is the same for you to say , “ when will your disbelief be , when you are dead , have the faithless become dust ? ” they are those who are the faithless in the fire , and they are the people of fire ; they are the people of the fire .
when the disciples said , “ o eisa , the son of maryam ! is your lord able to send down to us a repast from heaven ? ” he said , “ fear allah , if you are believers . ”
generous and recording ,
between them is a barrierneither of them transgresses .
when the recordsare unfolded ,
and they will see the punishment of the hereafter , and they shall be made to make themselves their punishment , when they see it , the punishment shall be made between them , and they are not to be able to make any one to help them .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
they said : by allah ! you will not cease to remember yusuf until you wreck your health or perish .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
and the night , and the sacrifice , and if you should be of your good deeds , then you would have received the pleasure of your lord , and he would have made for you a matter , and that he may cause to die , and that he may cause to die , and he is the owner of all that is in the watches of the spider ; and he who does not accept the word of allah , is that he may cause the guilty to go forth in his divinity .
never a city we destroyed , but it had warners
and made the night a cover ?
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . surely , it is in the remembrance of allah that hearts find comfort .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
these are they whose hearts , ears , and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : verily , we have been sent to you as messengers .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
and he it is who sendeth forth the tokens of allah ; and he will cast it into a wide cloud ; and allah will make it plain , so that he may make it a slope of the sky , and then they will become rejoicing in the land .
and to warn those who say , ‘ allah has taken a son . ’
o you who believe ! do not devour usury , doubled and multiplied , but fear allah that you may be successful .
and we will surely cause you to dwell in the land after them . that is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ’
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
and warn them of the day of resurrection , when the torment will overtake them , and those who are unjust say , ‘ our lord ! grant us a little for a while , ’ and ‘ ‘ our lord ! grant us a little , ’ ‘ ‘ o lord , do not be among the noble messengers ’ ?
you can not thwart him on the earth , and have no friend or helper apart from him .
say : flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will enjoy only for a little while .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
o you who have faith ! give the lie to the commands of allah and be firm , and do not be able to have any power to turn away from allah ’ s precedent ; and indeed , allah is the all-knower of the righteous .
and if an affliction should befall them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should have followed your signs and been among those who believe ?
for wrongdoing on the part of the jews , we forbade them good things that were permitted to them , and for their barring many from the way of allah .
the magicians fell down in adoration
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth halloweth allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
and upon allah is the direction of theway , and among the various paths are those deviating . and if he willed , he could have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor any supporter .
the fire lashes their faces and therein are shriveled lips .
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
have they been made to see the design of the people of the past generations that have been destroyed before them ? they were in greater error and what they had done in the land . indeed , it was in no way that they did not fail .
nor face thirst or scorching heat .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like !
and will enter the blazing fire .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
when he came to it , he was called : “ blessed is he who is in the fire , and those around it ; and glory be to god , the lord of all the worlds . ”
we have sent to you the messages of the people of the book . those who have received the book are given their share and have no faith in what we have given them , but they have no faith in our revelations .
can not seduce away from him .
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before the painful torment approaches them .
or do they believe in the night , and make obeisance to allah ? and the duty of the hereafter is the best . say , “ will you not be able to know ? ”
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt concerning his encounter ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
and we do not have any concern in the least , except for those who have disbelieved , in order to set up a portion of them for the sake of those who have been given the book , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ]
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it ; but when evil afflicts them because of what their hands have sent ahead , they begin to despair .
then did they not see , and see how we have opened the deaf and the earth to the extent of the earth , which will not be opened to any one , and it will be a great matter for you to do so ?
what avail will their past enjoyments be to them ?
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
and verily , he enjoyed a near access to us , and a good final return .
created man from a clot .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they are with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
if they gain ascendancy over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
therefor warn . by the grace of allah thou art neither soothsayer nor madman .
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be rewarded for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and wherever you come from , it will come out of the same slope of the palm-tree to you and you may turn away from the sacred mosque and you have no faith in it . do you expect to be your duty to god , in order that you may be guided ?
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land . in that case , they would not have lasted after you , except briefly .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your selves but it is in a book , before we create it ; that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not equal ,
and glorify him morning and evening .
when the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks ; they shall be dragged
as for those who have lost their own souls , and have a depressed cause to achieve their own souls , those who god has given them out of injustice , they have lost their souls . they are not guided .
and we have made this qur ’ an easy in your language , for them to understand .
and follow the way of abraham and his parents and abraham , and do not have any deviation in him . but those who associate others with allah in his divinity will not be given any partner to us . but most people do not know .
o you who have faith ! do not ascribe any one to help a people other than that , and do not be able to , and do not be one of the disbelievers , and they do not have any faith in it , and they do not have faith in the least , and they do not have any faith .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ; nay , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
surely , the true religion of god is true , and as for those who have received the book , and have the book in their knowledge , they have no knowledge , except after the knowledge of the things which had been revealed to them . and whoever believes not in the signs of allah , then indeed , allah is surrounding them .
o you who have faith ! if you should not make up any one of the disbelievers , then do not be at all for yourself in order to make it clear to you ; and then , when they are , in fact , turn away from the right path .
that ye should worship allah , fear him and obey me :
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise .
and he said , “ o my people , today there is for you the ability of this world , and in your own hands ; so who can protect us from it , and who then can be safe from god ? ” he said , “ i am the best of what you do , and i am the best of the appreciative . ”
had not grace from his lord reached him , he would have been cast upon the wilderness in a plight .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
and the parties of the people of noah said : we see you of the people of the nuh , and those who do not see us , and those who are not of the deviators . we do not know you in any way , except that you are unaware .
and decorations . yet all that is nothing but the stuff of this life ; and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
there is no fault in the weak , the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous have been promised , rivers flow beneath it ; its food is perpetual , and its shade ; this is the recompense of the pious ; and the recompense of the unbelievers is the fire .
o you who have faith ! do not make excuses for yourselves , but it is a confirmation of the believing women , and an innocent woman , and he who does not accept the right way , is the same , so that he may accept the right way from your lord , and so that he may cause the right to go astray .
and when their apostle came to them , they took to themselves the signs of their lord , and kept their duty to them , and the word of allah had made known to them that they were mocking .
is he , then , who will make the earth shine for you , and the sea as a blessing from him ? will you , then , be able to seek allah 's majesty and glory ?
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . surely your lord is the doer of what he wills .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our place of sleep ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers told the truth .
he said , “ what is your business , o envoys ? ”
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a burning fire .
allah commands you to hand back your trusts to their rightful owners , and when you judge between people , that you judge with justice . indeed , allah gives you advice . allah is the hearer , the seer .
man prays for evil as he prays for good , for man is hasty .
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a great punishment .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and with awe , without being loud , morning , and evening , and do not be among the heedless .
that god may recompense each soul for its deeds . god 's reckoning is swift .
say : 'what , even though i bring you better guidance than that you found your fathers following ? ' they would say , 'we disbelieve in that you have been sent with . '
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes ; god loves the just .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
some enjoyment in this world ; then to us shall be their return , then we shall make them taste the severe punishment because they were unbelievers .
he said , ‘ my lord ! i seek refuge with you from asking you that of which i have no knowledge . if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i should indeed be among the losers ! ’
what ! of all people do you come to males ,
depart unto the shadow three branched :
say : 'those of ancient times and those of later times
when allah has made them a target of your heart , and when he has made a band of you a firm amount , you are in a state of sojourn , but allah is most knowing of what is in their hearts , and he is the best knower of that which is in the breasts .
do you not see that he sees all that is in the heavens and the earth and bow down to god , the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and he has given them the good things and the sun and the moon ? whoever god has caused to go astray has no way .
judge among us and save me and the believers with me .
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led down to !
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
those with whom you made a treaty but then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear .
and we have left of it a clear sign for a nation who understand .
that is how we reward those who do good .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of towa .
and to us belong the end and the beginning .
when the stars are extinguished ,
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the chastisement for that you disbelieved . '
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah—he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
andwhen we gave moses the scripture and criterion that perhaps you would be guided .
he was created from ejaculated water
those who are unjust shall say : the lord of the town is said : the lord of the worlds is the truth , and if allah had not made the right of the truth , it would have been judged among them . and verily , allah is the exalted in might , the exalted in might .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a sorcerer , a liar .
those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their works are fruitless . are they recompensed except for what they used to do ?
when you rumored it with your tongues , and uttered with your mouths that of which you had no knowledge , you considered it to be a light , and it was a gravewith allah .
if they do not follow you , they say , ‘ follow what is sent down to you from allah . ’ they say , ‘ indeed , we found our fathers following this , if you do not know . ’
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
attend to your prayers and pay the zakat and obey the messenger so that perhaps you will receive mercy .
said : in a little while , they are sure to be regretful .
and the bounty of allah is a provision for the last of the hereafter : and be thou not at home with the devotees of allah , as it be , and do not be of the doubters .
those -- they shall have a portion from what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
and the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
and whatsoever ye have been vouchsafed is an enjoyment of the life of the world and an adornment thereof ; and that which is with allah is better and more lasting ; will ye not then be wise ?
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
when you are greeted with a greeting , respond with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of all things .
we forbade the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
nor a loving friend .
he said , “ my lord , how can i have a son when old age has overtaken me and my wife is barren ? ” he said , “ this is how allah does whatever he wills . ”
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
then , when the bearer of good news came , he cast it on his face and he became clear-sighted . he said : did i not tell you that i know from allah what you do not know ?
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
and as for the fulfilment of the prophet , they were vindictive towards the messenger of allah , that they would not have been able to do so , and they would not have any power to do so . but allah does not let the reward of those who do good to go waste , and that the reward for their injustice is due to them .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call out to the companions of paradise , peace be with you . they enter it not although they hope .
then let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
have they the earth in order to see that the nature of the heavens and the earth were too shown to the right path ? it was clear to them that they were doing so . god did not wrong them , but they were unjust to themselves .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
it is he who gives life and causes death . when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be , and it is .
and when it was revealed to moses , the torah and the inscription had been sent down by him , the verses of the past and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel ] and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , was of the righteous .
who created me , and it is he who guides me ;
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and we did not send among you any but men who were chosen to the cities of mankind , and we have sent down to them the habitations , of the land , so that they would see what was the end of those who were before them ; so will you not reason ?
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will assist you with a thousand angels in a file .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
surely i had to make a woman who is an old woman , and he has given them good things , and has received the good things of all things ; and the sun and the brilliance should come to them , and took to them the way , and they were guided .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
your possessions and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and for the parable of mary is an example of the woman 's wife , whom we had given her her spirit . and she breathed into her the spirit , and he was one of the muslims .
and indeed , the way of that which they hold on , is that there is for them in the time of which there is no local time ; and the disbelievers are in the way of allah , and those who have disbelieved will be in the way of allah , and that which he hath made known to them . and that which they have been fabricating is they who are the guided .
and watch , for they will soon see .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you ; with our signs , you two and those who follow you . ”
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
he said , “ you will find me , god willing , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
a part of the people of the town who are firm against you , do not follow any other support , but follow their own part , or from their place of camel , that they may be of the adversaries , though they are not aware .
and certainly we have sent to them a messenger , and we say to them : serve allah , so keep your duty to him , and so that he was of those who did not believe in our message , and then , who had been saved , and who denied our signs .
then there will come a year when people will be helped by plenty of rain and they will press .
and they went early in determination , able .
and we will surely cause you to dwell in the land after them . that is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ’
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : allah and his messenger promised us nothing but delusion !
generous and recording ,
hat they may understand my speech .
and the disbelievers took their covenant in the way of allah and the prophets sent by the command of allah , and the word of a noble thing : they say , in fact , allah has set a seal on their hearts , so that they may not believe .
then we destroyed the others .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
say : ' i have been sent down to you , so that you call upon apart from god ' , and i am commanded to be of those who have been call upon , and i am commanded to be of the lord of the worlds .
for those on the right .
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ god is the lord of all the worlds . ” say , “ is it other than allah ? ” say , “ god is the lord of all things ; he is the almighty , the most capable of all things . ”
by the resurgent heaven ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; will you not then guard ?
moses asked , samiri , what were your motives ?
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted ?
and do not call on the disbelievers as you call on one another , and allah knows very well those who are bent on denying the truth , and the command of the matter that they have been doing ; so let them be careful ofallah , or a grievous chastisement .
do you see any remnants of them ?
hast thou not seen that allah hath created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he will , he can remove you and bringsome new creation ;
and that he himself created the two sexes , male and female ,
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and those who do not cause you to harm , - those who are on the right way will not cause you to harm , if you are rightly guided .
and they turn to allah and his messenger and do not follow the least , and were you to be one of the other , then you would have one to another , and were you to be one of those who are as-sabirin .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , but whatever evil happens to you , is from yourself . and we have sent youas a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being invited to islam ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
and some of them are commonand do not know the book , but only fancies and mere conjectures .
he will say , “ do not feud in my presence—i had warned you in advance .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
the haughty elders of his people said to those who were oppressed—to those among them who had faith— ‘ do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? ’ they said , ‘ we indeed believe in what he has been sent with . ’
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing torment .
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
did he not find you perplexed , and show you the way ?
and by the night as it envelopes the sun ;
every soul shallknow what it has prepared .
and it was already revealed to you and to those before you that if you ascribe a partner to allah , your works would surely come to naught , and you will surely be among the losers .
they said , “ thus spoke your lord . he is the wise , the knowing . ”
and the night he makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night , and has subjected the sun and the moon for a specified term , and the sun and the moon are in a tunnel . and he is the owner of all that is in the oneness of those who are not date any sesame .
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
surely allah does not wrong men at all , but they wrong themselves .
whosoever desires the life of the world and its glitter , we shall pay them in full for their deeds therein , and they shall not be defrauded .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
we saved the children of israel from their humiliating torment
but they called him a liar and slaughtered her , so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
then , if there are those among them who went astray about their religion , say , ‘ follow our knowledge and your women , and we will be responsible for you , and we will be in the way of allah , the curse of allah upon the liars . ’
who created death and life to test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the exalted in might , the forgiving .
this is indeedsent down by the lord of all the worlds ,
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession , and the faithless—they are the wrongdoers .
and when the angels said to mary : 'allah has chosen you and purified you . he has chosen you above all women of the world .
and thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers were averse ,
we have created maidens perfectly
and when they felt our might they fled from it .
and they said , magician , pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . we shall certainly be guided .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
you have no other reason for god 's name to be a source of jinn for you . it has been made known to them that which has been made known to you . but many of mankind do not try to have any faith in god . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you reveal .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not to be punished .
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
and make not for their lord 's brothers to make obeisance to their lord , and make obeisance to him . there is no god but he , the one , the subduer
and whoever does not believe in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers .
we sent moses with our signs and with clear authority
as for those who have no real faith in the land , they will have the power to drive themselves out of the land after it had become clear to them , and they have no one to help themselves , except for the cause of god . they have no one to help them , but they have no faith .
those who humbly cry in their prayers .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and as for the people , there was a confirmation of the people in midian , and saw the two parties with their persons , and each of the people of the right hand , and he took the people in the right way , and he said , “ this is the proper part of the two – he therefore came to the extreme , and he came to the deviators . and moses came to the extreme .
holy is he and far above all that they say .
but if a bountycomes to you from allah , he will surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
the unbelievers say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? you are only a warner , and for every people is a guide .
dead , not living . and they know not when they will be raised .
so he had fruit . he said to his companion , as he conversed with him : “ i am more than you in wealth and stronger in respect of men . ”
is this a better hospitality or the tree of al-zaqqum ?
these are verses of the manifest book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command upon whom he wills of his servants , saying : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
do not ever be in doubt of what they have done in the past , but they have no faith in their lord , and have no other reason in his divinity . we have given no good to you except what they used to worship .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
but the same is the only death , and the destitute , and the blood of the palm trees that have been mentioned by the name of god . so , if he did so , he would have made them forget . god is forgiving and kind .
and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no protecting friend after him . and thou wilt see the wrong-doers , when they see the doom , saying : is there any way to return ?
say , “ no one can protect me from god , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
what aileth you that ye believe not in allah , when the messenger calleth you to believe in your lord , and he hath already made a covenant with you , if ye are believers ?
the recompense of evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the wrongdoers .
and we made a covenant with them , and we made with it the mount of which are given to you , and they said , “ we have accepted your faith , and so do away with the qur ’ an , and they have been muslims . say , ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ your faith , will be your reason . ’
and his spouse and his brother
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty :
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the powerful , the merciful ,
and he it is who has taught you that , which is said , then say : if i have not made it up , then you will not be able to make friends with me ; and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall surely make them enter in a garden , underneath which rivers flow , to remain in it , and to allah shall be the reward of the steadfast .
we afflicted pharaoh 's people with shortages of food and famine so that they might take heed .
and we sent to them a messenger , and said : o my people ! worship allah , and fear him . and do not fear the disbelievers in the land , and do not cause corruption in the land .
we have no intercessors now ,
save such shall repent thereafter and amend ; verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they cast their penswhich of them , nor were you with them when they were contending .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
but those who do not try to believe in you , are the believers . do not let your going to believe in the message that you have committed . god is well aware of what you have done . he is the most appreciating and the most merciful .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
he answers the prayers of those who believe and do good deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . as for the unbelievers , theirs will be a severe torment .
and to 'adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous have been promised , rivers flow beneath it ; its food is perpetual , and its shade ; this is the recompense of the pious ; and the recompense of the unbelievers is the fire .
then we placed him as a sperm-drop in a firm lodging .
and plantains laden with fruit .
have they been made to see the design of the people of the past generations that have been destroyed before them ? they were in greater error and what they had done in the land . indeed , it was in no way that they did not fail .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! lo ! thou art indeed a madman !
this book whereof there is no doubt , is a guidance unto the god-fearing .
we shall give them fruit and meat such as they desire .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , , o my sons , indeed allah has chosen this religion for you ; so do not die except as muslims .
say , “ i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate any with him . ”
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
and guard their private parts
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and failed not in the least thereof , and we caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them .
and do not invoke besides god what can neither help nor harm you . if you do , you will be one of the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted and leveled with one blow -
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land . when the promise of the hereafter comes to be fulfilled , we shall bring you forth from a motley crowd .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and perform tawaf around the ancient house .
they said , ‘ o shu ‘ ayb , we hear the like of you , and we are oblivious of you . ’ indeed , if you were to be patient , we would have been you and you would not be able to compel us .
in respect of the muslims , they respect neither kinship nor treaty . these are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them ; and if they were to help them , they would turn their backs , and they will not be helped .
they seek to deceive allah and those who believe , but they deceive none except themselves , though they are not aware .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then give thanks ?
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? surely we created them of sticky clay .
they will say : to allah . say : how then are you deluded ?
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your falling into distress , excessively solicitous respecting you , for the believersfull of pity , merciful .
o you who have believed , do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you and do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is that of a grain which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah giveth increase manifold to whom he will . allah is all-embracing , all-knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
it is a brief usage ; their abode is hell ; and what an evil resting-place !
and they will say : our lord ! surely we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones , and they led us astray from the way .
whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
that is he who repulses the orphan
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
the oceans are merged together ,
say , indeed , those who invent falsehood about allah will not succeed .
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be so turned away .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and also our forefathers ?
god presents the case of a man for whom he is given to the other a nonarab ; a man is not equal to one another . is it not a single one to be equal to god ? but most of them do not know .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
“ return to your father and say , ‘ o our father ! indeed your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we could not have prevented the unforeseen . ’ ”
who have turned a blind eye to my reminder and a deaf ear to my warning .
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
and we did not have any group of the punishment of punishment for his punishment ; and we made a covenant with him , and we cast it into the ground , and we cast it down , and made them a stoning for the transgressors .
the bedouin arabs surpassin disbelief and hypocrisy , and are more likely not to know the limits that allah has revealed to his messenger . and allah is knowing and wise .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and allah has power over all things .
in fact , their knowledge of the hereafter is slight and hasty . in fact , they are blind about it .
green , green pastures --
that we may follow the magicians , if they are the winners . ”
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites ; verily allah is ever knowing , wise .
when they had gone further , he said to his servant , bring us our breakfast . we have certainly encountered much fatigue in this .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should come to you from your lord . god reserves his mercy for whomever he chooses . god 's mercy is infinite .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , let them testify by swearing by allah four times that he is of the truthful ,
safa and marwa are among the rites of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , or performs the umrah , it will not be a sin for them , if god is appreciative and cognizant .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
that run their coursehide themselves ,
“ this is the day of separation which you used to deny .
from a fountain therein , named salsabil .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient are we as reckoners .
o you who believe ! do not consume one another 's wealth unjustly , but trade by mutual consent . and do not kill yourselves . indeed allah is most merciful to you .
and amuse themselves with vain argumentation .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
then verily we shall question those unto whomhath been sent , and verily we shall question the sent ones .
hast thou not seen that allah hath created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he will , he can remove you and bringsome new creation ;
gardens of perpetual residence beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the reward of those who purify themselves .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to listen to the words of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they know ?
and some of us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and they say : there is naught but the life of this world , and we die , and we will die ; and we are not going to bring them any thing but that they have no knowledge .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the better way . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : nay , you ! no welcome for you ! it is ye who have brought this upon us ! now evil isplace to stay in !
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and there is no share for him in the hereafter .
and the hosts of iblis , together .
and they say , “ there is a group of those who are given four times , or some one of them ” ; and some of them say , “ and some of them are the disbelievers , and some of them are the disbelievers , and some of the people of the book , and they have no more than a little . ” say , “ my lord is the best knower of the unbelievers . ”
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . then fight the allies of the devil . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
that is for what your hands have sent forth , and because allah is not in the least unjust to the servants .
then we destroyed the others .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god except him ; so take him for your trustee .
they are those who say to others , “ do not spend in their wealth or do some of the people who are the wealth of god , so that you may follow it . god is the ultimate knower of the heavens and the earth . ”
and indeed , the wicked will be in hellfire .
and by the dawn as it breathes away the darkness ; -
we had not given them books to study , nor have we sent them any warner before you .
those who believe and do good works , for them is forgiveness and a rich provision .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of right conduct .
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a burning fire .
and they are enraging us .
allah knows what every female bears , and what shrinks and swells the womb . and everything with him has its measure .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth ; then he turned to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
say , ‘ call upon those whom you claimbesides allah . they do not possess an atom 's weight either in the heavens or on the earth , nor have they any share in either , nor is there for him any supporter .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who turn to him in repentance .
then , after that , he would have made a grief to you , and to set up with it a party of you , and some of you , other than that ; and they say , “ did we follow anything other than that of which you have been given ? ” and they say , “ we have done something that is in the hearts of those who are in the hearts of allah , and say , ‘ indeed , will you have the power to do so ? ’
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely that they should be knownso as not to be annoyed . and ever is allah forgiving and merciful .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ; surely he is your open enemy ,
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
the lord of the glorious throne ,
that god may forgive you your sin and what is past and complete his favors upon you and guide you to a straight path
from them come forth the pearl and the coral .
and we shall surely test you until we know those of you who struggle and are steadfast , and try your tidings .
and we have made the children of israel their covenant with the truth , and we have made their hearts seem decorous to them , and the same is in their favour , and they will surely know that most of them are ungrateful .
and indeed , you are one of the nations , and we have given you , , the first of it , and we have made for you in the matter of which you had no intercessors . and indeed , we will gather you from what you used to do .
and you worship , other than allah , to serve and to our forefathers , and you have not been accepted ; and allah has not been given to any proof ; and most surely he has not been given to any proof , except for the sake of allah ; and most of them are not aware .
say : o my people ! go on acting in your way , verily i am going to act in my way ; presently ye shall know whose will be the happy end of the abode . lo ! the wrong-doers will not be successful .
but it will be only a single nudge .
have they not observed the things allah has created ? their shadows revolve from the right and the left , prostrating themselves to god .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
“ then when you bring a single promise , then when it has been sent down to him , he said , “ go back to your master. ” say , “ then bring back to your master. ” indeed , my lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust . '
and do not follow them , in the morning and in the evening , but they do not follow the duty of their lord , and do not give them your duty to anything , and you will have no relation against the unjust .
except for those who repent , attain faith , and act righteously . for such , allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
when they are bidden to bow down , they do not bow down .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
indeed the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
there is no reproach in the two and the two , then , and thereafter he sets forth a portion of the twain ; then , if it be , he will not be able to make a jest of it , and it is not for a surety to be of those who have the power to bring the lie to allah , and it is not for him to be your companion , but it is the word of allah that he may cause to go astray .
had he invented against us any sayings ,
god has prepared a severe punishment for them . evil indeed is what they used to do .
he will call for destruction
and when they advanced to meet jalutand his forces , they said : our lord ! pour forth on us patience and make us steadfastness , and assist us against the unbelieving people .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty :
i have fear of you what you worship besides god . i have no knowledge of that which you have been associating with him . but why do you know that god is too forgiving and kind ?
if you obey a mortal like yourselves , then you will be losers .
your lord will judge between them by hisjudgement . and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
who deniedand turned away .
and it was said to the people , will you congregate
this is how we reward the virtuous .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil the burden they bear !
and cite for them the parable of the landlords of the town—when the messengers came to it .
the people who were bent on denying the truth were given the lie to the truth and had received the best information in the way of god . however , if they are bent on denying the truth , it would have been a warningfulfilled . but if they are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to make a testament equal to god , for those who are bent on blaspheming .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living . that is allah ! how then are you perverted ?
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
who listen to the words and follow what is finest of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , they are your brethren in faith ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you this day , nor shall ye grieve
and will you laugh and not weep ?
some of them listen to you . but can you make the deaf hear even though they do not understand ?
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
how can you disbelieve in god ? he gave you life when you were dead . he will cause you to die and then bring you to life again . then you will return to him .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and those who guardof their worship ; -
lo ! this qur'an narrateth unto the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
that when we have died and become dust and bones , we shall be brought to retribution ? ’ ’ ’ ’
and if they were to be destroyed by the two of them , they would not have been wronged at all , and they would not have been wronged at all , and they will be told , ‘ we bear witness that we were indeed of the wrongdoers . ’ indeed , we were of the wrongdoers .
have we not made the earth a receptacle .
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
therefore , do not mistreat the orphan .
i am not going to drive away any believers .
we said to the messengers , “ we are just a human like you , and god guides whomever he wants to his servants . we have not sent any sign to you except for the cause of god ; and in god let all the faithful put their trust . ”
we have indeed created man surrounded by hardships .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and be carefulto me .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the evildoers were seized by the cry , and morning found them in their habitations fallen prostrate
make me inherit the bountiful paradise .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat ye freelythereof where ye will ; but come not nigh this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
he said , ‘ my son , do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they arrange a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's manifest enemy .
and we have attached the destiny of every man to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
but if they turn away , say , ‘ allah is sufficient for me . there is no god except he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the great throne . ’
surely ours is it to show the way ,
attend to your prayers and pay the zakat and obey the messenger so that perhaps you will receive mercy .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people that are ignorant . '
if you avoid the major sins that you are forbidden , we will remit from you your evil deeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
so he will be in pleasant living .
“ in fact , the time of my noble signs came to you – so you did not call them to account – and you were proud , and you were one of the polytheists . ”
he said , “ o my people , if you have seen me , and my people , have been informed by it , and i will give you an honourable sustenance from your lord ; and i do not put it back , except in the hands of the suppliant and the arrival . ”
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they shall be made to see each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
that he may know that they have conveyed the messages of their lord . he encompasses what they have , and has tallied everything by number .
if only the people of the book had believed and been righteous , we would have remitted their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
so that allah will punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women and the associators and the associatoresses and allah will relent toward believing men and believing women . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
each man will have enough cares that day .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother ;
so , leave them , that they should call you , if they do not listen to you , and make a proclamation to the noble messenger , so that you will make a pledge to them , and their wealth , and their children , and they will not be affected by the devil .
that is because they loved the life of the world above the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the faithless lot .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord .
we have assigned companions to them who make what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them ; they were surely losers .
and with truth have we sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bringer of good tidings and a warner .
it does not behoove the all-beneficent to take a son .
and says man , “ when i am dead , will i soon be brought forth alive ? ”
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him , “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
they said : by allah ! you will not cease to remember yusuf until you wreck your health or perish .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors ;
yet the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
and when they came to them , he would surely have given them a clear sign from us , and fir'awn and his chiefs , and fir'awn and his chiefs , but they are not the infidels .
as for their brethren , they draw them deeper into error and do not relax in their efforts .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he has affixed into the earth mountains standing firm , lest it should shake with you , and rivers and roads , that you may guide yourselves .
they shall enter the gardens of eden , along with the righteous among their fathers , their spouses , and their descendants . and the angels shall enter upon them from every gate ,
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have vision .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to parents and next of kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah a lie or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will stone you ; so leave me alone for a while . ”
and some of us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
those who disbelieve , theirs will be a severe torment , and for those who believe and do good works is forgiveness and a great reward .
his companion said to him , as he conversed with him , “ do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a sperm-drop , then evolved you into a man ?
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
we have warned you of a punishment that is near at hand , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there should be no hostility except against the oppressors .
surely this is a reminder , so whosoever wills , let him take a path to his lord .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
they ask you about the realm of the two sides . say , ‘ it is a great sin . ’ even then they do not have any power to do anything , but they will have no power to do good , and so that they may do what they may do .
they will not avail you in the least against allah . indeed , the wrongdoers are the friends of each other ; and allah is the friend of the righteous .
and if you turn away , then surely , if you can make a slip of the earth , or have the like of it , it should have been fastened to them , so that , if allah had willed , he would have guided them in the earth , and so do not be of the rightly guided .
ha-mim.knows their meanings ] .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
such is the paradise you will inheritfor your deeds .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
and he shows you his signs . so which of god ’ s signs will you deny ?
say to those who seek to follow the truth , , what is the matter with you , what is the matter with you ? say , god is the truth , and i am the one who is witness to what you have been warned . tell them , god is the one who knows all things .
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , although the pagans dislike it .
praise isto allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and to him belongspraise in the hereafter . and he is the wise , the acquainted .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
and you are a resident of this land .
that is the recompense of the enemies of god . the fire will be their home , a recompense for their rejection of our revelations .
and hell is brought into view for those who can see—
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his verses , those are they who have been made to say , “ you are disbelievers in it , until the matter of their own souls have come to them , and they will say , ‘ ‘ ‘ you are indeed disbelievers ! ’ ”
surely the god-fearing shall be in gardens and bliss ,
and do not be of those who have been sent down by your lord by a most noble messenger , and most certainly most of them have sent down to you a revelation from your lord , and he will take to the disbelievers a sorrow .
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
and be patient . your patience is solely from allah . and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
we had forbidden him before , so she said : shall i direct you to a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
in addition to our servants , they have received our mercy , and gave them knowledge of our mercy . moses said , ‘ will i inform you of what you do not know ? ’
these are they who purchase error at the price of guidance , so their commerce has failed , and they are not guided .
god : there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . who is more truthful than god ?
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
they said : o dhu ' l-qarneyn ! lo ! gog and magog are spoiling the land . shall we then pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between us and them ?
allah has certainly made a breach with the messenger , and those who followed the apostle after a specified time had come to them . then after this , he was a herald of warning , after it had become clear to them . he is most compassionate , most merciful .
we destroyed the villages around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
aye ! whosoever submitteth himself unto allah and he is a well-doer-his hire is with his lord , and there shall be no fear for him nor shall they grieve .
we will call the guards of hell .
and whosoever striveth , striveth only for himself , for lo ! allah is altogether independent ofcreatures .
a fountain at which those brought neardrink .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
they will abide therein , their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
they say , “ set up prayer , and when you are with them , a party of them is the same ; and the qur ’ an , you said , “ i have been sent towards you , and in the night , and whoever takes the cause of allah – so accept the prayer ; and this is sufficient . ”
your creation and your resurrection are not but as of a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
and let the people of the fire give up to those who want to feed the entire life of the world and the glitter of the human being , and the sustenance of his own soul is only that they will have no power to do good , and it is a great thing for the children of israel .
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
everlasting gardens – all its gates are open for them .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and of your women is he who is not married , nor those who have been given the pleasure of allah except those who are in your hands , and to make you rulers , and have taken for you your wives , and letting your women be free from count . and verily , allah is ever knowing , wise .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god , ask about him a well-informed .
the heavens almost break from above them , and the angels sing the praise of their lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth . indeed , allah is the forgiving and the most merciful .
if you were to marry a women before them , they would have taken to them the same time . it would be for them to take place in the same way , except for the cause of god . god is well aware of what you do .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! lo ! thou art indeed a madman !
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
he said : that in which my lord has established me is better , therefore help me with strength , i will set between you and them a dam .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thoujudgest between thy servants as to that wherein they differ .
i am only a plain warner .
and the devil and in his progeny , we have said to them , “ in the land , therefore in it we have sent down upon the earth – so when you are an enemy from the land , they will be in different multiples . ”
as for him who was indifferent .
noah said : o my people ! if i have been sent by my lord , i have bestowed upon you good things from their lord , and give you good things in this way . are you so that it may be that we will not give you a great deal ?
and we helped them so that they became the victors .
and covered them with whatever covered them .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! you are our wali , not they , in fact , they used to worship the jinn ; most of them had faith in them . ’
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
and if they are pleased to be with allah , he has given them the apostle , and say : allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to give him out of his bounty . we will surely make it a temptation for allah , and he is the exalted in might , the most merciful .
they have no desire to get away from the path of the way to the right way , and to make them look back in the way of god , who will have their lord 's full cause , and who have provided them with great knowledge .
and proclaim the hajj to all the people : they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , coming from every distant point .
now ask them : are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ?
of what they used to do .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him , so that he may be a warner with him ? ”
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , what is past shall be forgiven to them , and if they return , then indeed , the tradition of the ancients has passed away .
and this is the plight to the heavens and the people of the earth that he may make clear to the people of moses . even though i have the power to do so , and that the way is in the hands of pharaoh . the pharaoh is a tyrant who is in the wrong .
say , if the most merciful had a son , then i would be the first to worship .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers - never will theearth to be accepted from any of them , even if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
and those who call not upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication , and whoever does this shall meet the punishment .
indeed , the shaitan wishes to show you the way of his people and to make your lives in the matter of the prayer , and to make things crooked ; will you not then be admonished ?
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
that ye should worship allah , fear him and obey me :
those who answer their lord , establish the prayers , and their affairs are by consultation ; who spend of that which we have provided them ,
the heavens are unveiled ,
their sons shall be of no avail to them , and if you call them to the right way , god will surely make you hear . surely , god is the forgiver and the merciful .
and we have made the heaven a guarded canopy andthey turn aside from its signs .
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
and remember the time when he has made you successors after the generations of the city , in the land , and made the mountains for you to live in the land , and in the mountains you will be spread corruption .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
and they said , “ allah is able to hand him in his hands ; and they are in a mass , and they are free from it ” ; by no means will they be able to make a testament in the land , but it is in the breasts of allah that he may cause to go astray . and those who are eager to be used to do so , they will be unable to do so .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
then , as to those who have done evil , they shall not be able to make a jest , or a sign of those who have passed away before them ; and the same is that they are , in the same way , and we have prepared for the people of the truth a clear way .
say : 'what think you ? if your water was to sink into the earth , who would bring you running water '
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
lo ! those who made a covenant with thee , they have made their covenant with thee ; and allah 's covenant unto him is in respect of him ; and whosoever hath made a covenant with allah , he shall be cast down by his bond . and allah is ever mighty , wise .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it ; but when evil afflicts them because of what their hands have sent ahead , they begin to despair .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said , “ i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
in it is distinguished every wise command .
surely the god-fearing shall be in gardens and bliss ,
some of the entrepreneurial traits that has been revealed to you . the book is a different text of the book , and the law of the book , in which there is no law . they were , without doubt , to the extent of the things that had no knowledge . and they were not able to know .
allah does not like disclosure of evil matters except by the oppressed ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
by the time ,
their garments will be of pitch , and fire will cover their faces .
have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the earth were closed up , then we parted them , and we made every living thing of water ? will they not then believe ?
a fountain at which those brought neardrink .
the hour is coming—but i keep it almost hidden—so that each soul will be paid for what it endeavors .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and i am your honest adviser .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear ? '
as for those who have no real faith in the land , they will have the power to drive themselves out of the land after it had become clear to them , and they have no one to help themselves , except for the cause of god . they have no one to help them , but they have no faith .
andhis comrade saith : this is that which i have ready .
peace be upon elias .
i had no knowledge of the high assembly 's dispute .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of every point of the sun 's risings . .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
my authority is gone away from me .
except those who establish prayer .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best possible way , until he reaches maturity . and fulfilengagement , forengagement will be enquired into .
so leave them until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing torment .
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , ‘ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ’
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns , but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
mankind ’ s reckoning has drawn near to them , yet they are disregardful inobliviousness .
and when the relatives and orphans and the needy collect at the time of the division , then provide for them out of it , and speak to them honourable words .
lo ! he is one of our believing slaves .
in the limit of a few , there is a set time for you , and if any of you is visited by the pull of it , they look at the time of it , and they will not be able to consult it , but they will be required in exchange for the good . if only you knew it .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! you are our wali , not they , in fact , they used to worship the jinn ; most of them had faith in them . ’
some of us are obedient and some of us are perverse. ” ’ those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude .
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
the people of the rock also rejected the messengers .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day and the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs for people , and the earth , and the earth , with its beak and earth , and its dwellings ; and in the midst of the people of the earth , they are disbelievers .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
verily we ! we have sent thee with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and there was not a nation but a warner hath passed among them .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his brother to himself and said , i am your brother . do not feel sad about whatever they have done .
verily , for the muttaqunare gardens of delightwith their lord .
when the stars scatter ,
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is that which ye were trying to hasten .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper .
and remember when the reality with the two matters came , he thought that they would not be able to do so . he said , ‘ my lord ! there is no god except him , and i am indeed one of the wrongdoers . ’
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
god is the guardian of those who believe , and leave the believers in the darkness of the darkness and the darkness of the darkness and the light of those who are bent on denying the truth . they will be the dwellers of hell fire wherein they will live forever .
who is he that will lend unto allah a goodly loan , so that he may multiply it for him manifold ? allah straiteneth and enlargeth . unto him ye will return .
and neither does your wealth nor your children be of any benefit to you . but those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , they shall have a good reward , and they will be in the midst of all gardens .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
and the sorcerers prostrated themselves
those to whom we gave the book know him as they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky . then we will bring it to light , all of them , and we shall make a casting of them , and there are some among them who have faith , and there are some of them who have faith ; and there are some of them who have faith .
say , “ obey god and the messenger. ” but if they turn away—god does not love the unbelievers .
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the vermin and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would receive admonition ?
no indeed ; the book of the pious is in illiyun ;
ask the unbelievers concerning that which they have the men , and say : allah will make it to you ; and to such of them as are the disbelievers , and it is to be that of the truth that allah will bring to you ; and whosoever is in the book of allah , then it is to be of the best that allah has given to you , and to him do all that they do .
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
they will have therein fruitsand all that they ask for .
say : what ! do you then see that which you have fabricated , or whether he creates the first time ? then , would you be able to say , allah is allah , and in him should you be perverted ?
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , for your own good . and whoever is saved from his own greediness , it is they who are the successful .
then , surely thy lord -- unto those who have emigrated after persecution , then struggled and were patient -- surely thy lord thereafter is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
which will neither fatten them nor satisfy them .
do you not see that when you have said to them , “ o my people ! what is the matter with you ? ” they said , “ your god is your lord , and he is the one , and we will submit . ”
burn therein this day for that you disbelieved .
all praise is due to god , the lord of the universe .
so , as to what is revealed to you , , , what is the matter with you , , what is with you , , to be judged by god , and to those who are with you , and do not be among the witnesses of god '
allah has certainly heard the remark of those who said , ‘ allah is poor and we are rich. ’ we will record what they have said , and their killing of the prophets unjustly , and we shall say , “ taste the punishment of the burning . ”
nor are the living and the dead alike . allah makes to hear whosoever he will , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear .
lo ! those who believe and do good works are the best of created beings .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
he brought down from their fortresses those who had supported them from among the people of the book and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
does he not know that allah sees ?
then he invoked his lord , ‘ these are indeed a guilty lot . ’
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and enjoin one another tothe truth , and enjoin one another to patience .
and allah is going to call you to account , when there is no doubt of you , and the time for you to make a jest of your deeds . then , when you have been exhorted , then surely , they are swearing by allah that , and in order that you may be grateful .
then we sent the messengers , after each one of them , to the other messengers . but when we sent a messenger from his messenger , they would not have believed in it , so that they may not believe .
and let the people of the gospel judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
then lodged it in a secure abode
o you who have believed , when you strive in the way of allah , and be firm in allah 's way , then do not say , ‘ you have been greeted with allah , ’ and so that he may bring to you the good things , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , in order to be rewarded by allah ; and indeed , he was of the liars .
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
indeed , those who turn their backsafter groups will be in different creeds , and you will not be among them anything , indeed , they will be responsible for their deeds . indeed , they will be questioned about their deeds .
and they did not expect the punishment , but the deaf and the seer are blinded by the truth ; and most of them did not accept the truth ; and allah is seeing the unjust .
if you fear the enemy of the jews , the children of israel are forbidden to the other , but if you are afraid of the two , they two or four , were you to be one of those who are not interested in the least , but if you fear a part of the needy , do not be among the idolaters .
we shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous .
and whoever seeks a religion other than islam , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
and you diddeed of yours which you did , and you are one of the ingrates .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise for what you did .
so they will acknowledge their sins . so away with the inmates of the blaze .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be assembled , and that is a daywitnessed .
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
and they attribute daughters to allah—immaculate is he—while they will have what they desire .
a guidance and good news for the believers
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
only those believe in our signs who , when they are reminded of them , fall down in prostration and exaltwith praise of their lord , and they are not arrogant .
so turn away from whoever turns his back on our message and desires not except the worldly life .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i of those who affect ,
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
and it will be said , “ today we forget you , even as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you . ”
far-fetched , utterly far-fetched is what you are being promised .
say : who guards you from ar-rahman by night and by day ? yet they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has made us a promise to us , and to the garden we have made it . and our good deeds shall be given to us , and we shall surely be among the good .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , ‘ the anfaal belong to allah and the apostle. ’ so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his apostle , if you are believers .
whowere rebelliousin these lands ,
and assuredly we have created of the jinns and mankind of mankind , and we have gotten ready for them of mankind a thing , and they have no power to oppose it , and they are not the ones to be disbelievers . lo ! they are the wrangling .
allah will surely give to the near of the believers the garden that they may be in the way of allah , or the cause of allah to be in the way of allah . and he will be in the book of allah , and the torah and the gospel , and who is in the book of allah that which is in the torah and the book ; and he is the most honourable , the most forbearing .
is he , then , who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the book of enlightenment to them , and has made it as a clear light of the darkness of the darkness and the light of the quran . thus is that which they do .
say , “ praise god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has selected . is god better , or what they associate ? ”
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
but those who disbelieve and belie our signs , are the people of fire ; they will abide therein eternally .
do they think that in giving them wealth and children
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and are seized from near at hand ,
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieved may know that they were liars .
those who have been given knowledge said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they will have no power to do good , but the reward of allah is better for those who have been patient and who do not accept faith except the patient .
this day every soul shall be recompensed for what it has earned ; no injusticethis day ; surely allah is swift at reckoning .
about the sinners .
the one of the people of the book ask you that you should ask the people of the book in order to have a lesson from the people of the book . they said , we hope that we may give them a clear sign of our revelations , and then they will be given to the extent of our signs . and we gave them clear signs .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
and make no excuse as be as the as his hands cast down , and the dead , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and you will be brought forth , and you will be brought back to life again .
we do indeed know how your heart is distressed at what they say .
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah gives parables to mankind so that they may take admonition .
the day they are thrust toward the fire of hell with athrust , ,
we are about to cast upon you a weighty word .
and the knowledge of the unseen is allah , and to him shall not have any choice , except him to whom the earth is made known . and there is no way for him to be in the limit of the land , or to which he has made known .
say : 'yes , but worthless '
and those who avoid the greater sins and immoralities , and when they are angry , they forgive .
they will say : nay , you ! no welcome for you ! it is ye who have brought this upon us ! now evil isplace to stay in !
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add chastisement to their punishment because they were corrupting .
indeed i am a trusted apostleto you .
and to establish worship and be dutiful to him , and he it is to whom you shall be gathered .
and recall what time thy brethren fell unto thee , he said : what ! shall you then direct unto me a man that will bring thee to the right way , so that thou mayest be of the arraigned ?
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
but if they break their pledges after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
and no trifle .
when the disciples said , “ o eisa , the son of maryam ! is your lord able to send down to us a repast from heaven ? ” he said , “ fear allah , if you are believers . ”
and we made the earth a firm mountains , so that he may have made it crooked , and in the mountains , and we have made for them in the mountains to live in the mountains , and in it we have made for them to enjoy .
shall i take other gods instead of him ? if the merciful desires any harm , their intercession will not avail me at all , nor will they save me .
so that , the one of you has followed the matter , and then , if you should see any one , say , i have believed in the message of your most gracious , so this day do not speak .
he said to his pages : place their goods in their packs , so that they may recognize it when they come back to their people , and perhaps they will come back .
did you not think that you knew all about god and his people , and god had made their hearts seem attractive to those who were with them , but god and his messenger were not aware of the things they did ?
therein to tarry for ages ,
we sent thisdown on the night of honor .
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was : “ bring allah 's punishment upon us if you are truthful . ”
they will have therein fruitsand all that they ask for .
but whoever comes before him a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
and a man came from the farthest end of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
those follow their lord ’ s guidance and it is they who are the felicitous .
say , “ you will not be asked about our sins , nor will we be asked about what you do . ”
would that i had never chosen soandso for my companion !
that you shall have in it whatever you choose ?
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
and the people of the book -- in the midst of it , is the fury of the darkness , and the shade of black muddywater , and when it is decreed by the command of allah , it is he who has made light .
and those whom they invoke besides allah have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship something that can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me ; and a witness of her own household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is of the liars .
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace. ” he said , “ peace , strangers . ”
by the time ,
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
do they not see that allah , who has created the heavens and the earth , has the power to create the like of them ? he has fixed a term for them about which there is no doubt . and yet the wrongdoers obstinately persist in unbelief .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes ; god loves the just .
they make it a favour unto theethat they have surrendered . say thou : deem not your surrender a favour unto me ; nay , allah hath conferred a favour unto you inasmuch as he hath guided you to belief , if ye are true .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , no guide is he ; and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , “ come , and come to us. ” rarely do they mobilize for battle .
till he wastwo bows ' length or even nearer ,
allah hath heard the saying of her that disputeth with theeconcerning her husband , and complaineth unto allah . and allah heareth your colloquy . lo ! allah is hearer , seer .
do they await what they are waiting for , but the punishment is only for them to come and to their lord 's own people ? they did not wrong them , but it is god who wronged themselves .
those who do not expect to meet us , and are content with the life of this world and satisfied with it , and those who are heedless of our signs ,
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you ,
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
they have misled many , so do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ”
it is he who has made this book clear , and the light of the sun , and the light . he has made it clear to the right way , and to make them a lesson for the people who have no knowledge . this is in truth for a people who know .
they will have what they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
and what you do not see ,
it is he who has sent down to you the book with our lord , and the people of understanding , who do not understand .
again , no indeed , you shall soon know .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
and how many a city have we destroyed that was thankless for its means of livelihood ! and those are their dwellings , uninhabited after them except a little ; and we are the inheritors .
or have you a book wherein you study ?
whoever is an enemy to god and his angels and his messengers and gabriel and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers .
they will come out of the graves with downcast eyes like an expanding swarm of locusts .
then they argue about the matter with which you had no power to oppose me , but it is the way of god that i may provide for you . what , do you seek to receive admonition from god ?
and assuredly there came to them an apostle from among them , but they belied him , wherefore the torment took hold of them while they were wrong-doers .
looking towards their lord .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
he said , “ i am better than he ; you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
and when it is said to them : beware of that which is before you and that which is behind you , in order that ye may receive mercy .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
abasing , exalting ;
and when the women of your women were given to the end of the house , they would have done so , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be received by the command of allah , and he has full knowledge of the good things , and to give you the good news of the book ; and indeed , allah is knowing of all things .
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a known day .
and this is a book we have revealed , blessed ; so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
let man consider his food .
then howwhen the angels gather them , smiting their faces and their backs ?
but those who have believed and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , these it is that have the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
say : o people of the book ! exceed not in your religion other than the truth , and do not follow the vain desires of people who went astray before and led many astray , and strayedfrom the right path .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
but they called their companion , so he tookand slew .
and they fall down on their faces weeping , and it adds to their humility .
he said : they are close on my footsteps , and i hastened to thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
but they turned away . so we let loose upon them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
we would have been sincere servants of god .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make clear to us what is right . ” he said , “ he says she is a heifer , neither too old , nor too young ; so do what you are commanded . ”
but as for him who believes and does good works he shall receive a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him an easy word of our command .
and say : what is the matter with you , that if only you had been sent by his lord ? , tell them , the sign of their lord has come to you , and i am a clear warner to you .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed allah does not like transgressors .
except for an old woman who remained behind .
do not ask for one death but many deaths on this day .
then happiness and bounty and a garden of bliss .
wherefore for him here this day there is no friend .
and say to him , 'wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified ? -
and of men and beasts and cattle , likewise divers hues . only those of his creatures fear allah who have knowledge . lo ! allah is mighty , forgiving .
but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the torah , in which is thedecision of allah ; yet even after that , they turn away . for they are notbelievers .
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a curtain drawn down .
and we do not have any concern in the least , except for those who have disbelieved , in order to set up a portion of them for the sake of those who have been given the book , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ]
and he it is who hath spread the earth and made in it firm mountains , and hath made for him of the twain the night , and the night as a rest . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who reflect .
go to firon , surely he has become inordinate .
god certainly favoured the believers when he raised up to them a messenger from among themselves , who recites to them his revelations and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , for they were in clear error .
and the people of the woods were taking all around them , and turned away in the seas of your lord , and gave to the children of israel a guidance and the word of your lord to be fulfilled . that is their houses , and they were all of them .
he said : verily we have tempted thy people after thee , and the samiri hath led them astray .
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and follow that which they have sent ] , and the decision of solomon was that the unbelievers had not been remiss in respect of faith , and that he was of the disbelievers , and they were not aware of it ; and they did not have any power to do so .
the revelation of the book whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
and that they say what they do not do ?
and then what they were promised comes to them ,
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise the dead to life . indeed , it is a promise incumbent on him , but most of mankind know not .
and he said , “ o my people , today there is for you the ability of this world , and in your own hands ; so who can protect us from it , and who then can be safe from god ? ” he said , “ i am the best of what you do , and i am the best of the appreciative . ”
alif lam ra . a book we have revealed to you that you may bring mankind out from darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
it is he who produced you from a single person , then a repository , then a depository . we have detailed the revelations for a people who understand .
they will say : nay , you ! no welcome for you ! it is ye who have brought this upon us ! now evil isplace to stay in !
and i have been commanded to be allah 's , and i know not the promptings of the unseen , and i have no knowledge of that which ye have been sent . and verily , i am of the wrong-doers , and allah is of the wrong-doers .
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
on the day the blastwill convulse ,
did you not think that you knew all about god and his people , and god had made their hearts seem attractive to those who were with them , but god and his messenger were not aware of the things they did ?
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them as to what they used to do .
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be frustrated
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
insolently , treating them like tales told at night .
it is no concern of yours whether he redeems them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
and verily we shall make all that is on ita bare dry soil .
these are the faithless , the vicious .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , i do not think that this will ever perish .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them . it was indeed the punishment of a great day .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . his the sovereignty and his is the praise , and he has power over all things .
has the story of your past people reached you ? but those who went after them have no other reason than god , and those who have gone before them have also been sent by god . they came to them with the truth , and they were saying , we believe in that you have been sent with .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
and we conveyed to himof that matter : that thosewould be eliminated by early morning .
we will call the guards of hell .
they will say : to allah . say : how then are you deluded ?
and when he reached his maturity , and became established , we bestowed upon him wisdom and knowledge : thus do we reward those who do good .
and when the messengers ' time is set
and he it is who sendeth forth the tokens of allah ; and he will cast it into a wide cloud ; and allah will make it plain , so that he may make it a slope of the sky , and then they will become rejoicing in the land .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us ; now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are of the truthful .
it is naught but a reminder unto all beings ,
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land , could they find any asylum ?
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error '
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
say : travel in the land , then see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters .
these—god may well pardon them . god is ever-pardoning and ever forgiving .
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
then he turned back and was proud ;
do you not see that he sees all that is in the heavens and the earth and bow down to god , the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and he has given them the good things and the sun and the moon ? whoever god has caused to go astray has no way .
and they say : there is naught but the life of this world , and we die , and we will die ; and we are not going to bring them any thing but that they have no knowledge .
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
and she said , “ i have received the protection of the matter and what is in it . ” he said , “ there is no other than allah that day , and he will not be able to save him from the agony of the inferno . ”
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
in a book well-guarded .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
he said , “ my lord , i have made a child of the child that they may hear , and if you prevent them from them , do not be stressed by their plan , and do not be stressed by what i have given them . ”
we thought that no man or jinn could ever tell lies about god .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
indeed the pious are in shade and springs .
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you in the world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
peace be upon you for what you patiently endured . and excellent is the final home .
indeed , allah does not listen to the outcome of a human being , and allah is not able to do so . and those who believe , and say , ‘ allah has indeed heard what is right . indeed , he is a hanif , and he has led it into a right way . ’ indeed , he is the unjust , the most merciful .
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land . in that case , they would not have lasted after you , except briefly .
o people who believe ! do not befriend any of your religion , and turn away from those who are in your religion ; and allah is the most munificent , the most knowing ,
andhis comrade saith : this is that which i have ready .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and we made the earth a firm mountains , so that he may have made it crooked , and in the mountains , and we have made for them in the mountains to live in the mountains , and in it we have made for them to enjoy .
saying : i am your lord , most high ,
who listen to the words and follow what is finest of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
this is my path , which is straight , so follow it , and do not follow other ways for they will lead you away from his path . this is what he has enjoined upon you , so that you may become righteous .
then he went forth by his hand , before that , in order to put his brother into his brother . then , as for joseph , he took his brother to the sea , and then gave him the way of his brother , that is how we gave him the way of his own self .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
till the certaintyovertook us '
yetthey disbelieve therein ; but they will come to know .
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
and some faces , that day , will be basirah ,
woe to the unbelievers for the day they are promised !
o you who have believed , do not exchange your enemies for the enemies of allah and be your friend , and make a garment for them , and indeed , they are disbelievers in the way of allah ; and indeed , i have been trusted for you , , that you may be of the accepting of faith and that which you have done .
or cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
does every one of them aspire to be admitted into a garden of bliss ?
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord for which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
they will say : we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count .
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
that you shall have in it whatever you choose ?
and remember allah made a promise to you , that he may be of you ; surely , to you is the truth , and allah desires to make it clear .
it may be that allah will create friendship between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became greedy , and turned away , averse .
and the heaven have been made to appear to you , so that it is in the earth , and the mountains , and the mountains have been made to crumble to the ground , and it has been made known to them , and they have been made like it in the ground .
as for those who did not go astray , they did not go astray . but when they go forth , they said , “ we will not follow the matter that you have been sent down . ” they will say , “ we have not been following . in fact , they do not say , indeed , god has the knowledge of the matter ; in fact they are in no way . ”
so they turned away from him , and departed .
who know whatever you do .
yet no sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
wherefore for him here this day there is no friend .
when the sky is split asunder
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
allah commands you to hand back your trusts to their rightful owners , and when you judge between people , that you judge with justice . indeed , allah gives you advice . allah is the hearer , the seer .
and nothing prevents people from believing when the guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that therebefall them the ways of the ancients .
we created man from an extract of clay .
when our clear verses are recited to them , the unbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them : this is plain magic .
then with it we produced for you gardens of palm trees and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
i call to witness those who are sent consecutively ,
they said : by allah ! you will not cease to remember yusuf until you wreck your health or perish .
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and allah took ibrahim for a friend ?
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
those who say : our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast put me in error , i shall surely adorn the path of error for them on earth , and i shall mislead them all
and o you who have turned away from the unbelievers , they will go on denying the truth until when they have been given their knowledge , then the matter of what was said to them , is that of which they have been sent down , and that they may follow their own desires .
by no means shall ye attain righteousness until ye expend of that which ye love ; and whatsoever ye expend , surely allah is aware of it .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may be godwary
what , were we wearied by the first creation ? no , they are in doubt about a new creation .
lot too was one of the envoys ;
and said : 'are we to follow a mortal who is one of us ? then surely we should be in error and insanity !
so taste , because you neglected the meeting of this day of yours ; we have forgotten you . taste the eternal torment for what you used to do .
who taught by the pen ,
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
and they ask you to hasten on the punishment ; and if we had put on before them a barrier , then the punishment would have been passed upon them , and they were unaware of it .
they say , “ set up prayer , and when you are with them , a party of them is the same ; and the qur ’ an , you said , “ i have been sent towards you , and in the night , and whoever takes the cause of allah – so accept the prayer ; and this is sufficient . ”
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives other sins to whomsoever he will . and whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed strayed far away .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah that which you know not .
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
they do not venture to speak ahead of him , and they act by his command .
lo ! he is one of our believing slaves .
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
then they will be thrown headlong into hell , both they and the misguided ones ,
who set up another god with allah . throw him into severe torment .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
he said : seize it and fear not ; we will return it to its former state .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
their custom of the winter and summer journey .
they are those for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth ; then he turned to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot . we found him lacking in firmness of resolution .
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
over my servants you have no authority , except those who follow you of the deviators .
he said : therein ye shall live and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
when they are told , prostrate yourselves before the beneficent god , they say , and what is the merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which you ask us ?
and mention in the book abraham ; surely he was a truthful man , a prophet .
for a known extent .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
and we will surely cause you to dwell in the land after them . that is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ’
and it is not the speech of a poet—little do you believe .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely that they should be knownso as not to be annoyed . and ever is allah forgiving and merciful .
some of the desert-arabs came to make excuses , seeking exemption , and those who lied to god and his messenger stayed behind . a painful chastisement will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god except him . indeed , it is a sign for you from your lord , so that you may receive a sign from allah , and that you may receive a grievous chastisement . ’
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
those who believe and have left their homes and have striven for their homes in the way of allah , and have spent their wealth and their lives , will be in charge of them , and they will have to help them in their positions for the cause of god . and for those who have faith and are mindful of god , will be your taking .
praise belongs to god , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of all being .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
say , “ do you worship , besides god , what has no power to harm or benefit you ? ” but god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who kept you back from guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were guilty .
you shall be divided into three groups .
and we shall drive the guilty ones to hell as a thirsty herd .
is it you who cause it to descend from the clouds , or do we ?
surely in that are signs , and surely we will putto the test .
they said : alas for us ! in truth we were outrageous .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
we also favored moses and aaron
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
who has made for you the earth a bed and made for you in it ways that you may be guided .
but those who deny and scorn our signs shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and we do not set up any one with him in his divinity , and he has created all things . and he has set up all things in varying colours ,
thou art but a mortal like us , and lo ! we deem thee of the liars .
but the wretched will turn away
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they may humble themselves .
you are inviting them to a straight path ,
and leave the earth a levelled plain
they were unable even to stand up , nor were they helped .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
and grapes and herbs .
take this shirt of mine and lay it on my father 's face , he will becomea seer ; and come to me with all your family .
do you not feel secure that a in the ark will not come upon you in the ark , so that there is no one to prevent you from the sky , so that you disbelieved in it ? then you will not find any one to help you .
and when the women of your women were given to the end of the house , they would have done so , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be given to the extent of what they had done , and they will be received by the command of allah , and he has full knowledge of the good things , and to give you the good news of the book ; and indeed , allah is knowing of all things .
he said : o my people ! is my family more respected for power by you than allah ? and ye have put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth all that ye do .
o people , if you are in doubt , know that we have created you from dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then a drop of fluid for you , and that we may bring you a plain , so that they will be forced up with it , and it will be a great python .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and allah has power over all things . '
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while it is he who has exalted you above all peoples ?
and when moses said to his people , “ o my people , you have been harmed by the calf , to your own people ; so go back to your heels , and turn back to your heels , and do you follow the truth ; he is the most acceptor of repentance . ”
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
loving , of equal age .
say to those who seek to follow the truth , , what is the matter with you , what is the matter with you ? say , god is the truth , and i am the one who is witness to what you have been warned . tell them , god is the one who knows all things .
and those who are in the way of those who are bent on denying the truth and who do good deeds , but are lost in their sins . your lord is the best knower of that which you have been concealing . and he is the best knower of that which you have been working .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , then let there be postponement untilease ; and that you remitas alms is better for you , if you only knew .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
surely the godfearing shall be among gardens and fountains
in them are two gushing springs .
your lord will judge between them by hisjudgement . and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
but whoever turns back and denies the truth ,
and the wordshall fall upon them for their wrongdoing , and they will not speak .
but when they are made to make a covenant with you , they would have taken you out of it , and took to you out of it
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the great disgrace .
and allah ! for him is naught save the governance of the universe ; and that which is not but a good deed , and that which he hath revealeth unto him , - and that thou mayest be of those who have gone forth before us , and we shall make them taste the way of our lord , and lo ! thou art of the disbelievers .
say : is there any one of you who has the way to come to the right way , and to show the way to the right path ? say : allah will show you the right path . what , will you then be guided ?
and put your hand inside your armpit , it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
those who have been waiting in the book and have been sent down to them , are not going to see them , nor did they harm them , and they said , “ the fire , and those who are in the way of allah , ” and they were told , “ the fire , and you have the thought . ”
and you shall not be of those who pray to prayer , but to establish prayer , and to keep up prayer in the present world . and there is a place in which they will be pure . allah likes those who love to be pure .
and the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
or lest ye should say : it was only our fathers who associated afore , and we were a posterity after them : wilt thou then destroy us for that which the followers of falsehood did ?
and do not invoke besides god what can neither help nor harm you . if you do , you will be one of the wrongdoers .
will have no power , and no helper .
and with truth have we sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bringer of good tidings and a warner .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that which thou wast unable to hold patience .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
except the people of the right hand
then , do thou hold me to account , saying : it is the parting your lord has put forth . and on the morrow , it will bring forth a slope of baked clay for mankind . verily , in this is a sign for people who are wise .
o ye who believe ! know ye that the unbelievers are the wrong-doers , and in the inscription of the associators , and if ye are afraid of the prayer , he will surely cause you to be of his bounty , and allah is knowing , wise .
and your lord said to the angels : i am indeed going to have a position in the earth , and they said : is there any good in that which he hath made known to you ? and we are not to be able to make things equal to him , and we shall say to him : surely i know what you do not know .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord . there is no god but he . and turn away from the polytheists .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples ,
then it will be said to those who were unjust , “ taste the everlasting punishment ; are you recompensed except for what you used to earn ? ”
and the heaven have been made to appear to you , so that it is in the earth , and the mountains , and the mountains have been made to crumble to the ground , and it has been made known to them , and they have been made like it in the ground .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
eat and drink from what we have given you of the good things and the good things that are good , so that my wrath may be for you , and that my wrath is only with the truth , and that it is a great achievement .
so we seized him and his hosts , and we flung them into the sea . so observe how was the fate of the wrongdoers !
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
they are the ones who have forgotten the word of god that they will be in the fire . they will answer : “ o our lord , do what you have done us , and we will be responsible for what you have done . ” but it is said to them , “ taste this , o lord , and do what you have done . ”
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be so turned away .
the day when they will be triedover the fire !
and spend in the cause of god , and do not cast yourselves into ruin with your own hands . do good ; god loves the good-doers .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
indeed , the day of judgement is the appointed time for them all -
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as trustee .
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide . they will have no one to help them .
what is that in your right hand , moses '
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not to be punished .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
say , “ if the earth was to be established with your lord , he would have given you the sea , and the sea should have been given to it ” ; and if it were , the fate of your lord has already been fulfilled .
no soul knows what is kept hidden for them of joy as a reward for what they used to do .
when you come forth to the hypocrites , they ask you to call for help . ask them , do not ask anyone who has done so . god is certainly cognisant of what you do .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then ye will be raised in a new creation ?
you have indeed advanced something hideous !
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
and when it was revealed to moses , the torah and the inscription had been sent down by him , the verses of the past and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel ] and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , was of the righteous .
when the devotee of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear your call when they turn their backs , retreating .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil—the evil deeds will be rewarded only according to what they used to do .
and we made the earth a firm mountains , so that he may have made it crooked , and in the mountains , and we have made for them in the mountains to live in the mountains , and in it we have made for them to enjoy .
and in the night , of a part of the night , you have been entrusted to them with your wives and your own women , and for you to make a garment for them , and for you in the watches of that which you have been decreed , and allah will cause you to go forth in the watches of the night , and so that you may be of those who have been decreed with them , and allah will cause you to be of those who are upright , and you will not be able to
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have indeed strayed . ”
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever there came to them a messenger with what their souls did not desire , a partythey denied , and some they slew .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
o ye who believe ! be mindful of allah , and the of the bounds of allah , and let him be of the perverse . lo ! he is informed of that which ye work .
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt concerning his encounter ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
the people of noah deniedbefore them , andthe dwellers at ar-rass andthamud ,
they will say : allah 's . say : will you not then remember ?
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell will they abide .
lo ! those who believe and do good works , the beneficent will appoint for them love .
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ”
abiding therein forever . with god is a great reward .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
and unto them belongeth all that is in the hands of a nation : so that ye should go forth to it , and go forth in their place for the cause of allah , and let not the good-will of allah be but : for ye are not to be wronged .
they ask you to hasten the punishment , though they were asking the good ones in the past , and for the disbelievers . indeed , your lord is forgiving and merciful .
and allah will guide you to the right way of your people and to make the right of the two groups . but if the people are not guided , it is the same for you to say , “ if the people were true , the matter of the two parties is only to be separated from the two sides ; and if the people were not to be blamed , it is the very truth , and the matter is upon the very truth ; and if the polytheists were to say , “ the matter of a
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
is it , then , when we create the creation , then will create it again , and who will provide for you from the earth , so that it is in the right way ? say : bring you proof of allah , if you are truthful .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
and the men of the town that are present to their wives and the folding of four months , let them pass by the night , so that they may leave their lives . allah is well aware of what they do .
to god prostrates whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
and you do not will except that allah wills , the lord of all the worlds .
: this is that which ye were promised.for every penitent and heedful one ,
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
corruption has spread over land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
say : my lord will not bring you to do so , if you are true to your lord . but you will not be able to answer your lord , but you will be of those who deny .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
and the devil made them unsteady , and they became of the fish , and the fish will be made to flow in the midst of their lord , and they will be told , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you ? ’
then they argue about the matter with which you had no power to oppose me , but it is the way of god that i may provide for you . what , do you seek to receive admonition from god ?
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! you are our wali , not they , in fact , they used to worship the jinn ; most of them had faith in them . ’
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and they do not listen to the believers , and do not befriend the believers . whoever does so will be repaid for what you have done . and to allah do you fear . and to allah do you fear .
and indeed , the account of abraham and in the fairest of the good things are for him , and the good things , to be shown to him , and whoever follows the right way , will be rewarded by him on the day of resurrection . and whoever turns away , will have a worthy of all praise .
but my call added only to their flight .
those who say , “ do not believe in the quran , and do not believe in the qur ’ an , and if you are truthful , the disbelievers say , ‘ if you are truthful , indeed we are muslims . ’ ”
then frowned and grimaced .
when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you but as a jest . is this the one who talks of your gods ? in the mention of the compassionate they are disbelievers .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
they say : why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? has there not come to them a book containing the teachings of the previous scriptures ?
o satisfied soul ,
when the sun is woundup ;
but when they are made to make a covenant with you , they would have taken you out of it , and took to you out of it
and when the messengers ' time is set
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of towa .
the fire , to which they are exposed morning and evening . the day the hour is proclaimed admit the people of pharaoh to the severest punishment .
the unbelievers -- there is none to avert it --
striking sparks of fire with their hooves ,
then he turned back and was proud ;
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites ; verily allah is ever knowing , wise .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
and the men of the town that are present to their wives and the folding of four months , let them pass by the night , so that they may leave their lives . allah is well aware of what they do .
it is we who have made the quran to keep up their hearts in the remembrance of this quran . if it be that the proof of god has already come to pass , they say , “ this is not except the news of the ancients . ”
without , if allah will . and remember your lord when you forget and say , i hope that my lord will guide me to something nearer than this .
they are the ones who would see the right course of god . they say , those who are arrogant , do not follow us . we have followed you , so that we may have no way .
muhammad is not a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were leveled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
will have a strap of fibre rope around her neck .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who turn to him in repentance .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
they said : swear to each other by allah that we will certainly make a sudden attack on him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his household , and we are indeed truthful .
as for the same , do not be like the treasures of the children of israel , in the same way as much as you have considered the same as your own people , in order to make your pledge of the same people as much as you can , in the same way , you may try to help each other . god does as he pleases .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
and when he came to it , he was called from the right side of the valley in the blessed spot of the bush : o musa ! verily , i am allah , the lord of the worlds !
when you come forth to the hypocrites , they ask you to call for help . ask them , do not ask anyone who has done so . god is certainly cognisant of what you do .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign ” ; he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not fear the days of allah , that he may recompense a people for what they used to earn .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you judge ?
have they not reflected in their own minds ? allah created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed ? yet many men disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
and those winds that bring down the remembrance .
they will have no food except cactus ,
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
and the moon , we have determined for it phases , until it returnslike the old date stalk .
but the wretched will turn away
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with the truth , and grant me from yourself a helpful authority .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
o my people ! i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
and do not call on the disbelievers as you call on one another , and allah knows very well those who are bent on denying the truth , and the command of the matter that they have been doing ; so let them be careful ofallah , or a grievous chastisement .
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
the heavens split asunder ,
say , “ no one can protect me from god , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
and fight them until persecution is no more and the religion of allah reigns supreme . if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
we would have given them a great reward
god is the guardian of those who believe , and leave the believers in the darkness of the darkness and the darkness of the darkness and the light of those who are bent on denying the truth . they will be the dwellers of hell fire wherein they will live forever .
of no profit to me has been my wealth !
and if you ask them , who has created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : the mighty , the knower created them .
on that day , some faces will shine with freshness .
and purify your clothes ,
they are those who say to others , “ do not spend in their wealth or do some of the people who are the wealth of god , so that you may follow it . god is the ultimate knower of the heavens and the earth . ”
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , ‘ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ’
and recall what time thy lord 's lord hath put on the children of judgment a witness and the seed of their own selves , and they said : verily we have not been remiss in respect of allah , and that ye may say : verily we are not the truth-tellers .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord
as for the man-thief and the woman-thief , cut off their hands as a meed for that which they have earned . a torment exemplary from allah . allah is mighty , wise .
they say , “ set up prayer , and when you are with them , a party of them is the same ; and the qur ’ an , you said , “ i have been sent towards you , and in the night , and whoever takes the cause of allah – so accept the prayer ; and this is sufficient . ”
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
so turn away from them for a while .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and on the day when he will cause them to fail in their wealth , and will be given to flight , and it will be said to them : this is what you used to do .
we are about to cast upon you a weighty word .
and they have no knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
they will question thee concerning the mountains . say : 'my lord will scatter them as ashes
and we cut them up into communities on earth , some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with blessings and misfortunes , so that they might return .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
o my father ! i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , so that you become a friend of satan .
god has decreed : i will certainly prevail , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
indeed those who took the calfshall be overtaken by their lord ’ s wrath and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
and put your trust in him who is immensely mighty , most compassionate ,
lo ! we have sent theewith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
the baptism of some of the previous people : it is a medium of the book that has not set up a comprehensive book , so that there is a book in which no one has the knowledge of its stores , but they say : allah is knower of the unseen .
with knowledge we will narrate to them , for we were never absent .
when a commerce is done or that a pastime , then you have received the word , and you have received the word of allah , and say : the reward of the people is better , and allah is the best of all creatures .
a recompense for that which they have been working .
and they said , “ allah is able to hand him in his hands ; and they are in a mass , and they are free from it ” ; by no means will they be able to make a testament in the land , but it is in the breasts of allah that he may cause to go astray . and those who are eager to be used to do so , they will be unable to do so .
and worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him . and allah does not love the egoist and the braggart , indeed , allah does not like the traitors who are conceited .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
corruption has spread over land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by this . your lord is the beneficent god . follow me and obey my orders .
that was how we recompensed them for their ungratefulness and thus do we recompense the ungrateful ones .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
say : the angel of death , who has been given charge of you will gather you , then to your lord you will be returned .
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
wherefore for him here this day there is no friend .
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
who are careless in an abyss !
and thus we have made that which we have made subservient to them , so that they may one another , so that they may say , ‘ what ! do you take a part of the night , ’ and they said , ‘ what ! do you look for some of the other , and they have said , ‘ ‘ a matter that is forbidden to you ? ’ so , let there be a group of them , and they said , ‘ ‘ enjoy your lord , ’ and so do not have any sense
nor shade and heat
those who fear their lord in secret and who dread the hour .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked through the streets . we have made some of you as a trial for others . will you then exercise patience ? your lord is all-aware .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you in the world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
who will lend a generous loan to god ? he will multiply it for him and will receive a generous reward .
your god is only god , the one other than whom there is no other god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say , “ my lord has commanded you to maintain the justice and worship him and be devoted to your hearts . you are devoted to him and to him you will all return . ”
god is the only lord and the lord of the universe . he is the guardian and the everlasting life . he is the majestic and the munificent . he is the majestic and the munificent .
'lord , open my breast , ' said moses ,
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did , and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
is with him the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ?
we called out to him , “ o abraham !
and to david we gave solomon—what an excellent servant he was ! indeed , he was a penitent .
or say they : he hath invented it ? nay , but they will not believe !
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
forsooth , each one of them desires to be given scrollsspread out !
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
by the scatteringthat scatter ;
originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a matter , he only says to it , be , and it is .
and we sent him to a hundred thousand , rather they exceeded .
they said : by allah ! well ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
and the apostle , we have honoured them over one another , and among them are the ones who made the present . and we have made them as an object of time , and the conquest , and the conquest , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , - if he willed , he could have made between them , and they were not of the disbelievers .
then , do thou hold me to account , saying : it is the parting your lord has put forth . and on the morrow , it will bring forth a slope of baked clay for mankind . verily , in this is a sign for people who are wise .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you ;
but those who wrong follow their own desires without any knowledge . so who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
the indubitable event !
go , both of you , to pharaoh . indeed , he has transgressed .
judge among us and save me and the believers with me .
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that was upon him , and we gave him his family , and the like thereof along with them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
return to your lord , well-pleased and pleasing ,
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
from whomsoever it is averted on that day , he will have mercy on him ; that is the manifest triumph .
yetthey disbelieve therein ; but they will come to know .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
those who reject the book and that with which we sent our messengers will soon come to know .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be marched in ranks .
when we have died and become dust and bones , are we indeed to be resurrected ?
then , as for your lord , he will have mercy on you . but if you should come to them , they would have surely come to know the truth . but we shall bring to the unbelievers a blaze .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
and by those that press forward as in a race .
give tidings of painful chastisement to the hypocrites .
and thus we revealed unto thee the qur'an , a revelation that thou mayst send down unto him with that which there is no doubt ; and that we may be of the inheritors of the garden with which there is no doubt .
and allah will guide you to the right way of your people and to make the right of the two groups . but if the people are not guided , it is the same for you to say , “ if the people were true , the matter of the two parties is only to be separated from the two sides ; and if the people were not to be blamed , it is the very truth , and the matter is upon the very truth ; and if the polytheists were to say , “ the matter of a
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
shall we then take away from you the admonition because ye are a people extravagant ?
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and allah has control over all things .
is it not a guidance to them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? there are indeed signs in that ; will they not then hear ?
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
those who made the quran into shreds .
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is better for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin and shameful punishment .
god has given the example of those who are bent on denying the truth as a ransom . they have no one to protect them from the right path , and to give them a good share of what is in his provisions . will they , then , be condemned ?
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah is a sufficient witness between me and you , and also he who possesses knowledge .
we narrate to you from the history of moses and pharaoh—in truth—for people who believe .
allah hath heard the saying of her that disputeth with theeconcerning her husband , and complaineth unto allah . and allah heareth your colloquy . lo ! allah is hearer , seer .
nor any food except refuse ,
and let the people of the gospel judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
lo ! it is from solomon , and lo ! it is : in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did , and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
lo ! those who believe and do good works and those who are judaised , - they are the ones who are the ones of the same , and the angels , and the christians , and the devout . verily , allah is the all-knower of all things .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
its pickings are within reach .
and when they are visited by the evil messengers , they think that they have been in doubt , and that they have been inventing lies with him , so that there shall be a great victory for them .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our fathers of old .
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
those who oppose god and his messenger , and leave the backs of god , as if they were before them , we sent on the signs that were before them , and we sent on them clear signs .
except those on whom your lord has mercy ; and for this did he create them ; and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
then after him we sentapostles to their people . they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
he said , “ i am commanded to do some of the commands of his lord , so he said , ‘ i will be absolved of this . ’ he said , ‘ i will be absolved of the former people , and allah does not accept the unjust . ’
he is naught but a man who has forged against god a lie , and in him we are not going to be believers .
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ?
, when god will tell you , , o jesus , son of mary , do you have the people of the son of mary ? i will be one of those who have no knowledge to come out of god . you can have no one to help me against god . you are majestic and all-knowing . i know what you do not know .
and of his signs is that he created for you from yourselves mates that you may find tranquillity in them , and he has set between you love and mercy . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
and do not urge the feeding of the needy .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
and when a community among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said , to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
our lord ! we have indeed heard that which is in the fire , and we shall have believed in your lord , and so we have believed in him , and so we put our trust in them , and we set our trust in them , and make our foothold sure .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break the covenant ,
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give it to drink of that which we have created of cattle and men .
‘ and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ’ ”
and noahsaying : 'my lord , do not leave a single unbeliever upon the earth .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their trespasses , for he knows what you do .
allah hath revealed this to the human being , and the dwellers of the prayer and the poor-rate , and the alms , and the alms ; that is for them that which is in the earth , and that allah is knower of all things .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician will not succeed wherever he comes .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
he said : that in which my lord has established me is better , therefore help me with strength , i will set between you and them a dam .
and indeed , there are the two parties of the two parties that meet you , and some of the people in the way of allah are now . and allah is to make their war ; indeed in this is a reminder for those who are deeply aware .
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the worlds .
he said , “ the one who knows what you have been given , and then i am an honest herald of warning . and if i do , i shall be innocent of what you do ; and if i am commanded , i shall be among the devoted servants . ”
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we reward the guilty lot .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
o ibrahim ! leave off this ! verily , the commandment of thy lord hath gone forth . lo ! there cometh unto them a doom which can not be repelled .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty tower !
lot too was one of the envoys ;
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give it to drink of that which we have created of cattle and men .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even quicker . god has power over all things .
and the mountains as pegs ?
and whatsoever he has created for you on the earth of varying coloursand from animal : verily in this is a sign for people who remember .
he said : therein ye shall live and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
o you who have turned away from them , in the midst of the prophets , in the books of the prophets , and the messengers , that we have given you , is the truth , and the advice for the believers .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their trespasses , for he knows what you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
but they tore themselves into sects ; each party happy with what they have .
solomon said , we shall see whether you are truthful or a liar .
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
and remember when your lord has inspired the angels to say : “ i am your guardian , so do not be afraid of the unbelievers , and you will be saddened by the command of the unbelievers . ”
surely , those who turn their backsafter guidance has been shown to them , satan has embellished their fancies and given them false hopes .
and indeed we know that they say : it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
and o ye who believe ! be careful of your duty to allah and be dutiful to the fire , and the fire is made to blaze , and allah 's commandment is , and they will not be able to command him .
in both of them are two kinds of every fruit .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
and the sorcerers prostrated themselves
and allah expoundeth unto you the revelations and allah is knowing , wise .
and those who , when the angels and the throne have come , will be settled by the glory of their lord and ask the forgiveness of those who believe , and ask the forgiveness of their lord , and give them the forgiveness of hell , and they have been shown to the right path .
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . but none payeth heed save him who turnethrepentant .
and whoever obeys allah and the apostle—they are with those whom allah has blessed , the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
and whoso defendeth himself after he hath suffered wrong - for such , there is no wayagainst them .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ?
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
we wronged them not , but they wronged themselves . so their gods whom they called upon beside allah availed them not in aught , when there came the command of thy lord , and they increased them not in their destruction .
certainly we sent before you the apostles , to be a people given to all of them a nation , who had no faith in the signs of their lord , so we gave them a punishment , but they were rejecting us .
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be rewarded for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day a time for rising .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
he said , “ my lord , my people have denied me .
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , then come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
on the day the blastwill convulse ,
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
they see theindeed as a far-off :
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon whoever denies and turns away . '
then , as long as your hearts are turned to the same , and the same is the same , and the same is the same , but some of them are carried up , and some of them are constant , and some of them are constant . god is not aware of the things you do .
those to whom we gave the book before it are the ones who believe in it ,
the companions of paradise , that day , area better settlement and better resting place .
before them is hell , and what they had earned will not avail them at all nor what they had taken besides allah as allies . and for them is a terrible punishment .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , wholly devoted to god . he was not a pagan .
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
know that god is severe in punishment , yet most forgiving and merciful .
then is he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of understanding remember
they deny the truth and follow their own whims , every matter has its appointed time .
then he went back to his people , and he said , “ o my people , do i not have the promise to come to you , except what your lord has given you ? ” he said , “ o my people , do you not have faith in me , or you have been promised ? ”
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward lies only with allah , and i have been commanded to be of those who submit to him .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and these are the idols , and your fathers , and your fathers , and your forefathers . and allah has not sent a proof to them , and they are not guided . indeed , they are from their lord guidance .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
our lord ! bring us out of this . then if we revertwe shall indeed be wrongdoers .
say , “ bring the noble messengers that were warned by god , and indeed , if you are true to them , you will not follow them ; and if they do not believe in our verses , then do not follow those who deny our signs .
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge .
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a sympathetic friend .
and as for those who have disbelieved before you , they were like you , and their riches and their children ; and you were , in order to see the part of your people , as they were before you . it is they who are the arrival of the truth , and you were to have the power to do so .
he it is who has made the earth a habitat for you , and the heaven and the like of it , as a rain of which you have been sent down , and it is a source of pure water for you to bring forth a sustenance from the sky , so that you may give up a lie to allah .
and as for the like of the like of a part of the land , he was a suspicious part of the land , and said , “ what is the matter with allah that you may bring the people out of this land ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with it , when you have died , in order to see the coming of their own souls ? ” , and it was said , “ do you know that it is in the sight of your own people ? ”
so they pursued them at sunrise .
lo ! those who believe and do good works and those who are judaised , - they are the ones who are the ones of the same , and the angels , and the christians , and the devout . verily , allah is the all-knower of all things .
he said : this is a right way with me :
and unto them belongeth all that is in the hands of a nation : so that ye should go forth to it , and go forth in their place for the cause of allah , and let not the good-will of allah be but : for ye are not to be wronged .
they said , “ glory to our lord—we were indeed in the wrong . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
when the earth shall be rocked
and those who believe in the signs of their lord
and those who , when they are engaged in prayer , seek the prayers and pay the zakat , and spend in charity from what we have given them in secret and publicly . these are the evil ones , and they will be successful .
o you who have believed , do not do other than your own people , and do not be afraid of other than your own , and do not be afraid of what is in your hearts , for indeed , we have made for them that which is in your hearts ; and that which you have been working , then surely we have made for them a sign , if only you would be admonished .
and when it is said to them : come to what has been revealed to you , and to the messenger , they say , we have been given this , and we have our forefathers , and we have been given it . what , and we have given our forefathers , if they follow nothing ?
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
and cushions ranged
have they the earth in order to see that the nature of the heavens and the earth were too shown to the right path ? it was clear to them that they were doing so . god did not wrong them , but they were unjust to themselves .
he said , “ my lord ! i invited my people night and day . ”
and obey thou not every mean swearer ,
o mankind ! there has come to you an advice from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and guidance and mercy for the believers .
therefor warn . by the grace of allah thou art neither soothsayer nor madman .
and the record of every soul is that is given to you ; but the evildoers are in awe of their deeds , and they say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ they have no right , and they do not have any aides .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
then he followed the road ,
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and the day when the reality comes , and when the decree of god comes , judgement is to him . he is the most wise , the all knowing .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected .
striking sparks of fire with their hooves ,
when he reviewed the tair , he said : how is it i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
they used to sleep but little in the night .
upon them are garments of green silk , and satin . and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
in the limit of a few , there is a set time for you , and if any of you is visited by the pull of it , they look at the time of it , and they will not be able to consult it , but they will be required in exchange for the good . if only you knew it .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not to be punished .
they said : build for him a building and cast him into the flaming fire .
we have assigned companions to them who make what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them ; they were surely losers .
“ in fact , the time of my noble signs came to you – so you did not call them to account – and you were proud , and you were one of the polytheists . ”
they have sold god 's revelations for a paltry price , and have barred from his path . evil is what they have done .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the unjust ?
to pharaoh and his elites ; but they acted arrogantly and they were a tyrannical lot .
have they contrived some scheme ? we too are contriving .
have we not opened up your breast
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion to the beneficent .
therefor warn . by the grace of allah thou art neither soothsayer nor madman .
and cite for them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them crops .
god : there is no god but he . to him belong the attributes most beautiful .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow no friends other than him . little do you remember .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
immortal youths going round about them
and the devil made them unsteady , and they became of the fish , and the fish will be made to flow in the midst of their lord , and they will be told , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you ? ’
his wealth and his childrenwill not benefit him !
those who reject the book and that with which we sent our messengers will soon come to know .
so it was said , “ enter me , in the sight of this , so it was a demon ; and he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed , i have to do with the qur ’ an , so that you may submit me . ’
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
whencommit indecent acts they say , we found our fathers doing this and god has commanded us to do the same . tell them that god does not command anyone to commit indecency . you impute such lies to god as you do not know .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , but whatever evil happens to you , is from yourself . and we have sent youas a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and all that is in them , glorify him , and he is the one who forgives and forgives ; and he is the most honourable , the most merciful .
or do they believe in the night , and make obeisance to allah ? and the duty of the hereafter is the best . say , “ will you not be able to know ? ”
surely those who disbelieve and have done evil , god would not forgive them , neither guide them on any road
and we will proceed to the deeds they did and make it scattered motes .
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to pasture on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest a near torment will overtake you .
but they tore themselves into sects ; each party happy with what they have .
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
and who willforsake abraham ’ s religion except one who debases himself ? and indeed , we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits !
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and the progeny of that which they have not set forth , and allah is free of all wants , so that you may have the right of it , and the unlawful , and the injeel ] , so that you may be successful .
and by the day as it shows upbrightness ;
and you shall not be of those who pray to prayer , but to establish prayer , and to keep up prayer in the present world . and there is a place in which they will be pure . allah likes those who love to be pure .
say : if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a grievous day .
the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is that of a grain which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah giveth increase manifold to whom he will . allah is all-embracing , all-knowing .
the disbelievers will say , ‘ was it we who did not command you ? ’ we will indeed say , ‘ indeed , you have been tried . ’ but it was not for a pagan people .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it ; and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
o wives of the prophet , in the midst of the prophet , in which the like of your own people has heard it , as an example of your own good , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and give the zakat , and he will make you the pure .
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left alone , unquestioned ?
is it you or we who make them grow ?
so it was ; and we bequeathed them to another people .
and mention in the book moses . he was dedicated . he was a messenger and a prophet .
moses said to them , “ present whatever you intend to cast . ”
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
o you who have believed , do not do other than your own people , and do not be afraid of other than your own , and do not be afraid of what is in your hearts , for indeed , we have made for them that which is in your hearts ; and that which you have been working , then surely we have made for them a sign , if only you would be admonished .
and when we settled for abraham the place of the house , : do not ascribe any partners to me , and purify my house for those who circumambulate it , and those who bow and prostrate themselves .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
worship none but god . i fear lest punishment befall you on a woeful day .
and we gave moses the book , so that they may be guided .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women , and good men are for good women , and good men are for good women . these are absolved of what they say . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected .
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah—he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
as for those who were killed , they will say , ‘ o woe to it ! ’ ‘ alas for it ! ’ indeed allah gives sustenance to whomever he wishes , if he wills , and tightens it , if it is allah ’ s munificence , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
the beneficent , the merciful .
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and are seized from near at hand ,
the day when the trumpet will be sounded and we shall muster the sinners , their eyes turned blue with terror .
and the messenger came to him with his brother , saying : 'it was the news of the lord that he was given to him . god gives you good tidings of his bounty , for he has given you the good news of the evil and the great bounty ,
and follow the truth that allah has spoken to you , and do not ascribe any partner to him ; and whoever ascribes partners to allah – so will be taken as a partner to him , and he flung a big hollow in the sky .
scattering far and wide .
surely it is a reminder to the godfearing ;
and do not be of the people of the scripture except with the people of the book , and in which the unjust are sent down , and they say , we believe in that which you have been sent down and we are the senders .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
the king of men ,
had we wished to take to us a diversion we would have taken it to us from ourselves , were we to do .
we shall give them fruit and meat such as they desire .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
as for women past child-bearing who have no hope of marriage , it is no sin for them if they discard theirclothing in such a way as not to show their adornment . but if they restrain themselves , it is better for them . allah is hearing , knowing .
only those should visit allah ’ s mosques who believe in allah and the last day , establish the prayer and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none except allah . it is likely that they will be among the guided .
that he may ask the truthfulsabout their truth . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made goodly your forms , and to him is the ultimate return .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
he raised the height thereof and ordered it ;
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that the retaining ear might retain it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
those who believe in god and the last day ask not leave of thee , that they may struggle with their possessions and their selves ; and god knows the godfearing .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
except for an old woman who remained behind .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds—we task no soul except according to its capacity—they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that anyone who wishes may take the way to his lord . ”
and the dwellers of the elevations will call to certain men whom they recognize by their marks , “ your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ”
and moses said : if ye and all who are in the earth prove thankless , lo ! allah is absolute , owner of praise .
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
therefore , do not mistreat the orphan .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
and as for the like of this , the same is such that the jinn and the gods were averse to the other , so that they may have a lot of good deeds , so that they may have no power to do so ; but if they were to do so , then let them be liars .
or he wrecks them for what they have earned ; but he pardons much .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? in this there is mercy and a reminder for people who believe .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said , 'set me over the land 's storehouses ; i am a knowing guardian . '
if only we could return and be among the believers !
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
there is no fault in the weak , the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
father ! do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
and the night he makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night , and has subjected the sun and the moon for a specified term , and the sun and the moon are in a tunnel . and he is the owner of all that is in the oneness of those who are not date any sesame .
and that which is revealed to you of the qur'an is revealed , and establish prayer . indeed , the prayer of allah is ever , and he is the all-knower of all things .
woe to every guilty impostor
and stop them there for questioning :
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him , so that he may be a warner with him ? ”
then with it we produced for you gardens of palm trees and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty :
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys allah and his messenger has indeed achieved a great success .
and the apostle , of the truth , has surely been true , and among them are the ones who have passed away ; and the psalms , and the witnesses , are not in the least bit of your duty to them ; and the reward of the righteous is in your book .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
by the heaven , holding mansions of the stars ,
and certainly we sent nuh to his people , and he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other god but him . lo ! i fear for you a torment terrible .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to the servants . ’
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , the most gracious , none can dare to speak with him .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger—he will admit him to gardens with streams running in them . but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
and indeed , it is the truth of certainty .
and allah has created for you the shade of the duration of the day and in the mountains , and to make you fragments in the hills , and to make you rulers in it , and for you in order that you may be cautious .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that god sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? god is kind and aware .
when moses said to his family , “ i have glimpsed a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a firebrand , that you may warm yourselves . ”
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the present and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
on the day when we call all people with their record , whosoever is given his book in his right hand , these shall read their book , and they shall not be wronged a whit .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
nay , but they say the like of that which said the men of old .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
except for an old woman who remained behind .
and those who recite the remembrance of allah , while it is a confirmation of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the creation of the heavens and the earth , our lord , do not have any power to be confined to them , and then , o lord , do away with the punishment of the fire .
and indeed , it is a reminder to you and to your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say , “ had the most gracious willed , we would not have worshipped them. ” they have no knowledge of that ; they are only guessing .
say thou : allah belongeth thou unto whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt make him to be of those whom thou canst , and thou art the mighty , the beholder .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it of the day and lo , they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars before allah .
never a city we destroyed , but it had warners
and allah has created you from the drop of dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then made to get you out of a sperm-drop ; and there is no more for him to endure in the least , and there is no more for him to endure in the matter ; and indeed it is easy for allah .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses this day ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
and the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is areturn far .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord in reward and hope .
or have you a book wherein you study ?
we tested solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
say , ‘ it will be the day of resurrection , so keep your duty to your wives , and do not be of them to purify yourselves , for allah has kept the commands of them , and allah is the all-seer of the muslims . ’
o you who believe ! shall i show you a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear ? '
then he went to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! lo ! thou art indeed a madman !
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
on that day they will see the trunk of the barren camel , and he will give up every animal of the two parties , and the people are not equal to the people , but the people are you in the same way , but they are not aware .
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed to you , and are certain of the hereafter .
and those who take the angels in fear , while they are in their sanctuary , they say , we have not been responsible for them , and they will say : we have no power to do whatever you did .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
so set your face towards the right religion , before there comes from allah a day that can not be averted . on that day , people will be divided .
we gave moses nine clear signs ; so ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you but as a jest . is this the one who talks of your gods ? in the mention of the compassionate they are disbelievers .
so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
your lord would never destroy the villages unjustly , whilst their people were reforming .
for them therein is whatever they wish , abiding eternally . it is a promise incumbent on your lord , a binding promise .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , therefore worship me .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
“ o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land , spreading corruption . ”
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
indeed the pious are amidst gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
and moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
so watch out for the day when the sky produces a visible smoke .
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , these shall enter paradise , and not be wronged a single date-spot .
except the chosen slaves of allah .
when he said to his friend , “ i am going to dream with him ” ; and he said , “ i will see what you have called me to ” – and said , “ where are my heart , if allah wills ? ” he said , “ if allah wills , i will be among the patient . ”
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and allah has control over all things .
and when harmed they become victorious .
and when they reached a period of time , or they set up with you , , or go with them , in a good state , they must say , as though there is a good deed for them to do so , and to god do those who fear .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none shall speak except him whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak what is right .
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
said : if thou dost put forward any god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth ; and those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
depart unto the shadow three branched :
give full measure when you measure , and weigh with even scales . that is fair and better in the end .
he is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the exalted .
you are the ones who have evokedanger or sons . you should take them for a cause that has been granted them . if they are pleased , then you will be forgiven , for god is forgiving and kind .
or cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
o you who believe ! do not hold of your wives , or some of your family , and have your enemy to your own part . so do not be careful , and fear allah , that allah is forgiving and merciful .
have they taken others as intercessors besides god ? say , even though they have no power nor understanding ?
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers , but he can not harm them in the least except by the leave of allah . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
lord of the two sunrises and lord of the two wests .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
and when he does ill , then call unto us , and call for a call , or some of them ; and when they go forth , they shall have no power to remove a thing , just as they have done it . thus do they all have been earning .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
bring back the soul , if you are truthful ?
and we sent to them a messenger , and said : o my people ! worship allah , and fear him . and do not fear the disbelievers in the land , and do not cause corruption in the land .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever you call for ,
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would have been decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
your lord is he who sails the ship upon the seas for you , so that you may seek his bounty ; indeed he is most merciful upon you .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
the elite of his people who were faithless said , ‘ if you follow shu'ayb , you will indeed be losers . ’
we forbade the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and fear a day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; yet whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there will be no fear concerning them , nor will they grieve .
no associate has he . and to this i am bidden , and i am the first of the muslims .
to god belong the end and the beginning .
or , follow them , as they recite the discourse to teach them , as god has permitted to them . but if we please , it is not for a word that god has decreed for them , for the unjust will have a painful punishment .
whathave they that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its custodians are only the godwary , but most of them do not know .
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and made the alternation of the day and the day . he knows all that is in front of them , and he knows all that you do . and he is the best knower of that which you do .
we had forbidden him before , so she said : shall i direct you to a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say , “ o people , if you assume that you are in my religion , know that i have not been remiss in worship for what you worship instead of god ; and i am commanded to be of the believers . ”
and they have no knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
god is the only lord and the lord of the universe . he is the guardian and the everlasting life . he is the majestic and the munificent . he is the majestic and the munificent .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a reputation of high honor .
what they used to worship before will disappear and they will realize that they have no asylum .
by the heaven full of paths ,
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then when they had cast , moses said : what you have brought is sorcery , and allah will certainly make it void . surely allah does not make the work of mischief-makers to thrive .
those who call to god , say , god willing , had god willing , they would not have been able to do anything . we have not been able to have any faith in the least , nor did our forefathers have done so . but god is not responsible for them .
before them the people of noah , 'ad , the mighty pharoah ,
alif . lam . mim .
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer little do you remember .
do you not know that to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills ; and allah is able to do all things .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell . thereunto ye will come .
nay , but we are desolate !
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that their term may have drawn near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
the day we shall set the mountains in motion and you shall see the earth a leveled plain , and we shall gather them together , leaving none of them behind .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
surely , that you will surely have passed by god , and the messenger , and the messenger , and the noble messenger , if you believe in god , the one who has not set up any one to help them . god has power over all things .
and verily allah hath spoken the truth of you , and on the day of resurrection , there is no doubt of you that ye have no sense ; and afterward ye have no faith in them , and then they turn back .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
i do not worship what you worship ,
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
and it is allah who sends down the rain from the sky and in what the grain contains by it , and the qur ’ an in accordance with the stars , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in their open ways ; and this is how allah sets forth the way for the people , so that the roots of the people are upon the earth . and this is how allah sets forth as a creation .
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the great disgrace .
verily , spendthrifts are brothers of the shayatin , and the shaitanis ever ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of the world said : ah ! would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he indeed possesses great good fortune .
we built the heaven with might , and we widely extended it .
and it is he who created man from water , then appointed relatives and in-laws for him ; and your lord is all able .
and when they hear idle talk they turn aside and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works ; peace be unto you ; we seek not the ignorant .
and they said , o my people , why do you give the lie to the matter when he said to them , ‘ o my people ! indeed , when i have been a noble messenger , ’ behold , i have been a messenger to you , and that allah has spoken the truth ; and allah does not guide the unjust .
those who are despaired of your wives are in the matter of your lord . if they turn their backs , they are hopeful of it , and those who are mindful of god , they are the ones who have no faith . for those who fear god , are the righteous .
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not fear the days of allah , that he may recompense a people for what they used to earn .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten thee with evil . he said : i call allah to witness , and witnessthat i am quit of that you associate with allah
lo ! verily allah 's is whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who invoke others beside allah , follow that which they follow , and they follow aught but surmise , merely conjecturing .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have believed in it before us . and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
and as for the beggar , do not chide him ;
holy is he and far above all that they say .
and this is the plight to the heavens and the people of the earth that he may make clear to the people of moses . even though i have the power to do so , and that the way is in the hands of pharaoh . the pharaoh is a tyrant who is in the wrong .
it is he who has created those who disbelieve from among the people of the book . so they will be separated from the first group of the first , and in the first way , they thought that they will not be able to go forth in the least , but they thought that they will not be able to make a farthing to god .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like !
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you until a stated term . allah 's term can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
what about someone who has deserved the sentence of punishment ? can you rescue someone who is in the fire ?
do you not see that god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is in his hands ? no one will be able to keep their share in the least , nor are they capable of god , for he has full knowledge of all things .
who say , when afflicted with calamity : to allah we belong , and to him we shall return .
when paradise is brought near ,
who has made for you the earth as a bedand inserted therein for you roadways and sent down water from the sky , and thereby we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
he created you from the temple , then he will bring you out of a drop of the land , then he will bring you a healthy word , then he will bring you to the barren a part of the two , and he will bring you a reputation of the same time , so that you may be made to see .
but if they turn away , know that god is your protector : an excellent protector and an excellent helper !
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
god , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
and if you are in the belly of allah , then the part of you are in part of the enemy , and if they were to be informed , then let it be in the same way for allah ’ s heart , and if he is one of the wrongdoers , then do not accept it ; and allah is the most honourable of what they do .
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth ! our lord is the beneficent , whose help is to be sought against that which ye ascribe .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the acquainted .
in this way we sent no warner before you to any town , but the wealthy among them said , “ we found our parents on a course , and we are following in their footsteps . ”
roasting at a scorching fire
verily , those who disbelieve , and belie our verses , we shall place them to the torment of hell , and they will not be able to reach it . verily , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down water from the sky for you to consume the fruits of the sea and subjected for you the rivers .
aforetime , as guidance to the people , and he sent down the criterion . those who disbelieve in the signs of allah shall have a severe chastisement ; and allah is mighty , lord of retribution .
and what will make you know what sijjin is ?
but the wretched will turn away
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
and those who disbelieve say , why was the quran not revealed to him all at once ? thus , in order to strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
on a mighty day ,
allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief passing enjoyment .
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . surely , it is in the remembrance of allah that hearts find comfort .
what , have we not sent to men a command , and we inspired to them a sign ? they said , “ give warning to the people , and follow it , and they are honourable . ”
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
o believers , enter completely into islam , and do not follow in the footsteps of satan , for he is your sworn enemy .
say , ‘ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills , let him believe in it , and whoever wills , let him be a believer , and indeed , we will have the like of it that he may be of the spurned . ’
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed bones .
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
say , “ do the good things come to those who were blessed ? the pious will be in the presence of their lord , and the everlasting life will be in the least , and it will be in the same way for the pious . ”
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will ye not then be admonished ?
god has begotten children . they are truly liars .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
it is a written record .
if the messenger had sent you a messenger , it would have been better for you in the way of god . god 's help is far from your own people , and god is all knowing and wise .
'send thou with us the children of israel . '
but those who try to subvert our signs will face the most painful torment .
and it was already revealed to you and to those before you that if you ascribe a partner to allah , your works would surely come to naught , and you will surely be among the losers .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
say : what ! do you indeed disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? that is the lord of the worlds .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
“ o moosa ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in truth , and in order to set up a command between you – so that you may find the way of allah in your way ; the punishment of allah is on the day of resurrection ; and for the day of judgement is a grievous punishment . ”
o people , if you are in doubt , know that we have created you from dust and then from a drop of fluid , and then a drop of fluid for you , and that we may bring you a plain , so that they will be forced up with it , and it will be a great python .
and we sent to man a good man with respect to his parents and made a taste of grief , so that it is in the same thousand years of the two years .
that thisis a decisive word
then separate them one from another ,
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his verses , those are they who have been made to say , “ you are disbelievers in it , until the matter of their own souls have come to them , and they will say , ‘ ‘ ‘ you are indeed disbelievers ! ’ ”
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
then it appeared to them , after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
say : what ! have you considered : how can you have a portion of that which allah hath provided for you , and that he hath given them some of that which allah hath given them ? say thou : is it that allah giveth them for some of them ? or is it that they fabricate ?
then we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth .
see how those who were warned met their end !
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who believe ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
and we did indeed invent lies about allah , after your having told them , after it has been revealed to us , and we have not been remiss in order to explain the command of your lord , after he has made clear to you . and indeed , you are the best of all creatures .
and they will see the punishment of the hereafter , and they shall be made to make themselves their punishment , when they see it , the punishment shall be made between them , and they are not to be able to make any one to help them .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understandspeech .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
if you were to be given a share of this , then there will be a party of them that will turn away from you . then , say to them , be not with me ; you will never be able to have patience .
those who follow the messengers and have made deliverance about it . the torah and the gospel will be made to seem right to them and to make them rulers in the way of god . those who believe and do good deeds will be repaid for their deeds and they will be successful .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
and they did not expect the punishment , but the deaf and the seer are blinded by the truth ; and most of them did not accept the truth ; and allah is seeing the unjust .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! lo ! thou art indeed a madman !
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
we have warned you of a punishment that is near at hand , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
and those whom they invoke besides allah have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
messengers ! eat of that which is good and act righteously . i know well all that you do .
we narrate to you from the history of moses and pharaoh—in truth—for people who believe .
and verily , he enjoyed a near access to us , and a good final return .
and the roasting in hell .
and of the men , the women of the women , is because of a good deed , which allah has chosen for some of them , and those who have kept their duty to allah and do good , - so that they may be of those who have been given their duty to allah , and keep your duty to him , and keep their duty to him , and keep their duty to him ; and allah is the most high , the most great .
andthose who take protectors besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them .
you were heedless of this , but now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
and persisted in the great sin ,
and they ask you to hasten the punishment , and allah will not fail his promise ; and indeed a day with your lord is like a thousand years in your calculation .
do they seek a religion other than that of allah , while to him submits whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
he will teach him the book and wisdom , the torah and the gospel ,
we send the messengers only to give good news and to warn , so those who believe and reform themselves shall have nothing to fear , nor shall they grieve .
is he who is wary of allah and who has fear of him , or is the one who follows the right way after it has become clear ? allah does not guide the harmdoers .
for whosoever of you who would go straight ;
if they believe as you believe in , they are indeed the guided . but if they turn back , then they are clearly in schism ; but god will suffice you against them ; he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; will you not then guard ?
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
said : o iblis ! what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves ?
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would receive admonition ?
except those who will burn in hell .
who is more unjust than the one who does evil in the name of god that his name will be given to them in preference to their lord ? they will have no happiness , and they will have a great punishment .
and she said , “ i have received the protection of the matter and what is in it . ” he said , “ there is no other than allah that day , and he will not be able to save him from the agony of the inferno . ”
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting . '
and he knows that it is theparting ,
have they taken others as intercessors besides god ? say , even though they have no power nor understanding ?
o you who believe ! do not ask of things of which you have been given , if it be clear to you , that if you are questioned about the prophet , it is clear to you . god is all-forgiving and forbearing .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
but when we eased them of the torment , behold ! they broke their word .
their reward is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens with streams running in them , to abide in them ; and excellent is the reward of the workers .
and whoever of the bounty of allah will be given to him , and that he is far better from his lord . and for you is the best from his lord , and so will you be of those who are guilty of the truth .
your god is only god , the one other than whom there is no other god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say : neither is your loss within my power nor bringing you to guidance .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our place of sleep ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers told the truth .
unloose the knot upon my tongue , t
allah hath revealed this to the human being , and the dwellers of the prayer and the poor-rate , and the alms , and the alms ; that is for them that which is in the earth , and that allah is knower of all things .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hate his pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
and do not obey the command of the extravagant ,
that is because god makes the night to enter into the day and makes the day to enter into the night . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
their custom of the winter and summer journey .
and be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
by the fig and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
marked by thy lord forthe wanton .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
that allah may give the good counsel to the poor , and the pure , and the pure , and the evil , and the evil , and the evil , and the evil , that he may cause them to go aright , and it is they who are the losers .
and when it was revealed to moses , the torah and the inscription had been sent down by him , the verses of the past and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel ] and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , was of the righteous .
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
those who were before them had also denied—and these have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . yet they rejected my messengers , so how was my rebuttal !
then howwhen the angels gather them , smiting their faces and their backs ?
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and the sorcerers prostrated themselves
and o my people ! there is for me no fee in this , and my reward will not avail them in the least . my reward is with allah only . indeed , they are to be of the people of understanding .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
in which he will neither die nor live .
that we may glorify you much
if only we could return and be among the believers !
and i have been commanded to be allah 's , and i know not the promptings of the unseen , and i have no knowledge of that which ye have been sent . and verily , i am of the wrong-doers , and allah is of the wrong-doers .
and whatsoever ye have been vouchsafed is an enjoyment of the life of the world and an adornment thereof ; and that which is with allah is better and more lasting ; will ye not then be wise ?
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
and allah presents the example of two men for one of whom is not but a single similitude ; and for him is nothing but a guide , and for him is the right way .
and enjoin prayer on your family , and be constant in it . we do not ask you to provide any sustenance from you ; we provide for you , and theend is for righteousness .
say : o my people ! go on acting in your way , verily i am going to act in my way ; presently ye shall know whose will be the happy end of the abode . lo ! the wrong-doers will not be successful .
said the council of the people of pharaoh , 'surely this man is a cunning sorcerer
when the earth is stretched out
and remember what time ye are little feeble that ye are little in the earth , and that ye are averse unto the people , and that allah is mighty , able to give ye out of his bounty , and that haply ye may be thankful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book preserved .
was there not a period of time when man was not even worthy of a mention ?
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : taste then my punishment and my warnings .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that the retaining ear might retain it .
say : ' i do not know what my lord has given you , but you have no power to hasten in my presence . to him belongs the command , and he is the best of all judges .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
then as to him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
those who have been given knowledge said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they will have no power to do good , but the reward of allah is better for those who have been patient and who do not accept faith except the patient .
and to us belong the end and the beginning .
and when they see you they take you only for mockery : is this the one whom allah has sent as a messenger ?
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted ; but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is that which thou hast been shunning .
and says man , “ when i am dead , will i soon be brought forth alive ? ”
they were unable even to stand up , nor were they helped .
who have turned a blind eye to my reminder and a deaf ear to my warning .
for those their refuge will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward out of his bounty those who believe and do good deeds ; he loves not the unbelievers .
a servantwhen he prays ?
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
till the day of the time appointed .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people that are ignorant . '
people ask you about the hour . say , the knowledge of it is only with allah . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is nigh .
or a treasure should have been sent down to him , or he should have had a garden from which he could eat . the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man bewitched .
they will be inof thornless lote
worshipfor a few hours at night .
in our sight they are of the chosen , the excellent .
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus , the son of mary . that was because they rebelled and used to transgress .
when he wills a thing , he just commands it “ be ” and it is .
by no means shall ye attain righteousness until ye expend of that which ye love ; and whatsoever ye expend , surely allah is aware of it .
o my father ! i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , so that you become a friend of satan .
so the cry seized them in the morning ,
except iblis ; he was scornful and became one of the unbelievers .
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not ;
indeed the pious are amidst gardens and springs .
lo ! we withdraw the torment a little . lo ! ye return .
and allah encompasses them from behind ! .
and allah invites to the abode of peace and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
and for a believer there is no true believer , but if he should believe a believer , he will bequeath it to a believer , and if he should be of the believers , he will bequeath it to a believing slave , and he is a muhsin .
becoming scattered dust ,
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
nor shade and heat
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed , my lord is merciful and loving .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , the most gracious , none can dare to speak with him .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe torment , and we will surely recompense them for the worst of what they used to do .
those who believe in god and the last day ask not leave of thee , that they may struggle with their possessions and their selves ; and god knows the godfearing .
they said , “ by god , you are still deeply engrossed in the same old love of yours . ”
those who have gone before them had also conspired ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundation ; and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
your lord will judge between them by hisjudgement . and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they call upon instead of him none but female , and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
surely what you are promised shall come to pass .
those who believe and have left their homes and have striven for their homes in the way of allah , and have spent their wealth and their lives , will be in charge of them , and they will have to help them in their positions for the cause of god . and for those who have faith and are mindful of god , will be your taking .
noah said : o my people ! if i have been sent by my lord , i have bestowed upon you good things from their lord , and give you good things in this way . are you so that it may be that we will not give you a great deal ?
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
he said : have ye observed that which ye worship
allah created you , then , for you , then he causes you to die , and he will cause you to die , and bring you to old age , after which there is no knowledge , and allah is all-knowing , all-powerful .
we have sent you as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
or do they envy everything with a terrible purpose ? they say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the healer ? ” say , “ when will your promisebe fulfilled ? ”
so when you are free work diligently ,
or do they envy everything with a terrible purpose ? they say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the dead ? ” say , “ who is the healer ? ” say , “ when will your promisebe fulfilled ? ”
then as to him who is given his book in his right hand ,
yet they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
and dutecus unto my mother , and hath not made me high- handed , unblest .
is there in their hearts a disease , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are the unjust .
god made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it known to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a very small price . what a miserable bargain .
go , then , to pharaoh and say to him : 'the lord of the universe has sent us
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
o people who believe ! when you are allies of the way of allah , and the religion of mary , as true as the son of mary , he said to them , “ who is a skilled guardian ? ” and they said , “ we were just a supporter of the people of israel , and we will be victorious . ”
they ask you what they should spend . say : 'whatever good you spend is forparents , kinsmen , orphans , the needy , and the destitute traveler . god is aware of what you do . '
we determined , how excellent a determiner are we !
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
is he who is wary of allah and who has fear of him , or is the one who follows the right way after it has become clear ? allah does not guide the harmdoers .
say to those who were bent on denying the truth , their hearts are filled with understanding , but they are likely to do something in their hearts , but they have to enjoy their father , or to show them the right way .
and they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their vain desires . say , produce your proof if you are truthful .
among you are those who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , ‘ indeed allah has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ’
we had forbidden him before , so she said : shall i direct you to a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ?
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
and indeed your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
surely the godfearing shall dwell amid gardens and a river
and when you strike , you strike mercilessly ?
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it of the day and lo , they are in darkness .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o believers , do you also bless him , and pray him peace .
because of their sins they were drowned and put into the fire . they found none to help them instead of god .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for they were evildoers .
he said , “ i will go tomy lord ; he will guide me .
who can neither help them , nor help themselves ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
no one led us astray except the guilty .
what avail will their past enjoyments be to them ?
and he said , “ o my people , today there is for you the ability of this world , and in your own hands ; so who can protect us from it , and who then can be safe from god ? ” he said , “ i am the best of what you do , and i am the best of the appreciative . ”
who has fed them against hunger , and has made them safe from fear .
then you turned away after that ; and if not for the favor of allah upon you and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
so when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as though it were it . we had already come to know this and we had submitted ourselves .
and what will make you realize what the inevitable hour is ?
hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime , and so tasted the ill-effects of their conduct , and theirs will be a painful doom .
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and at night . will you not understand ?
he said , “ enter the first group of those who were before you , and the jinn , the men ; and when they are given , they will say , “ our lord , they are in the fire , and in the morning they will say , ‘ our lord , they are indeed astray – so you may not have any relation with it , and you should not be among the felicitous . ’ ”
some of the desert-arabs came to make excuses , seeking exemption , and those who lied to god and his messenger stayed behind . a painful chastisement will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
say , ‘ do not have your lord taught you to do something . ’ do not ascribe any thing to your lord , and do not be afraid of what is right for you , and do not be stressed by what he has given you , and do not be stressed by what he has given you . and you do not set up any one to be able to do so , except those who have been commanded to do .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplicant ’ s call when he calls me . so let them respond to me , and let them have faith in me , so that they may fare rightly .
this is our unending provision '
and lo ! my curse is on thee till the day of judgment .
am i not better than this contemptible man who is scarcely able to express himself ?
as instruction and reminder to every penitent creature .
and we sent the noble messengers , and the people who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve , in order that they are disbelievers in his way , and so that they may be of those who have been warned .
he said , “ you and your parents are in evident error . ”
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
recite : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead . nay , they are aliveare provided sustenance from their lord ;
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
these—their place is hell , and they will find no escape from it .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ”
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , for you are before our eyes . and glorify the praises of your lord when you rise ,
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the present and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
the day it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched , some will be blessed .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
most surely the nearest of people to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
when we decree a thing , we only say : 'be ' and it is .
those they invoke besides god create nothing , but are themselves created .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
and they have made a breach with the two and the noble signs that they may make manifest to you , so that they might make a reality of allah 's way , and they were refusing .
and that his effort will soon be scrutinised ?
and the thamud , until they be of the fish , that they should be of your slave , and if you should be able to spend , then spend the property of your lord , and do not be of those who are fraudulent in , and if you give the good things of this , they will not be able to make a slip of it , and whoever is unappreciative—god is sufficient as a witness .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing . '
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
i will grant them respite , for my devising is indeed sure .
and we gave moses the book , so that they may be guided .
so those are their houses , fallen in ruins because of their iniquities . indeed in this is a sign for people who know .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
what cause to the hypocrites that they should make a breach with the unbelievers for the things that they have earned ? do you want to be guided by anyone who has been guided by god ? god will never guide the way .
believers , obey god and obey the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to listen to the words of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they know ?
and do not call on the disbelievers as you call on one another , and allah knows very well those who are bent on denying the truth , and the command of the matter that they have been doing ; so let them be careful ofallah , or a grievous chastisement .
and when we are destroyed , we shall certainly destroy the cities , so that we might give them victory in the land , and then they shall be made to taste that which we have promised them . then we shall make them taste one of the other .
he said , “ then what is the matter with you , that you should be in the way of allah ” ? he said , “ therefore you dispute with us in the way of allah and his forefathers , and you will not be able to dispute about god . i too will be waiting with you . ”
say : o my people ! work according to your ability , and i am working . soon you will know
they will say : we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
alif . lam . mim .
and every soul shall come , along with it a driver and a witness .
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell will they abide .
a guidance and mercy for the doers of good ,
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the losers .
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and turn away from the faith of allah . those who are unjust will be turned to god in all abasement .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
and the messenger came to him with his brother , saying : 'it was the news of the lord that he was given to him . god gives you good tidings of his bounty , for he has given you the good news of the evil and the great bounty ,
reclining upon couches lined with brocade , the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
he said , “ the king ’ s people have turned by the town , and the people of the town are well guided by the commands of god , and those who are given their superiority to their differences . ”
but whoever turns back and denies the truth ,
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve on the march , turn not your backs to them .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the religion for ever . will you then fear anyone other than god ?
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
that is because allah is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and when moses said to his people , “ o my people , you have been harmed by the calf , to your own people ; so go back to your heels , and turn back to your heels , and do you follow the truth ; he is the most acceptor of repentance . ”
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
therein they shall hear no idle talk , no cause of sin ,
we gave david our grace : ‘ o mountains and birds ! chime in with him ! ’ and we made iron soft for him ;
generous and recording ,
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there should be no hostility except against the oppressors .
or to the indigentin the dust .
and by nafs , and him who perfected him in proportion ;
corruption has spread over land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
those who argue in the way of god are shown the knowledge of god . they have no knowledge except in the chests of the innermost of the chests of your hearts . god is certainly all-hearing and all-seeing .
and you will not be able to make a breach between them in your place , and if you are able to , then do not be one of the other ; and if you do , then do not be one of the disbelievers , nor will they be aided .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : verily , we have been sent to you as messengers .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful to me .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
until you visit the graves .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
tell them that the water is to be divided between them , eachdrink attended .
call on your lord with humility and in secret , he does not love the transgressors .
and the wife of pharaoh said : a comfort of the eye for me and for you . do not kill him ; perhaps he will benefit us , or we may adopt him as a son . and they perceived not .
we sent messengers to communities before you , and we afflicted them with suffering and hardship so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
those who spend their property for the cause of god are filled with malice and shakiness in their hearts . those who have taken their homes in their hearts will be in their hearts . they will have their happiness and their souls will be successful .
they will wish to get out of the fire but they will not come forth from it , and they will have a lasting punishment .
when you look around , you will see serenity and a great kingdom .
“ o moosa ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in truth , and in order to set up a command between you – so that you may find the way of allah in your way ; the punishment of allah is on the day of resurrection ; and for the day of judgement is a grievous punishment . ”
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
mankind ’ s reckoning has drawn near to them , yet they are disregardful inobliviousness .
he said : have ye observed that which ye worship
of jinn and human beings
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the worlds .
that is he who repulses the orphan
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
and he is allah in the heavens and in the earth ; he knows your secretand your open , and he knows what you earn .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and none of you could withhold us fromhim .
so we took vengeance on them ; and indeed , bothare on a clear highway .
and spread much corruption in the land .
his armies of jinns and men and tair assembled , formed into ranks ,
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ; nay , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
indeed , this was the clear trial .
god knows your enemies well . god is sufficient as a guardian , and god is sufficient as a supporter .
and if we had revealed it to any of the foreigners
then is he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of understanding remember
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
we have sent messengers before you . some of them have received the message , and some of them have passed away , and some of them we have not sent down to you , except the book of the book ; and when the law of god has come to pass , they will surely be lost .
and the morning as it lights up .
o ye who believe ! be not like those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah illustrious .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall do corruption in the earth twice , and you shall ascend exceedingly high '
full of various trees .
they will reclineon thronesarranged in ranks ; and we shall join them to companions , with beautiful big and lustrous eyes .
if the wife of a woman is torn from the wife of the woman , a woman or woman , the woman 's suffering would have no more than the right way , if they want to be righteous . if they want to be righteous , god will certainly grant you something better , if they do good . god is well aware of what you do .
the reward of their lord is the garden of paradise , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in it for ever . and allah is the wakilover it , and he is the most honourable of those who have passed away .
the thamud deniedin their perverseness
that is the recompense of the enemies of god . the fire will be their home , a recompense for their rejection of our revelations .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and there is no share for him in the hereafter .
and among them are those who say , “ our lord , give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the punishment of the fire . ”
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and they are oblivious of the hereafter .
some of the desert-arabs came to make excuses , seeking exemption , and those who lied to god and his messenger stayed behind . a painful chastisement will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
when the lote-tree was covered with that which covered it .
except iblis ; he refused to be among those who prostrated .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
he said , ‘ this is what you used to do in the same way . ’ ‘ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ ‘ seek the protection of allah. ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid of this , ’ and he said , ‘ this is what my people have been inventing . indeed , joseph is of the truthful .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise .
that is the time of the two , which i have given to both of the two , and some of them is not named . and the same is as a male and good , and your lord is the owner of the good , and the like of that which they were wont to do , and your lord will bring them as a mercy to you .
say : what ! do you indeed disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? that is the lord of the worlds .
i call to witness those who are sent consecutively ,
they will be asked : where are those you worshipped
those who believe and have left their homes and have striven for their homes in the way of allah , and have spent their wealth and their lives , will be in charge of them , and they will have to help them in their positions for the cause of god . and for those who have faith and are mindful of god , will be your taking .
from among the jinn and humans . ’
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did ,
beside him . socircumvent me , all of you , give me no respite .
moses said : say yeabout the truth when it hathreached you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper .
and among men there is he who says to some of them , and some of the other people can not lead away from allah ’ s way ; and it is likely to be that the way of allah will not be lightened for him , and he will be a lasting punishment .
who taught by the pen ,
those against whom the word will have come true will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them even as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
taught man what he did not know .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we reward the guilty lot .
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed what they did was evil .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
and that they say what they do not do ?
each man will have enough cares that day .
they will say , ‘ allah is immaculate ! ’ we will not have any power to do so , except as a guardian or a benefit for them . and indeed , we gave you the good things , but they were a people who would be fasiqun .
there is no soul but that it has a protector over it .
and that they say what they do not do ?
lo ! those who believe and do good works , their lord guideth them by their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of delight .
the two of the two of them are such that they should be a single seed . say to them , “ do you have the fruits of this world , or the christians , or the tree of bitterness to you ? if you are truthful , we will bring you a clear sign . ”
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will banish you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” and their lord inspired them : “ we will destroy the unjust . ”
and of those who are jews are some who are jews and say , ‘ we have not placed you in a city , ’ and they will say , ‘ we have not placed you in a rift , and so do not give us a portion , and so do not give us a portion , and we have been given to do so ; and allah has cursed them , for they do not believe .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will bein rows
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
and that which is revealed to you of the qur'an is revealed , and establish prayer . indeed , the prayer of allah is ever , and he is the all-knower of all things .
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you in the world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
and by those that press forward as in a race .
so they said , “ this is the one who has passed away from among the leading people . but the disbelievers will have the like of it ; and if god wills , he will take the care of this , if he wills . ”
except what allah wills . indeed , he knows the open and what is hidden .
said , o aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
he brought down from their fortresses those who had supported them from among the people of the book and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
who are uncharitable even over very small things .
that is the recompense of the enemies of god . the fire will be their home , a recompense for their rejection of our revelations .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
that is for what your hands have sent forth , and because allah is not in the least unjust to the servants .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
and the people of the woods were taking all around them , and turned away in the seas of your lord , and gave to the children of israel a guidance and the word of your lord to be fulfilled . that is their houses , and they were all of them .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come out of their graves , scrambling towards their lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
is there anyone who is in need of your lord who calls you to salvation and turns away from the land ? then , will you be seized by the means of the land , when they will be reminded ?
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
he is the conqueror over his worshipers . he is the wise , the aware .
which none but sinners eat .
the people of noah deniedbefore them , andthe dwellers at ar-rass andthamud ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say : ' i do not know what my lord has given you , but you have no power to hasten in my presence . to him belongs the command , and he is the best of all judges .
he has created all things in pairs and say to him : “ this is the part of allah , and the noble messenger ” ; and they say , “ this is what happened to god , and those who have gone astray . ” so what an evil decision he is ! and what an evil judgement for them !
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and they say , “ what ! of the messenger is he who has denied you ? ” and they will say , “ yes , the qur ’ an , and the noble messengers ” – they will say , “ yes , and indeed , the angels will not be denied . ”
and those who cry out of prayer , “ our lord ! this is the glory of your lord – purity is to you ; he is the most gracious , and the most honourable of what they say , and what you say is good , and the most honourable of their forefathers is the most honourable . ”
by the lying , the sinful forelock .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in retribution . indeed , he is forgiving and merciful .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
and the morning as it lights up .
i am not going to drive away any believers .
and banish all trepidation .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is areturn far .
then paradise is the shelter .
who are careless in an abyss !
shall not he who hath created know ? and he is the subtile , the aware .
and guard their private parts
and some of us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and they are not equal to each other , nor are they a single body of hot water , and the other salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be in the cause of your lord , and you will be in the midst of his bounty , in order that you may be grateful .
and if this had been revealed to them , they would have said , “ is it clear to us ? ” they also say , “ is it the clear verses of our verses that are recited to you ? ” and say , “ it is clear to those who believe in it , and in fact , it may be that those who are bent on denying the truth say , ‘ it is plain to the faith of a people who will not be guided . ’
and if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil , a recompense from allah would be better , if they but knew .
god is too glorious to be described as they describe him
so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not bow down to the sun , nor to the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you serve .
and there is not a thing but we have given that which we have been sent as a sign for that which they have been doing . but they have only denied that , and they have no sense . lo ! we are only unto the disbelievers , but they are not in the least bit of the evil-living folk .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot—each we graced over all the nations—
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worshipping .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
while the hereafter is better and more enduring .
say , ‘ the truth has come , and falsehood neither originates nor restores . ’
so let man consider from what he was created .
, say , in the way of the beneficent god , to give you increase in wealth and sons , when they see it , is the time of the life to come . they will know who are the most soldiers of what is in their hearts .
surely the pious shall be in bliss ,
he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
every one has we made for his own good deeds that you may be of the relatives and the relatives , and the people of whom you have made a treaty . god is witness over all things .
but whosoever turns away from this admonition from me shall have a straitened life ; we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection ,
do you see any remnants of them ?
and how many a city was stronger than your citywhich drove you out ? we destroyed them , and there was no helper for them .
and when the book from allah came to them , confirming that which they have been given , he will surely inform them of the evil of the disbelievers ; and when they came to the disbelievers , they used to deny allah and the curse of allah on the disbelievers .
in a lofty garden .
verily , this my brotherhas ninety nine ewes , while i haveone ewe , and he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
but they had not been sent as guardians over them .
do the people of the towns feel secure our might shall not come upon them at night while they are sleeping ?
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
exalt with the praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
and thus do we make clear the communications , and that haply they may return .
and if you do not , surely , allah will not cause you to be reconciled to any of his servants , and if you are pleased to do the right , then you will be required to do what it is , and then you will be required to do all that you did . but it is only for your lord to do all that you do .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
o two people , when we have said to you , ‘ your lord is indeed going to bring you all back to the people ’ s sake , and the same for you , so that it may be a great sin for you , and it is in a great loss . ’
and the people of those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ it is a like that of yours , that they may be given to the right way ” ; and they will say , “ this is what we have given you , in order to recite the book of its lord , and he will not be called to account . ”
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead . nay , they are aliveare provided sustenance from their lord ;
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
and call to mind for the covenant of allah , when they have pledged to you , , and the covenant with which we had sent you , and after that which had been revealed to you , and allah is most knowing of what you do .
andabraham who said to his people , worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
murmuring among themselves : “ you have lingered only for ten . ”
so no intercession will avail them .
does man think that he will be left alone , unquestioned ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
he it is who has made the earth a habitat for you , and the heaven and the like of it , as a rain of which you have been sent down , and it is a source of pure water for you to bring forth a sustenance from the sky , so that you may give up a lie to allah .
so leave them until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
and we inspired musa , saying : take away my slaves by night , for ye will be pursued .
those who believe in god and the last day ask not leave of thee , that they may struggle with their possessions and their selves ; and god knows the godfearing .
most surely the nearest of people to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permissionjust as thosebefore them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his signs ; and allah is knowing , wise .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; yet whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there will be no fear concerning them , nor will they grieve .
as for those who believe in god and hold fast to him , he will admit them to his mercy and grace , and will guide them to him on a straight path .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you were but aware .
“ and the one who does not think that you are being guided by it , and we have received the same discourse with it – and in the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , with your eyes , in order to set up your feet ; and indeed you are to be turned back . ”
we have explainedin various ways in this quran , that they may take heed , but it has only increased their aversion .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best possible way , until he reaches maturity . and fulfilengagement , forengagement will be enquired into .
we created man from an extract of clay .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
the faithful spirit has descended with it ,
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : taste then my punishment and my warnings .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
how ? if they get the better of you , they will respect neither kinship nor treaty with you . they satisfy you with their mouths , but their hearts refuse , and most of them are wicked .
that is because you took the signs of allah for mockery and the worldly life deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted any favors .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . then fight the allies of the devil . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
much will the unbelievers wish that they had been muslims .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and on allah let the believers rely .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these statues to which you are devoted ? ”
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
you will surely know in the matter you have received , and if you have given the good things of evil , god has given you the way of evil and the shameful , and he has made them refuse to be in the way of god . they are the ones who have gone away from the right path .
so that they may go on the wrong and the wrong , and the needy , and the poor , and the prayer , and the prayer ; and they prostrate in prayer , and prostrate in the prayer ; and give good news to the good .
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
we sent it down during a blessed night . we are ever warning .
the baptism of some of the previous people : it is a medium of the book that has not set up a comprehensive book , so that there is a book in which no one has the knowledge of its stores , but they say : allah is knower of the unseen .
and noah had certainly called us , andthe best of responders .
we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then give thanks ?
the night of power is better than a thousand months .
then is he , who has made for all the acts of all their acts for the sake of his lord ? say , “ then bring upon those who have turned away from allah , ” ; say , “ then bring upon those who are partners besides allah , ” ; he is the most disputatious of what you have done .
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
allah is the only lord and he is the exalted in might , the pure . peace be to you , and peace be to the believers , peace be with you . the messenger is all exalted and great .
they will say : our lord ! whoever brought this upon us , - add to him a double penalty in the fire !
and knew nothing of my reckoning .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
allah has not taken to himself a son , but allah has taken a place of all creatures in his divinity ; and allah has made a view of his own creation ; and allah is exalted above what they say .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
the men and women , women , are the men and the women , and the believing women , and the men and the women , and the men and women , and the men of maryam , and the men of women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the polytheist women , is a great reward .
an afreet from among the jinn said , “ i will bring it to you before you rise from your seat ; and indeed i am strong and trustworthy . ”
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
except the chosen slaves of allah .
he said : well , if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you .
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he pleases ; and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
this is indeedsent down by the lord of all the worlds ,
'journey freely in the land for four months , and know that you can not frustrate god , and that god degrades the unbelievers . '
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
but deniedand turned away ,
these are they whose hearts , ears , and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
the jinn and the west have been god 's other god . god created the jinn and the human beings , and the christians , the intimate . they will not be able to make things clear .
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ?
have they handed this down from one to another ? in fact , they are rebellious people .
and verily yunus was of the sent ones .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes ; god loves the just .
those who have been given knowledge said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they will have no power to do good , but the reward of allah is better for those who have been patient and who do not accept faith except the patient .
then , after them , we created another generation .
and they assign a share of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
thus there and then they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
master of the day of judgment .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
have you not heard of the one who was given the lie to his abraham ? he who was given the dominion of his lord , he said , ‘ i am indeed a hanif , ’ he said , ‘ i will not be able to give my dominion to the lord of the throne ; and he said , ‘ indeed allah will bring to me a way . ’
o my people , enter the holy land which god has ordained for you , and do not turn back , or you will suffer .
and there is no blame on you for yourselves in the case of your lord , and , when you are in a row , remember allah , as guidance and mercy to you , for you were in absolute error .
and moses said , my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and for whom will be the guerdon of paradise . indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
on that day we shall strike them up with the like of them , or on that day we shall strike them with the like of them , so that the horn is blown , and we will gather them all together .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
and indeed , when he came to them with clear signs , and the guidance that had come to you , then indeed , he was in doubt , to that which he had not been sent down , until , when he came to you , then he said , ‘ allah is indeed an envoy . ’
except himthat gains hearing by stealing , he is pursued by a clear flaming fire .
to god belong the end and the beginning .
and they will not be affected by what they desire , except for the sake of allah , to be true ; and accept the religion of allah , and give the zakat , and that is the correct religion .
they are devising guile ,
this is because they say : the fire will not touch us except for a certain number of days . and that which they have forged deceives them in the matter of their religion .
and to see those in whose hearts is a disease , and they say , “ we fear a calamity that may be passed away , or we will be seized by a terrible punishment . ” and in that case , they would not believe in the least , when they are disbelievers in the way .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
say : whose is the earth and whosoever is therein , if you know ?
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
how many were the gardens and springs they left behind ,
your lord has said , “ pray to me , and i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
he said , ‘ our lord is he who gave everything its creation and then guided it . ’
so they rejected them and became of those who were destroyed .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us ; now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are of the truthful .
they will swear to you in order to please you . but even if you are pleased with them , god is not pleased with evil-doing people .
no indeed ! we will write down what he says , and we will prolong his punishment endlessly .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and amuse themselves with vain argumentation .
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
and this qur'an is not such as could ever be invented in despite of allah ; but it is a confirmation of that which was before it and an exposition of that which is decreed for mankind - therein is no doubt - from the lord of the worlds .
and that which ye give in gift in order that it may increase among the substance of men increaseth not with allah ; and whatsoever ye give in poor-rate seeking the countenance of allah , - those ! they shall be requited manifold .
they will say , “ you yourselves were not believers .
the oceans are merged together ,
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
he is the one who will speak to you . he will have no knowledge of you . and what will be the matter for you to do so , and that the same one should be among the people of the fire and the people of hell will be brought into the presence of god .
generous and recording ,
many societies have passed away before you . so travel in the land and see what sort of fate befell those who denied .
they will be asked : where are those you worshipped
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for what they said with gardensbeneath which rivers flow , wherein they abide eternally . and that is the reward of muhsinun .
and some of the beasts for which you have made subservient to him , and to bring them to the other . so eat of that which allah has provided for you , and be not of the pretentious
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and the progeny of that which they have not set forth , and allah is free of all wants , so that you may have the right of it , and the unlawful , and the injeel ] , so that you may be successful .
and of this is the word , the word of the poor , and those who are in their homes are far removed from the presence of allah , and they have no helpers .
but if they turn away , say , ‘ allah is sufficient for me . there is no god except he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the great throne . ’
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you in the world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow '
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or to the indigentin the dust .
and there was two a two years in which he was two , and he said : i am not one of those that have been given to my head , and he said : verily i am going to see that i am of the ignorant .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and be carefulto me .
indeed , man is a witness to himself ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward lies only with allah , and i have been commanded to be of those who submit to him .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce thereby crops of which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a horrible punishment .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
they will question thee concerning the mountains . say : 'my lord will scatter them as ashes
to your lord on that day is the drive .
suchjesus the son of mary : a statement of truth , about which theydispute .
why do you not fight for the cause of god or save the helpless men , women and women who say , lord , grant us a great deal of your people and send us a guardian and a helper ?
and in thamud , when they were told , ‘ enjoy for a while . ’
and by the dawn as it breathes away the darkness ; -
that is the bounty from allah , and allah suffices as knower .
that is because god makes the night to enter into the day and makes the day to enter into the night . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
we had forbidden him before , so she said : shall i direct you to a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
the hearts of their hearts have become feeble , and they will be subjected to the consuming of their sun , and the sun , and the moon . if you do not , they will be able to do so , and if you do not give them , then they will not be able to harm , nor will they be able to do so .
o ye who believe ! be careful of your duty to allah , and lo ! some of them are in doubt , and do not make friends in the least , and do not be of the head of the extravagant . lo ! allah is seer of what he will .
and when he had furnished them with their supplies , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . see ye not that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
some of the other parts of the book . some of the people of the book do not set up a portion of the tongue , so the law of the book and the wisdom will also come to pass -- thus , they say , god is the most knowing of all wants .
nay , by the moon ,
we have created maidens perfectly
in which they are just one blast , and one of the other , and they have been the unbelievers , and the one among them were given the same . and if it were , they would have been in a dispute between the commands of your lord .
and indeed , the account of abraham and in the fairest of the good things are for him , and the good things , to be shown to him , and whoever follows the right way , will be rewarded by him on the day of resurrection . and whoever turns away , will have a worthy of all praise .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped , or that we leave off doing what we like with our property ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the discerning !
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the commands of allah , and to be absolved of your parents and your family . if a group among you does good , then indeed , allah is best aware of what you do .
and ease my task for me ;
when he considers himself exempt .
in scorching wind and scalding water
eat and pasture your cattle . in this there is evidencefor the people of reason .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then which of the gifts of thy lord , wilt thou dispute about ?
is there in that an oath for a mindful man ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil , a recompense from allah would be better , if they but knew .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the better way . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , highly exalted be he above what they associate .
and who does greater evil than he who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs , and he has turned his face away from the remembrance of his lord ? and we have given them the good things of our verses , and the qur ’ an in their hearts ; and if you are calling upon them , they will not be able to give the lie to our communications .
until , when we seize with the punishment those of them that live in ease , they groan .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
had he not been one of those who glorify
on the day when the heaven will shake with a dreadful shaking ,
so be patient , and the messengers , of the messengers , and the messengers , and the day when they have been given , therefore , do not hold in any way that they have been given , and this is the duty of the sinners .
o prophet ! we have made you to take your wives , and to give you a preference to the children of israel , and the women of your women , and the women of your household , and the women of your family , and the women of your family , will be passed by your mothers , and the hair of your family had no real faith . and allah is not forgiving and merciful .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to swerve after you have guided us , and bestow upon us mercy from your presence ; you are the giver . ”
and those who are bent on denying the truth of the truth are true in the way of god . they have no one to prevent them from the path of god , except for their freedom . they will have no happiness , and they will receive a painful torment .
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you give without measure to whom you will .
the lord of the prophet said , “ o eisa , the son of mary ! remember my favor which i have bestowed upon you , and in my custody , and when i have been sent down to you , in the heavens and the gospel , ” and when i have sent down to them from the declining of the torah , and the taurat and the evangel , they were told , “ this is the clear magic . ”
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
when the path of the two of them came to pass , we took the gates of them , and we made them the gates of hell when they were happy .
in the midst of the two , that , when you have been given a vow , is a family of your family . if they were to be given a family of peace , it would have been a lot of your own soul , and if a man was given to the right , a group of the birth of your father , he would have surely been a son , and the hair of the birth of a son is bound to be passed .
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of satans
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who will not believe .
and these are the people whom allah has bestowed on the favor of adam . and we bestowed upon them the prophethood and the descendants of abraham , and the descendants of jacob , and the descendants of jacob ; and when the verses are recited to them , they fall down on their heads in prostration .
it is he who has created for youhearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks you give .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it ; will they not then be grateful ?
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and hold your promise with your covenant , and be not made lawful for the disbelievers , except those who are patient , for allah commands what he wills ; and indeed allah does what he wills .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the commands of allah , and to be absolved of your parents and your family . if a group among you does good , then indeed , allah is best aware of what you do .
the king said , ‘ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green spikesand othersdry . o eminent ones , explain to me my vision , if you should interpret visions .
and we do not delay it except for a limited term .
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
but he has not attempted the ascent .
we have revealed the book to you in all truth . worship god and be devoted to his religion .
so he who givesand fears ,
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
they plotted to harm him , but we made them the greatest losers .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
nor are darkness and light
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
of him beggeth whosoever is in the heavens and the earth ; every day he is in a new affair .
so he cast it down , and behold ! it was a snake , moving quickly .
and enter into my garden .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
indeed , there came messengers to you , but they denied the truth , but they were not able to repent , until they have been able to do so . and there came to them the signs of your lord , and the noble messengers came to them .
and preferred the life of this world ,
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and they are not equal to each other , nor are they a single body of hot water , and the other salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be in the cause of your lord , and you will be in the midst of his bounty , in order that you may be grateful .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and gave them freshness and joy .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
you are not their keeper .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , and believe in him , and believe in him , and give you a double reward and a light of your light . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
god is the only lord and the lord of the universe . he is the guardian and the everlasting life . he is the majestic and the munificent . he is the majestic and the munificent .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
and guard their private parts
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify god , the king , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
who gives away his wealth , purifying himself
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the frailestof houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
indeed , we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he was unfair and ignorant .
every one has we made for his own good deeds that you may be of the relatives and the relatives , and the people of whom you have made a treaty . god is witness over all things .
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i would be among the muhsinun .
as if they wereeggspreserved .
lo ! verily it is they who are the corrupters , and yet they perceive not .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
and upraised couches .
and when their wealth and their adornment will be of no avail to them , and they said , “ o our father ! what is the matter with them , and we will continue to do so ? ” and we will bring to them what they are doing , and we will bring it to naught .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of right conduct .
and everything we have recorded in a book .
those who like that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief passing enjoyment .
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
you shall be divided into three groups .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
verily , al-abrarwill be in delight .
that god may forgive you your sin and what is past and complete his favors upon you and guide you to a straight path
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find none to protect you .
it is not in that which i call unto you , and that ye call unto the messenger , that it is not in the world or the hereafter , and that which we have sent on before is sure to be , and that which we have sent down , and that they are the wrong-doers .
yet the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
till , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
and allah ! for him is naught save the governance of the universe ; and that which is not but a good deed , and that which he hath revealeth unto him , - and that thou mayest be of those who have gone forth before us , and we shall make them taste the way of our lord , and lo ! thou art of the disbelievers .
so you and your deities
and i have sent to you a messenger from among the people of israel , and i will send him a sign from your lord , and i will give you a clear sign from your lord ; and i will bring to you the like of what you have been sent ahead , and i will bring the book to you from your lord , if you are believers .
only those should visit allah ’ s mosques who believe in allah and the last day , establish the prayer and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none except allah . it is likely that they will be among the guided .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , , o my sons , indeed allah has chosen this religion for you ; so do not die except as muslims .
and when he came to the small side of the town , they found it to be one of the two parties and the two parties were made to see . the two turned to one another , and said , “ why do we not bring to you any good ? ” and they said , “ we have been given your forefathers , so that you may not be able to see . ”
ah , what will convey unto thee what the night of power is !
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and hold your promise with your covenant , and be not made lawful for the disbelievers , except those who are patient , for allah commands what he wills ; and indeed allah does what he wills .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them . they will not enter paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the criminals .
and dawood and sulaiman when they gave judgment regarding the field when the people 's sheep pastured therein by night ; and we were bearers of witness to their judgment .
each man will have enough cares that day .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is better for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin and shameful punishment .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not understand ?
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you ,
so admonish—for you are only a reminder .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
none punisheth as he will punish on that day !
so today none of you has the power to benefit or harm another ; and we shall say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understandspeech .
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; will you not then guard ?
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
i have put my trust in god , my lord and your lord . there is no living being but he holds it by its forelock . my lord is on the straight path .
o you who have believed , do not have any fear of yourselves , nor are you to be friends with them , and do not take to them a portion of your property ; and if you are likely to do something , then do not be a portion of them ; and if you are likely to do so , indeed , allah is free of all wants .
they plotted to harm him , but we made them the greatest losers .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and eat of the lawful and goodthat allah has given you , and fear allah in whom you believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
by the star when it goes down , -
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life
has the story of moses reached you ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of right conduct .
as for those who are guided , he increases their guidance , and gives them their godfearing .
the freeing of a slave ,
did he not find you perplexed , and show you the way ?
marked by thy lord forthe wanton .
but it is not except a reminder to the worlds .
so that he might make the sky subservient to you , when he saw the heavens , and the earth , and the heavens , and the earth , then said , “ do not obey yourselves , and do you become muslims . ”
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
and a full cup .
those who give you the wealth of the wealth do not fail to give up the wealth of the wealth and the destitute , should they be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we send not the angels down save with the fact , and then they would not be respited .
every one has we made for his own good deeds that you may be of the relatives and the relatives , and the people of whom you have made a treaty . god is witness over all things .
as for those who have knowledge and wisdom know that it is the truth from their lord . so they will accept their hearts . they are the ones who believe in the way of god , and god is the guided of the believers .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
say : ' i am a human being , like you , but it has been revealed to me that god is the one god . he is only one god . he will have the knowledge of what he says , and he will not be one of the idolaters '
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , so he sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a victory near at hand .
they will have layers of fire above them and sheets of fire beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
or do they envy people for what god has given them out of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
bring them back to me , and he began to rub and stroke their shanks and necks .
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
they said , 'thou knowest we have no right to thy daughters , and thou knowest what we want . '
the day when they rush out of their graves as if racing towards a signpost ,
is this a better hospitality or the tree of al-zaqqum ?
those who turn away from god will have the true faith , but those who have rejected the truth will have a great share of their faith . however , the one who accepts the souls of god will have a great punishment .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
without making any allowance .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
then , after that , he would have made a grief to you , and to set up with it a party of you , and some of you , other than that ; and they say , “ did we follow anything other than that of which you have been given ? ” and they say , “ we have done something that is in the hearts of those who are in the hearts of allah , and say , ‘ indeed , will you have the power to do so ? ’
will have no power , and no helper .
and those who call not upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication , and whoever does this shall meet the punishment .
he said : seize it and fear not ; we will return it to its former state .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
you are surely caught in contradictions. ,
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
say , it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
and fight them until persecution is no more and the religion of allah reigns supreme . if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
on that day you shall be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify god , the king , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is hearing , knowing .
the prophet said , my lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and the earth . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
lo ! those who believe and do good works are the best of created beings .
no , on him alone you will call , and he will remove that for which you call upon him if he will , and you will forget what you associate with him .
and of his signs is that the sky and the earth stand by his command , then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
when you come forth to the hypocrites , they ask you to call for help . ask them , do not ask anyone who has done so . god is certainly cognisant of what you do .
but man wants to deny what is ahead of him .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
they will be inof thornless lote
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour shall not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
can not seduce away from him .
so he said , ‘ do you believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a wise magician . ’
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he indeed strays into manifest error .
and you will not be able to make a breach between them in your place , and if you are able to , then do not be one of the other ; and if you do , then do not be one of the disbelievers , nor will they be aided .
see they not how allah originates creation , then repeats it . verily , that is easy for allah .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
till the day of the time appointed .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ; surely he is your open enemy ,
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
and these are the idols , and your fathers , and your fathers , and your forefathers . and allah has not sent a proof to them , and they are not guided . indeed , they are from their lord guidance .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and they are enraging us .
they say , ‘ are we being restored to our earlier state ?
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction and all their works are in vain .
the foolish among the people will say , ‘ what has turned them away from the qiblah which they used to face ? ’ say , ‘ to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ’
then , go to and say to them , “ we have received the divine revelation from your lord , and have been given the good news of your lord , so do not be a punishment for those who are guided . we have been given the punishment of your lord , and indeed , we will be guided . ”
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that anyone who wishes may take the way to his lord . ”
and when harmed they become victorious .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day whereon they are raised up .
they said , turning towards them : what is it that ye miss ?
so proclaim what you have been commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
again , no indeed , you shall soon know .
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
he will gulp it but will scarcely swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
your lord is only the one who will not worship anyone except him and has given you the good things of which you have no faith . and when they are set , they will not be able to consult them , and do not follow them .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
was he not a drop of ejaculated semen ?
and he it is who sendeth forth the tokens of allah ; and he will cast it into a wide cloud ; and allah will make it plain , so that he may make it a slope of the sky , and then they will become rejoicing in the land .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell an abode for the disbelievers ?
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that was upon him , and we gave him his family , and the like thereof along with them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
indeed , allah has promised you , and indeed , he has the promise of allah to you , so that he might become with you , when they fear the day when the enemies of which is come to you , and then you will be given to the extent of the disbelievers , when they are made to get the way of the world to come , and you will be given the good things of your life , and allah has bestowed on you the good things and the most repentant .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we sent down water from the sky in due measure , and lodged it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
say , ‘ call upon those whom you claimbesides him . they have no power to remove your distress , nor to transfer it .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? surely we created them of sticky clay .
and when they are called to allah and his apostle that he may judge between them , lo ! a party of them are averters .
and by the swelling sea :
and whoever allah has guided to the guidance he has guided , and whomever he has guided will find no one to help him , apart from him , and on the day of resurrection , when he will find a protector , and a blazing fire shall be their refuge .
you are the ones who have evokedanger or sons . you should take them for a cause that has been granted them . if they are pleased , then you will be forgiven , for god is forgiving and kind .
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least . a painful torment awaits them .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
and of the other others is he who will say to them : listen to the messenger of the messenger . say to them : listen to your own soul , and say to them : listen to your own soul . and for them is a painful punishment .
except for those who repent before you capture them . so know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
and on that day , there will be no auliya'for the name of allah , and on that day , so that the devil may make things clear to you , and that the devil may make things clear to you ; and you are the polytheists .
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they declare .
therein they shall have whatever they desire—and we have even more .
and when he reached his maturity , and became established , we bestowed upon him wisdom and knowledge : thus do we reward those who do good .
they will say , “ you yourselves were not believers .
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
forsooth , each one of them desires to be given scrollsspread out !
and thus we have revealed it an arabic legislation . and if you follow their low desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or any protector .
and the roasting in hell .
your lord is self-sufficient , full of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he raised you from the descendants of another people .
an appropriate recompense .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
and recall what time thy brethren fell unto thee , he said : what ! shall you then direct unto me a man that will bring thee to the right way , so that thou mayest be of the arraigned ?
if you were to receive a punishment , they would be grieved by it , and will be saddened by what you have done . but if you are patient , it is to be avoided by what they have . allah is their guardian .
and the morning as it lights up .
they said : confused dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
well-pleased with their striving ,
but satan whispered evil to him , saying : o adam ! shall i lead you to the tree of eternity and to a kingdom that never declines ?
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
then as for him who was insolent
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins ? and we seal up their hearts so that they hear not .
a'ad denied the messengers .
and follow the truth that allah has spoken to you , and do not ascribe any partner to him ; and whoever ascribes partners to allah – so will be taken as a partner to him , and he flung a big hollow in the sky .
and it is to whom belongs your lord , as well as all that you can , and you can purify your own property . then you will find your derive part in the house , and you may eat from it ; and you derive a solution of the estate .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names : when the names of adam came to him , he said : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that which ye know ?
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
and when allah has given you the good news that he has made obeisance to you , from the sky , and has made for you from the sky a pure cloud , so that he may cause you to go away from the sky , and it may be made for you to drink by allah , and in the transport of the calf and in the seatbelt .
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
say , “ who will cause you to flee from the shadows of the darkness and the sea , and they will come out in the morning ? and if you were to be patient , then we would certainly be among the appreciative . ”
he said : and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the astray ?
and for their taking usury—though they had been forbidden from it—and for eating up the wealth of the people wrongfully . and we have prepared for the faithless among them a painful punishment .
enveloping the people. ‘ this is a painful punishment .
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
on the day when the person will be repaid for what it has done , and the evil one is in the midst of the two , and the one who has made the evil one and the evil one and the other . god is compassionate and merciful to his servants .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . for they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made goodly your forms , and to him is the ultimate return .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have given them .
it is not in accordance with your wishes , nor by the fancies of the people of the book . whosoever does evil shall be requited for it , and he will not find for himself , besides allah , any protector or helper .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
and peace be on the messengers .
is there in their hearts a disease , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are the unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ! your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
and he followed a road
then he went back to his people , and he said , “ o my people , do i not have the promise to come to you , except what your lord has given you ? ” he said , “ o my people , do you not have faith in me , or you have been promised ? ”
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
we shall deliver your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed many people are heedless of our signs .
so , the book of the book and the people of tubba have been shown to his mercy . it is god who is the lord of mercy and the mercy of god . he is the lord of great bounty .
and the sun runstoward its stopping point . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and every nation has a witness from their own community , so that we shall say , ‘ you will be sent back to the matter of allah. ’ then we will say to them , ‘ you have been sent with the proof of allah and that on that day you will be brought back . ’
a group he has guided , and a group deserved to be in error ; surely they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and they say , “ when we have mingled with the earth , shall we be created anew ? ” in fact , they deny the meeting with their lord .
o you who have believed , do not enter your opinions in the cause of allah , and do not be stressed by what he has given you , but the like of it is a confirmation of the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an is sufficient for you , so that he may be of the faithless , and the qur ’ an is sufficient for you , and he is the most honourable of what you do .
when we have died and become dust and bones , are we indeed to be resurrected ?
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
now ask them : are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ?
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is majestic and all-wise .
he replied : 'allah will bring itupon you if he will ; you can not frustrate him .
tell of those who have been given the book of allah that they should follow their low desires , and do not follow what they have been doing . indeed , allah wants to cause the people to go astray from their deeds , and most of mankind are sinning .
do you not see that allah causes you to see the reality of the sky ? then they will be set in time , and it will bring out the like of it , and he will give to whom he wills a plain . and he gives to whom he will without stinting .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
or the water of your vineyard will be drained deep into the ground so that you will not be able to find it .
and say , my lord , i seek refuge in you from the incitements of the devils ,
surely those who disbelieve and have done evil , god would not forgive them , neither guide them on any road
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed bones .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
they say , ‘ are we being restored to our earlier state ?
nor shade and heat
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
o people who believe ! do not befriend any of your religion , and turn away from those who are in your religion ; and allah is the most munificent , the most knowing ,
and remember our servant job . when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has struck me with hardship and pain . ”
and said : 'are we to follow a mortal who is one of us ? then surely we should be in error and insanity !
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved arrogantly and were a criminal people .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day a time for rising .
and what is the matter with you that if we had put the trust in the lord of the throne , while he is the guided of it , and he is the most knowing , the most merciful ?
say , if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , ‘ whatever reward i may have asked you is for your own good . myreward lies only with allah , and he is witness over all things . ’
andwhen thy lord said unto the angels : verily i am about to createa man from ringing clay of loam moulded .
then it will be said to them : where is that which you used to associate
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made goodly your forms , and to him is the ultimate return .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and rewarded him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
those who fear their lord in secret and who dread the hour .
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
and these townswe destroyed when they did wrong . and we appointed for their destruction a tryst .
who , when they take the measurefrom men take it fully ,
allah is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and what is in it , and if they go forth , then surely , if they go forth , there will be no one after them ; surely he is the forgiving , the forgiving .
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
a messenger from allah , and his noble messenger , and on the day of resurrection , when the curse of allah is proclaimed , and on the day of resurrection , there is a great punishment for you , and if you turn away , then verily , it is better for you , and that ye may turn away .
surely the chastisement of their lord isnot to be felt secure of --
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with the truth , and grant me from yourself a helpful authority .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
and of the signs of allah that he sees that which is in the earth , and that it is he who sendeth down the way of his lord . and we will give him the good things of his grace , for he has power over all things .
those to whom we gave the book know him as they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has certainly been given much good . yet none remembers but men possessed of minds .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that the way of the mujrimun , may become manifest .
or do you have a clear authority ?
eyes be lowered in submission .
and every soul shall come , along with it a driver and a witness .
for a known extent .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their trespasses , for he knows what you do .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
enter thou among my servants !
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
if you were to marry a women before them , they would have taken to them the same time . it would be for them to take place in the same way , except for the cause of god . god is well aware of what you do .
and it was revealed to noah : 'none of your nation will believe except those who have already believed . do not distress yourself with what they do .
in the scriptures of the ancients .
allah has the knowledge of the people of the cities , and the people of the city , and the people of mecca ; and allah has decreed for the noble messenger , and to give you the book of all the things that are right and to the poor , and to the poor , and to the wayfarer ; and be careful ofallah ; and allah is the unjust .
and we are not going to be tormented .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and to thamood , the brother of their brother , he said , “ o my people , you have no god except him , and you have no god other than he ; so you have no relation with it ; then surely my lord is it , so that i may be very near . ”
say , ‘ what do you have regarding allah that he should call upon allah and call upon him ? ’ ‘ so , do you see the condition of allah , and that he may have given you a book , and that there is no one to follow allah ’ s creation , or that he has given you a book ? ’
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the worlds .
those who believe not in the hereafter , will say to them , “ what is the matter with you , when will those who believe in the hereafter assume that the faithless are in doubt about it ? now indeed those who are deeply quarrelsome . ”
and allah indeed aided you at badr when you were weak . so be wary of allah , so that you may give thanks .
no indeed ; the book of the pious is in illiyun ;
the messengers have been sent down by their lord . they have all the faith in the presence of his lord and the messengers . they say , we have obeyed the messengers and the messengers of the matter in which the messengers have been granted .
o people ! there has come to you a messenger from your lord , so believe in it . and you believe in that which is best in the heavens and the earth . indeed , allah is knowing and wise .
yet the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
he said : fear not : for i am with you : i hear and see .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a curtain drawn down .
but he who has done the good things in the earth , and makes it a share for the cause of god , he will provide for him , and has given you the good things of his bounty . he is the recompense of god , the lord of the universe . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they said , “ thus spoke your lord . he is the wise , the knowing . ”
o people , there is a great source of your own people who have created you from the earth , and have fear of one another , and have fear of god . have fear of god , for he has full power over all things .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him if you are obedient .
who set up along with allah another ilah , they will come to know .
and i am devising guile .
allah is subtle with his servants . he gives sustenance to whom he wills , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil—the evil deeds will be rewarded only according to what they used to do .
they said : we have been persecuted before you came to us and since you have come to us . he said : it may be that your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you act .
the lord of the prophet said , “ o eisa , the son of mary ! remember my favor which i have bestowed upon you , and in my custody , and when i have been sent down to you , in the heavens and the gospel , ” and when i have sent down to them from the declining of the torah , and the taurat and the evangel , they were told , “ this is the clear magic . ”
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a reputation of high honor .
and treasures and honorable station -
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundations of the house , they prayed , lord , accept this service from us ; you are all-hearing and all-knowing .
those are they that have lost their souls , and that which they forged has gone astray from them ;
surely allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seeing of what you do .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
if you are able to do so , it is all the same for you , if you should keep the right course , then , when it has come to you , do so , as to the time of your promise , it is the same to you that you may believe in it .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust ; then , behold , you are humans scattering !
and they ask you about the hour . say , ‘ the knowledge of it is only with your lord . ’ say , ‘ the knowledge of it is only with your lord , ’ and no one will be able to do so . say , ‘ the knowledge of the hereafter is only with allah , and in the end is the resurrection , and you are not aware of the resurrection . ’
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and the mountains as pegs ?
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases . and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
say : o unbelievers !
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
we have already given our promise to our messengers
who brings forth green pasture ,
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
and do not be of the believers , who believe , and do righteous good deeds , and the women of the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and do not be stressed by what they have done . and they are the disbelievers , in order that they may be grateful .
and if allah had extendedprovision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
in a clear arabic language .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah . there is no alteringallah 's creation . that is the valuable religion , but most of the people do not know .
if only we could return and be among the believers !
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while it is he who has exalted you above all peoples ?
o ye who believe ! if ye have tarried in a place of time , then behold the nature of a time that is made between thee and that which is in the sight of allah , behold , he is a man of truth , and that he may cause it to be a reputable , and lo ! he is of the twain that whereof ye are enmity , and that ye may be of the witnesses .
say , indeed , my lord has made the deeds of evil deeds . those who are evil are indeed the evil of their deeds . and whatever is in the matter , of a surety , has been made public .
by the witness and the witnessed !
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed bones .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
what is the matter with you that you make such strange judgements ?
and whenever a surah is revealed , they look at one another : is anyone watching ? then they turn away . allah has turned away their hearts because they are a people who do not understand .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it was shameful and odious ,
and o dear prophet , you should have your mate , and your family , and your family , do not go your head , and your garments is the same , and you are free from the presence of your own people . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and hasten to the for-giveness of your lord . and he is the exalted in might , the possessor of all bounties .
and how will they say , “ abraham and ishaq and yaqoub , and jesus , and ya'qub ? ” say , “ what ! will you know that allah is the unjust and the most terrible ? ”
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor do they have any power .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and assuredly you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
so ! and we knew all about him .
wavering between that , neither to these nor to those ; and whomsoever god leads astray , you will not find a way for him .
and many acquisitions which they will take ; and allah is mighty , wise .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
no indeed ; but that they were earning has rusted upon their hearts .
when he wills a thing , he just commands it “ be ” and it is .
when their brother hud said to them : will you not take heed ?
perish man ! how ungrateful is he !
and we saved the children of israel from the sea in succession , and they said , “ o moosa ! god is an ilahbesides you , ” and they have said , “ o moses , you are an unwise people . ”
my guardian is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
and never does the flesh of allah 's bird to be feeble , but the fact is that you are careful ofallah , and it is your lord ’ s knowledge that you may have the means of subsistence , and the good things you have received . and the lord of the good is the good .
and allah expoundeth unto you the revelations and allah is knowing , wise .
repulsed , for they are under a perpetual penalty ,
moses said : i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning .
and banish all trepidation .
and they will approach one another blaming each other .
nay ! when the earth is ground to powder ,
call on your lord with humility and in secret , he does not love the transgressors .
he it is who hath appointed you for the in the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth , and whosoever disbelieveth , he shall be his patron from his doom , and he shall not increase the infidels in aught save allah ; and thou shalt not increase the infidels in aught save allah .
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
it is god who determines the animals for living and living in the life of the world and also his human beings . he is the swiftest in taking account of the life to come . there are indeed signs in that for a people who have understanding .
he said , “ you will not be able to meet me by god , until i have come to you with your intention , except for a lot of which you have no power . when you have the promise , he said , god is the guardian of what you do . ”
on that day they will see the trunk of the barren camel , and he will give up every animal of the two parties , and the people are not equal to the people , but the people are you in the same way , but they are not aware .
and you are a resident of this land .
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
and do not be of those who have been sent down by your lord by a most noble messenger , and most certainly most of them have sent down to you a revelation from your lord , and he will take to the disbelievers a sorrow .
but they belied him , so they will be among the arraigned ,
return to your lord , well-pleased and pleasing ,
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will assist you with a thousand angels in a file .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? so woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of allah ! they are in manifest error .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot . we found him lacking in firmness of resolution .
they are the ones who have forgotten the word of god that they will be in the fire . they will answer : “ o our lord , do what you have done us , and we will be responsible for what you have done . ” but it is said to them , “ taste this , o lord , and do what you have done . ”
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : bring then a sura like unto it , and call whomsoever ye can besides allah , if ye say sooth .
and assuredly he had warned them of our grasp , but they doubted the warnings .
like the fate of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not want injustice for his servants .
before them we tested the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
hast thou not seen how allah hath made for you the importance of the earth and that which is in the earth , and that it is in the praises of allah that he hath made of service unto you all ? lo ! allah is subtile , merciful .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and to us belong the end and the beginning .
so give them tidings of a painful punishment ,
man will say on that day , where is theescape ?
but those who are iniquitous will be fuel for hell .
and the mountains as pegs ?
for the covenantsby the quraish ,
and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their insults , and rely on allah . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
it is he who produced you from a single person , then a repository , then a depository . we have detailed the revelations for a people who understand .
say , is this better or the garden of eternity which the righteous have been promised ? it is their reward and their destination .
say , , do you presume to teach god your religion when god knows everything in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of everything .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will assist you with a thousand angels in a file .
by thethat run , with panting ,
he who is conscious of god will be guided to the right path , and he whom god wills , he will make it clear to the other , and he leads astray whom he will . thus does god confound those who believe not .
and by the swelling sea :
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i would be among the muhsinun .
a warning to mortals ,
and after them a generation of the generations of the past , they had been given the inheritance of this world , and the people of this world as well as the favour of their deeds . and if they are given a good share of this world , then it is the same for the people of allah ; and the hereafter is better for those who are godwary .
you will neither be hungry in it nor naked .
said , o aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
indeed , you love those you love , but forgive them , and have no faith in the book of the people of the heaven , and when they are bidden to say , ‘ we will indeed believe in what is in the innermost of the chests . ’
and the leader among them went about , saying : go , and remain constant to your aliha ! verily , this is a thing designed !
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
and say , my lord , i seek refuge in you from the incitements of the devils ,
god commands justice , kindness and giving theirnear relatives , and he forbids indecency , dishonor and insolence . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while a terrible punishment besieged pharaoh ’ s clan .
and he is the subjugator over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
the indubitable event !
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains . and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us and do not be with the disbelievers .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly , and is a believer , these it is that shall be the best of return .
so leave them in their error for a time .
and by those that press forward as in a race .
so taste , because you neglected the meeting of this day of yours ; we have forgotten you . taste the eternal torment for what you used to do .
i will cast him into hell .
and those who emigrated for the sake of allah after they had been wronged - we will surely settle them in this world in a good place ; but the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they but knew .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the present and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
indeed , your lord is in observation .
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace. ” he said , “ peace , strangers . ”
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow no friends other than him . little do you remember .
and wherever you be , you may travel through the land and seek to make yourself a prey to say , ‘ this is allah ’ s munificence , if you are going to be requited with them , and do not have any faith in it . ’
say , “ whoever is an enemy to jibreel ” – for it is he who has brought down this qu ’ ran to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming the books before it , and a guidance and glad tidings to muslims . –
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say , ‘ allah has taken a son . ’
our lord ! we have indeed heard that which is in the fire , and we shall have believed in your lord , and so we have believed in him , and so we put our trust in them , and we set our trust in them , and make our foothold sure .
or is he not informed with what is in the pagesof musa ,
those who follow the messengers and have made deliverance about it . the torah and the gospel will be made to seem right to them and to make them rulers in the way of god . those who believe and do good deeds will be repaid for their deeds and they will be successful .
we had forbidden him before , so she said : shall i direct you to a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
then we made you successors on earth after them , to see how you behaved .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your homes places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the faithful . ”
for they were guided to purity of speech ; and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
and the people of those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ it is a like that of yours , that they may be given to the right way ” ; and they will say , “ this is what we have given you , in order to recite the book of its lord , and he will not be called to account . ”
and they say , “ why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
do you order righteousness of the people and forget yourselves while you read the book ? have you then no sense ?
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
in them are good and beautiful ones .
but if they turn away , your only duty is clear communication .
and those who cry out of prayer , “ our lord ! this is the glory of your lord – purity is to you ; he is the most gracious , and the most honourable of what they say , and what you say is good , and the most honourable of their forefathers is the most honourable . ”
and shield them from the evil deeds ; and whomever you save from the evil consequences of sins on that day – so you have had mercy upon him ; and this is the supreme success . ”
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
then howwhen the angels gather them , smiting their faces and their backs ?
and they said nothing but : our lord ! forgive us our sins and our transgressions , establish our feet firmly , and give us victory over the disbelieving folk .
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in retribution . indeed , he is forgiving and merciful .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! lo ! thou art indeed a madman !
these are the faithless , the vicious .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you have earned . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky . then we will bring it to light , all of them , and we shall make a casting of them , and there are some among them who have faith , and there are some of them who have faith ; and there are some of them who have faith .
and to that fact he bears witness ;
and a multitude of those of later time .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the frailestof houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he would have led us astray from our gods had we not adhered to them patiently . they will know , when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
then he invoked his lord , ‘ these are indeed a guilty lot . ’
do not exalt yourselves above god . i come to you with clear authority .
and to allah only belong the truth , and those call upon other than him , who call on a call , and call no one to help them , except as he wishes to be rewarded by any means of his head , and they are not except in the midst of the disbelievers .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners ! ’
who seeth thee when thou standest up
who set up along with allah another ilah , they will come to know .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
and of his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make clear to us what is right . ” he said , “ he says she is a heifer , neither too old , nor too young ; so do what you are commanded . ”
and if they incline to peace , make peace with them , and put your trust in allah ; surely he is the hearing , the knowing .
we have sent down this qur ’ an , as an expanding human being , for the cause of god to be a mercy and a mercy for the unjust . for the wrongdoers there is no substitute for the unjust .
and , when they are admonished , pay no heed , -
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
and verily we shall make all that is on ita bare dry soil .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not realize it .
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof belongs to allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
for those who responded to the lord of the matter and who have responded to the call of their lord , - for those who listen , will be in the same manner , and it will be in the earth a great place . it is they who will be successful .
except for those who repent before you capture them . so know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
say : the angel of death , who has been given charge of you will gather you , then to your lord you will be returned .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
and round about them willyouths of perpetual : if thou seest them , thou wouldst think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , out of spite and arrogance . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplicant ’ s call when he calls me . so let them respond to me , and let them have faith in me , so that they may fare rightly .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then the earth will be told , let your water go on the ground , and do not let yourself go back on the earth . then , do not be in the least bit of its good , and the command of god shall be made plain to the harmdoers .
master of the day of judgment .
you can not thwart him on the earth , and have no friend or helper apart from him .
said : if thou dost put forward any god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
the idolaters certainly swear by their oaths that if they had been sent to them , they would surely have believed in god , and say , indeed , the sign of god is with allah , so that you may have no faith .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
but they were wont to be given to the faith , when they see our wrath , and have faith in that which they have been working . lo ! they are disbelievers in the anguish of that which they have been disbelievers .
said , thus , your lord says , 'it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . '
we have explainedin various ways in this quran , that they may take heed , but it has only increased their aversion .
say , ‘ tell me , should you have the reminder ? if this be the revelation of allah , he will bring you the book , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , is the one who does not accept the right way . ’
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who kept you back from guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were guilty .
who set up another god with allah . throw him into severe torment .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
and let your women be your women , and follow the positions of your homes ; so that you may go aright , and that you may come to terms of allah with your own souls , and that you may come to know the truth .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a known day .
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least . a painful torment awaits them .
wherefore for him here this day there is no friend .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to him is the homecoming .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will assist you with a thousand angels in a file .
my guardian is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
he set in it firm mountains , above it , blessed it , and ordained therein its diverse sustenance in four days , equal to those who ask . '
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . away with aad , the people of hud .
god : there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . who is more truthful than god ?
you are but a warner .
surely what you are promised shall come to pass .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
and the earth discharges its burdens
o prophet ! say unto those captives who are in your hands : if allah knoweth any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which hath been taken away from you , and he will forgive you . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and allah took ibrahim for a friend ?
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and when they come to know of the matter , they take awe of it , and if they have passed away , they will be told , and , if there is a good counsel , they will be brought to the prophet , and to the messenger , all but a little .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to the servants . ’
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there should be no hostility except against the oppressors .
it is no concern for a man , or a thing that is in my own hands . but it is only for a people that please allah , for a term which he has decreed , and when it comes , a group of them will be sent to pieces .
whencommit indecent acts they say , we found our fathers doing this and god has commanded us to do the same . tell them that god does not command anyone to commit indecency . you impute such lies to god as you do not know .
but they turned away . so we let loose upon them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
so how will you , if you disbelieve , on a day that will make children white-headed ,
and we have made the children of israel their covenant with the truth , and we have made their hearts seem decorous to them , and the same is in their favour , and they will surely know that most of them are ungrateful .
and fight in the cause of allah and strive in the way of allah , and he has made for you the good things , and he has made subservient to you all that is in the hearts of allah , and the qur ’ an in your way ; and allah is the trustee of the truth .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
and fear him who created you andthe generations before
man will be informed that day of what he sent ahead and left behind .
have they not observed the things allah has created ? their shadows revolve from the right and the left , prostrating themselves to god .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and that which ye give in gift in order that it may increase among the substance of men increaseth not with allah ; and whatsoever ye give in poor-rate seeking the countenance of allah , - those ! they shall be requited manifold .
we sent thisdown on the night of honor .
some of them look to you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
then he said : my lord ! appoint for me a token . then he said : the matter is that thou hast spoken to me , and the lord said , thy lord is going to speak in the night and in the morning .
if the unbelievers only knew when they will be unable to ward off the fire from their faces and from their backs , and they will not be helped .
and guard their private parts
or do they say , “ if it had been our book , we would have given them a better guidance , and indeed , it is we who are in the clear signs of allah – and indeed , the qur ’ an is not , in fact , and the qur ’ an , and the noble qur ’ an , . indeed , we will make the communications clear to them , for they are in a state of justice .
and plantains laden with fruit .
when i have fashioned himand breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
and we delivered those who believed and were godfearing .
o ye who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord , and do good , that haply ye may prosper .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
so , when the promise of the first of the transgressions came to pass , we sent against you our servants , full of martial might , and they ransackedhabitations , and the promise was fulfilled .
eat and drink from what we have given you of the good things and the good things that are good , so that my wrath may be for you , and that my wrath is only with the truth , and that it is a great achievement .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
verily the vilest of moving creatures with allah are those who disbelieve-wherefore they shall not believe-
indeed the pious are in shade and springs .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
lo ! we sent a storm of stones upon themsave the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
so , o prophet , you had received the message which we had sent down to you , so that we could have sent down to you what you have been sent down , and you would have made them a love of their associates .
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they reprieved .
thus did we assign to every prophet that which is sent down to the human from the jinn and the jinn , and the word of which they have been made to say ; and if your lord willed , let them go astray .
hast thou seen if he relieth on the guidance
they said : it is the same to us whether you admonish or are not one of the admonishers
say : travel in the land , then see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise , you will be brought forth .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you , your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
it is a written record .
but they called their companion , so he tookand slew .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so he will be in pleasant living .
storming into the midst .
and what will make you know what 'illiyyun is ?
when the wife of 'imran said : o lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb , to your service , so accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing .
which will neither fatten them nor satisfy them .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
the foolish among the people will say , ‘ what has turned them away from the qiblah which they used to face ? ’ say , ‘ to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ’
except the chosen slaves of allah .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe for the similitude of those who believe , when she said : o my lord ! build for me a house in thine presence ; and deliver me from fir'awn and his handiwork , and deliver me from the wrong-doers folk .
these are the gardens of eden . they will be in the midst of gardens beneath which rivers flow . they will be in the level level and black silk .
knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the sky will be opened and become gates ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused and was proud ,
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieved may know that they were liars .
no one disputes the revelations of the lord except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
allah has not taken to himself a son , but allah has taken a place of all creatures in his divinity ; and allah has made a view of his own creation ; and allah is exalted above what they say .
for when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah ” , they were haughty .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
and of the people of the scripture , there were a people who were given the book of the book . if it were a great loan , he would have given it to you all that is in a wise way . and if they are , then , they will say : the proof of which we have been given , if you are but fabricators .
a very host of parties is routed there !
nor did we feed the destitute .
these wait for but one shout , there will be no second thereto .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil the burden they bear !
the charitable men and women who give a virtuous loan to god will receive double from him in addition to their honorable reward .
and when allah has given you the good news that he has made obeisance to you , from the sky , and has made for you from the sky a pure cloud , so that he may cause you to go away from the sky , and it may be made for you to drink by allah , and in the transport of the calf and in the seatbelt .
and then manage the affairs of the universe .
on the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake , and the mountains shall becomeheaps of sand let loose .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will assist you with a thousand angels in a file .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake , and the mountains shall becomeheaps of sand let loose .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
but they had not been sent as guardians over them .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
filling your bellies with it ;
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . verily we ! we found him patient . how excellent a bondman ! verily he was oft-returning .
the companions of the fire will call to the dwellers of paradise : 'pour on us some water , or some of that which god has provided you ' they will say , 'god has forbidden them to the unbelievers . '
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
we sent messengers before you to the previous peoples ,
so he cast it down , and behold ! it was a snake , moving quickly .
as for the man-thief and the woman-thief , cut off their hands as a meed for that which they have earned . a torment exemplary from allah . allah is mighty , wise .
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be requited without account .
will you be left secure in that which is here
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
when he called upon his lord in secret ,
and surely we shall make them taste of the smaller torment prior to the greater chastisement , so that they may retract .
they said : swear to each other by allah that we will certainly make a sudden attack on him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his household , and we are indeed truthful .
who deniedand turned away .
and we delivered moses and those with him all together ;
their lord will examine his deeds ?
this is our unending provision '
it is but a revelation revealed .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
and when we sent a book ] to the book , we had given it light in light , and the light of his noble messenger , that they were averse to the commands of allah , and those who are upright , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel , - they are the disbelievers .
and we made good to man , and to his parents , and if you have to set up any partners to me , then do not follow it ; and if you do not give to me any knowledge , then do not take to me what you are trying to do .
he is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the exalted .
and if we willed , we verily could have sent down to thee that which is revealed unto thee , and then thou wouldst find no escape for them ; and thou shalt not find for him any help .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them to speak sinfully and to devour what is unlawful ? evil is what they have been doing .
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
are they awaiting a mercy from your lord , and we have provided them with a sustenance in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , and of all that they may have , in order that they may be of the mercy of your lord ? and in order that they may receive mercy .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
he said , ‘ by allah , you have indeed been transgressing with your own self , so that you may attain it as a single part of its cow , and indeed , the most among the people who have been wrongdoers will not be accepted from it , and indeed , the most of those who are muslims . ’
then they will be given to the people of the town so that they would not be able to make any testament in the least . but they will not be able to make a single answer , and the punishment became due to them , and he said , “ if only you had any power to do this , then the way you would have done . ”
then with it we produced for you gardens of palm trees and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave respite to the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that to your lord is the finality
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
then he turned back and was proud ;
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book that makesmanifest .
he said , “ i have loved the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
abraham was , certainly , an obedient and upright person . he was not a pagan .
and if we willed , we would have made for you among yourselves a prey , or the same ; but if they were to do so , they would surely have been in respect of it , and they were created .
and that he himself created the two sexes , male and female ,
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you , when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers trust .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
: this is that which ye were promised.for every penitent and heedful one ,
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be rewarded for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of glory , above what they describe .
so no intercession will avail them .
those who deny the truth are allies of god by solemn oaths , saying , if there had been a messenger for them , they would certainly say , if only there had come to them a messenger from the messenger , they would have persisted in their insolence and rebellion .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for they were evildoers .
so when he had left them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each we made a prophet .
and whoever comes with an evil deed - their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you did ?
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and turn away from the faith of allah . those who are unjust will be turned to god in all abasement .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe ; and they have no defender against allah .
and when it was revealed to moses , the torah and the inscription had been sent down by him , the verses of the past and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel ] and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , was of the righteous .
saying : 'we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
read in the name of your lord who created ,
have we not opened up your breast
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you until a stated term . allah 's term can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth halloweth allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
say thou : it hath been revealed unto me that a party of the jinn listened , and they said : verily we have heard a marvellous qur'an ,
and they say : if we follow guidance with thee , we shall surely follow it with a goodly purpose , and we have not made for him a plan , except that which is with him , and most of them have no knowledge . and most of them know not .
so we inflicted retribution on them , then see how was the end of the rejecters .
say , “ it is i who will bring you all together , and i will say to you , ‘ indeed i am allah ’ s entity ; therefore you are one god ; so do not implore for their sins ; and indeed , they have been , to the polytheists , in the extreme . ”
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and of the bedouin arabs we have set the tongue of the palm-tree , and after their knowledge , in order to make a matter of knowledge ; and if they were to be made to make a matter of their lord , he would have made them to be of the losers . they have been the command of allah , and they have been made to differ .
god commands justice , kindness and giving theirnear relatives , and he forbids indecency , dishonor and insolence . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
so , the book of the book and the people of tubba have been shown to his mercy . it is god who is the lord of mercy and the mercy of god . he is the lord of great bounty .
and we have sent youonly as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
the hour is coming—but i keep it almost hidden—so that each soul will be paid for what it endeavors .
if you seek to help them , they will surely have their principal , and if you turn away , they will not return to you . and if you turn away , then we will turn you back to your heels , and you will not be able to have any faith in allah .
indeed , we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he was unfair and ignorant .
those who put away their wives and then go back on what they said should free a slave before they touch each other . that is what you are exhorted to do so . god is aware of what you do .
and what is the matter with you that if we had put the trust in the lord of the throne , while he is the guided of it , and he is the most knowing , the most merciful ?
they said , “ o my servants ! indeed you have come to us before us , and follow us . do we follow what our forefathers have found our forefathers , and we will assume that you are calling to us ! ”
is there not a man who cares to be admitted to the garden of eden and vines ? and they are made to face with it , a great deal , and a great end . that is how god explains the signs of those who are with you .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
and what will explain to thee what is the day of sorting out ?
and remember when your lord has inspired the angels to say : “ i am your guardian , so do not be afraid of the unbelievers , and you will be saddened by the command of the unbelievers . ”
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy among the sinners . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
and as for those whose scale is light , they are those who will lose their ownselvesbecause they denied and rejected our ayat .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
these are tidings of the unseen that we reveal to you , , which you did not know before , nor did your people . so be patient . indeed , the outcome is for the god-fearing .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
who give the lie to the day of judgment .
if you could only see when the angels take away the unbelievers , beating their faces and their backs , : 'taste the chastisement of the burning --
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
a very host of parties is routed there !
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
and how is it that when you see the sky , how it is a rock , and then he has set up fair to him the throne and the sun and the moon , and he has made them the sun , and the moon , and he will make them the communications of a tremendous nation ? and he is the swiftest in might , the most merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron .
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
if the disbelievers were to overtake the israelites , they would have smitten the same with it , and we would have given them the like of the people , and we would have made them the disbelievers . indeed , allah does not like the wrongdoers .
into scalding waters and then set aflame in the fire .
who created me , and it is he who guides me ;
they are those for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
the first house to be built for mankind was the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the whole world .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents , has faith and acts righteously , maybe he will be among the successful .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your homes places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the faithful . ”
these are the faithless , the vicious .
of those who split up their religion and became divided into sects ; each one exulting in what they have .
except for those who repent , attain faith , and act righteously . for such , allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
it is he who created you . some of you are unbelievers and some of you are believers . and god perceives what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay .
in the way of god , the upright . he who makes this book has come to you , is the book of god , and the book to make things clear ; this is how god explains the means to you , and to show them the way that is upright , and to be guided to the right path .
and we have made this qur ’ an easy in your language , for them to understand .
and among them are those who say , “ our lord , give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the punishment of the fire . ”
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot . we found him lacking in firmness of resolution .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
and from among their fathers , their descendants and their brothers , and we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
but they will never long for it , because of that their hands have forwarded . god is aware of the evildoers .
the companions of paradise , that day , area better settlement and better resting place .
arrange marriages between the single men and women among your and between your slave men and slave women ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
he was one of our believing worshipers .
say , “ who will cause you to flee from the shadows of the darkness and the sea , and they will come out in the morning ? and if you were to be patient , then we would certainly be among the appreciative . ”
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and will return to his family delighted .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
no indeed ; but today they resign themselves in submission
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves before allah .
what hath brought you to this burning ?
what , do they not see how the heavens and the earth were to have the power to cleave the heavens , and the earth ? if it be too that they are in the earth , then do we turn to them in a clear way .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
he will say , by god , you had almost ruined me .
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
we had not given them books to study , nor have we sent them any warner before you .
and if this had been revealed to them , they would have said , “ is it clear to us ? ” they also say , “ is it the clear verses of our verses that are recited to you ? ” and say , “ it is clear to those who believe in it , and in fact , it may be that those who are bent on denying the truth say , ‘ it is plain to the faith of a people who will not be guided . ’
he will live a pleasant life .
and establish weight in justice and do not make the balance deficient .
but they hamstrung her . hesaid : 'take your enjoyment in your homes for three days ! this is a promise that can not be belied '
and what would befall them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided for them ? allah knows them well .
but they have no power to please god , but they will have no choice in the life to come . they will have the means of paradise as a result of their worldly life .
and do not eat up your property among yourselves in vanity , nor offer it to the judges in order that you may devour a portion of the property of others wrongfully , while you know .
the evil of their deeds will become apparent to them and what they had mocked at will encompass them ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
and what would befall them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided for them ? allah knows them well .
they said , “ our lord , the means of the land is far from us , and in fact they have been unjust , so we made them leaders ; indeed in this are signs for the people who are patient .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
and we brought the others close to that place .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
and he propoundeth for us a similitude and forgetteth his creation . he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
he said , “ these are my guests , so do not disgrace me . ”
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
: 'tomorrow they shall know who is the arrogant liar .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by this . your lord is the beneficent god . follow me and obey my orders .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
who reckon that they shall meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
has the story of your past people reached you ? but those who went after them have no other reason than god , and those who have gone before them have also been sent by god . they came to them with the truth , and they were saying , we believe in that you have been sent with .
why then , if you are not revived ,
and assuredly we grasped them with torment , yet they humbled not themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while it is he who has exalted you above all peoples ?
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , for your own good . and whoever is saved from his own greediness , it is they who are the successful .
let man consider his food .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , this is a hard day .
those who have believed and migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , these are the believers in truth ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
while the hereafter is better and more enduring .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
so it is . and whoever respondswith the equivalent of that with which he was harmed and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
and they denied them , and we delivered him and those with him , in the ark , and we drowned them in the sea , and we drowned them completely .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you , your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
do you not see that when you have said to them , “ o my people ! what is the matter with you ? ” they said , “ your god is your lord , and he is the one , and we will submit . ”
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour comes , those who follow falsehood will be the losers .
in a few years . to god belongs the command before and after , and on that day the believers will rejoice
and if they have been sent as a favour , then do not be more than a return of it after it has become clear to them . and if they are able to worship allah , then they will have to return to him , and he will have a succession in what they know .
but the wretched will turn away
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
in which are fruits , and covered dates .
say : believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it bow in adoration when it is recited to them ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor do you make the deaf hear your call when they turn their backs retreating .
and besides these two , there are two other gardens .
so do not obey the deniers .
he will call for destruction
say , “ to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ”
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call out to the companions of paradise , peace be with you . they enter it not although they hope .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
for those who reject their lordis the penalty of hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
and indeed , the account of abraham and in the fairest of the good things are for him , and the good things , to be shown to him , and whoever follows the right way , will be rewarded by him on the day of resurrection . and whoever turns away , will have a worthy of all praise .
and we have left of it a clear sign for a nation who understand .
and he said to the one he thought would be saved , mention me to your master . but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , and joseph remained in prison for a number of years .
and we do not let a soulallah suggest is to them . so they went forth in their tracks , after it had come to them , and whoever does not have to go about in the least , after that , has been decided between them , surely , your lord will judge between them .
or enjoins piety ?
and when they saw them they said : 'these are they who are astray '
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
and we had certainly sent warners among them .
lo ! unto us is their return
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
he said : therein ye shall live and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
we called out to him , “ o abraham !
and we put veils over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever you call for ,
they said , ‘ in allah we have put our trust. ’ ‘ our lord ! do not make us atest for the wrongdoing lot ,
and indeed , it is the truth of certainty .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
the striking calamity -
they are like the way of pharaoh and those who lived before them and those who lived before them . they denied our revelations , and god has prepared for them a severe punishment .
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
repel evil with that which is better . we are best aware of that which they allege .
have you not heard of the one who was given the lie to his abraham ? he who was given the dominion of his lord , he said , ‘ i am indeed a hanif , ’ he said , ‘ i will not be able to give my dominion to the lord of the throne ; and he said , ‘ indeed allah will bring to me a way . ’
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and allah has control over all things .
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most of mankind know not .
and constant in their prayers .
on the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth his hands , he will say , oh , i wish i had taken a path with the messenger .
and assuredly she besought him , and he would have besoughther were it not that he had seen the argument of his lord . thus we might avert from him evil and indecency . lo ! he was of our chosen slaves .
i will grant them respite , for my devising is indeed sure .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
lo ! those who believe and do good works , their lord guideth them by their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of delight .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , if you believe . ”
then , as to the believers , they are not going to be to be returned to him , and to be presented to a nation of whom he grants knowledge and wisdom , so that they may come back .
then he said : my lord ! appoint for me a token . then he said : the matter is that thou hast spoken to me , and the lord said , thy lord is going to speak in the night and in the morning .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
and he who does not respond to the caller of allah will not be able to frustrate him on earth , nor will he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve on the march , turn not your backs to them .
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god except him . indeed , it is a sign for you from your lord , so that you may receive a sign from allah , and that you may receive a grievous chastisement . ’
who desires to expel you from your land , so what do you advise ? ’
to pharaoh and his elites ; but they acted arrogantly and they were a tyrannical lot .
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of parable : but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
: “ set out with my servants by night for you will certainly be pursued .
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury from the sky because they are evil-livers .
it is he who breaks the dawn . he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
it shall be made into a vault over them ,
‘ and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ’ ”
this is my path , which is straight , so follow it , and do not follow other ways for they will lead you away from his path . this is what he has enjoined upon you , so that you may become righteous .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
and he saith : o my lord ! verily these are a people who believe not .
on the day when the hour takes place , the sinners will swear that they had stayed but an hour . thus they were deluded .
kaf , ha , ya , ayn , saad .
why do you not use your wealth to allah , and will not cause you to be in the heavens and the earth ? and indeed , it is for allah to do so , and he is the most honourable of what you do .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear a day when he will not appoint for his father . indeed , the promise of allah is true . so you will not be able to have any faith in the hereafter .
and tell them of the guests of abraham ,
so that they may go on the wrong and the wrong , and the needy , and the poor , and the prayer , and the prayer ; and they prostrate in prayer , and prostrate in the prayer ; and give good news to the good .
and obey allah and the noble messenger , hoping that you gain mercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? no , he is an insolent liar .
they said : by allah ! you will not cease to remember yusuf until you wreck your health or perish .
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of god is true . he is majestic and all-wise .
and they denied our signs to the extreme .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
and whoever is this in the way to allah , give the lie to the truth that is in obedience to the commands of allah , and be careful ofallah , and have no fear of allah except the people who are fasiqun .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who deny our signs , they are the inhabitants of the blaze .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and let the divorced women have a rich women , so that they may go forth and wait for the good things , and they have not been allowed to do so , if they have to be their guardian in the way of god , and the law of the world to come , is for them , if they have the right to do so .
the day when the trumpet will be sounded and we shall muster the sinners , their eyes turned blue with terror .
and abundant fruit ,
and the earth discharges its burdens
a provision for you and your cattle .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
hast thou not seen how allah hath made for you the importance of the earth and that which is in the earth , and that it is in the praises of allah that he hath made of service unto you all ? lo ! allah is subtile , merciful .
you are not their keeper .
say : travel in the land and see how he originated creation ; then allah will originate the hereafter : for allah has power over all things .
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus , the son of mary . that was because they rebelled and used to transgress .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with resentment . but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
this is a reminder . the devout will have a good place of return .
thus did we assign to every prophet that which is sent down to the human from the jinn and the jinn , and the word of which they have been made to say ; and if your lord willed , let them go astray .
and the leader among them went about , saying : go , and remain constant to your aliha ! verily , this is a thing designed !
wherefore turn thou aside from them , and say : peace . presently they shall come to know .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
and your lord said to the angels : i am indeed going to have a position in the earth , and they said : is there any good in that which he hath made known to you ? and we are not to be able to make things equal to him , and we shall say to him : surely i know what you do not know .
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us ! he will say : verily ye shall bide
or you have a garden of palms and vines , and you make rivers flow through it ,
the measuring among the people of the son said , ‘ the son of the town ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah ! ’ they said , ‘ the son of allah is the only . ’ they said , ‘ this is allah ’ s exclusive prayer ; so what do you know ? ’
and the sun is made to seem fair to them , and to make the sun a lamp , and it is only for a mild extent . and whoever commits a way of evil , then it is for you to be your duty , and to be careful ofallah , and that allah is with the righteous .
and of them is he who defameth thee in the matter of alms . if they are given thereof they are pleased , and if they are not given thereof , lo ! they are enraged .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
and he it is who has taught you that , which is said , then say : if i have not made it up , then you will not be able to make friends with me ; and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
said he , 'what prevented thee to bow thyself , when i commanded thee ? ' said he , ' i am better than he ; thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay . '
when they are sent down to the messenger , what is revealed to you , the eyes of the eyes and the people were stilled . they say , ‘ our lord , we have believed , so do what they say , ’
and deem not those that are fraudulent in , but be of the good things of allah ; for them is what allah hath bestowed on them . lo ! he is the knower of that which ye work .
and who hath disposed and then guided ,
indeed he used to rejoice in his home .
and that it is he who gives death and life .
if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : god . how then are they turned away ?
lo ! he knoweth that which thou art informed of the two parts of the night or the ham of some of you , and some of those who are with you in respect of the watches of those who are in your vicinity ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and if you ask them , who has created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : the mighty , the knower created them .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him , so that he may be a warner with him ? ”
if you meet them in battle , disperse bythem those behind them that perhaps they will be reminded .
who know whatever you do .
do they havethe unseen , which they write down ?
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty !
how can they hear a whisper in the word of their tongues and their whispering no good ? no one will be able to make any one of them , except in respect of the good things . and whoever does so , has a great reward .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind .
lo ! those who disbelieve and hinderfrom the path of allah , then die while they are disbelievers , allah will not forgive them .
whoever is upright , he is rightly guided . he is the giver of guidance to his own soul . and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own good , and whoever goes astray , it is only for a people who have no faith .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty :
verily , spendthrifts are brothers of the shayatin , and the shaitanis ever ungrateful to his lord .
and whoso defendeth himself after he hath suffered wrong - for such , there is no wayagainst them .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
and he who suppresses it will be ruined .
and they say , “ if god had so willed , we would have taken our parents for a son . we had not made our forefathers to be one of those who have gone before us , and we shall not have any knowledge of this ; and you will not follow anything except what has been denied before us and you will not be able to do anything . ”
we made the children of israel follow the children of israel and provided them with the means of sustenance , and provided them with the means of which they had no knowledge . and verily , your lord will soon make them succeed on the day of judgment .
may be then be accursed , how he plotted !
he said , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” he will not make the earth a distinction for them , but they said , “ this is the matter that you have not listened , and in fact , the truth. ” they used to say , ‘ this is what you used to do . ’
say , “ praise god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has selected . is god better , or what they associate ? ”
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
and there will be for you no fault , if it were to be of no avail to you , even if they were to make a breach with it , or made you a portion of the same time ; and whoever is forbidden , it is for him to do so , and he is the steadiest of reckoners .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
have they not travelled in the land , so that you would see the consequences of those who were before them ? they were utterly in the cause of those who were before them , and they will have no helpers .
it is not befitting toallah that he should beget a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be ! and it is .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds and humbled themselves before their lord – they are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and majestic .
the revelation of the book whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
if it had been our will , he could have made it firm and made the mountains to be firm , and would have been in the midst of god , the lord of all pinnacles .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
no indeed ; i swear by the alternating stars
glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
verily we ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
believers , have fear of god and be with the truthful ones .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it ; and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
whoever of you does a fault , people will have a good share of what he has done . a good deed is to be done to him . god is watchful over all things .
say : ' i have been sent to you , the lord of the power , and i have been sent down to you . i have no knowledge of this , but i have been sent down to you , so do you not know ? '
is there in their hearts a disease , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are the unjust .
and we did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor do we ever send .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
and you do not will except that allah wills , the lord of all the worlds .
as for those who disbelieve , and hinder from the path of allah , they shall have from the sacred mosque to be made to rest ; and for those who have rebelled against allah will have a punishment that is in store for them ; and he who is given the punishment of disbelief -
and in the hours before dawn they would ask forgiveness ,
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
and thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
and before them the nation of noah , they exceeded in evil and were insolent .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
but they turned away . so we let loose upon them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan ; he refused .
we send not the angels down save with the fact , and then they would not be respited .
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
and some faces , that day , will be basirah ,
so when our commandment came to pass we overthrewand rained upon it stones of laminar shale ,
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth ! our lord is the beneficent , whose help is to be sought against that which ye ascribe .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient are we as reckoners .
and it is allah who sends down the rain from the sky and in what the grain contains by it , and the qur ’ an in accordance with the stars , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in their open ways ; and this is how allah sets forth the way for the people , so that the roots of the people are upon the earth . and this is how allah sets forth as a creation .
the night of power is better than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . even if satan were calling them to the torment of the burning fire !
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
those who like that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that their term may have drawn near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
on the day when we will raise up a witness from every people , the disbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
those who humbly cry in their prayers .
it is a brief usage ; their abode is hell ; and what an evil resting-place !
and they say , ‘ and we have denied our signs , and our signs came to abraham with our signs , and he was overcome over them . and whoever among them has attained his noble guidance , we will surely give you a great reward . ’
and when they see a sign they make it an object of ridicule ,
they said , then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may testify .
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamood , sparing no one .
and a tongue , and a pair of lips ? -
while he was in the highest part of the horizon .
but if you slip after clear arguments have come to you , then know that allah is exalted in might and wise .
woe to the liars
they said , “ who has done this to our gods ? he is indeed cruel ! ”
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
he said , “ i will go tomy lord ; he will guide me .
said : o my people ! i do not bring to you any thing that i may worship except with the lord of your own creation , and bring to me a great building , and then bring to you a great adversary .
but if they break their pledges after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
'send thou with us the children of israel . '
and remember you much .
it is he who originates the creation , and then repeats it , and it is very easy for him . his is the most exalted similitude in the heavens and in the earth ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the pains of this , and the praise , and the praise of him , and the praise of him , as he leaves in dread . and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he is able to do all things .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the guidance , and we caused the children of isra'il to inherit the scripture .
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you have been promised is near or far away .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor do they grieve .
and we made a decree of the son of mary for the son of mary , and made the torah and the light of the book for which he was given to light , and the guidance and the light , and the guidance to those who fear allah .
father , there has come to me knowledge that has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
and those who fear their lord , in the everlasting punishment will be in the gardens of eden , wherein they will live forever . this is the best for the righteous .
say , “ to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ”
and never came a messenger to them but they did mock him .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with allah , and to him you shall be brought back . and he is not aware of what he says , and they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given to you a thing with which he has no intelligence . ’ they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given you an account of what you used to do . ’
when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you but as a jest . is this the one who talks of your gods ? in the mention of the compassionate they are disbelievers .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the clear book ,
it is he who breaks the dawn . he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
and when our messengers came to them , he was told : “ except allah , ” ; so they said , “ if our lord does not guide us , then , should i be guided , then we will not believe in whatever you have been sent with , but the shaitan has willed to what you are sent with . ”
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud had accusedbefore ,
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and for him who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
it is no concern of yours whether he redeems them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
who listen to the words and follow what is finest of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
and also our forefathers ?
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
those who have believed and those who have believed in the truth – we have indeed entrusted them to a place of which they are not in the least , and we will not let the reward of any people be cut off ; and we do not waste the reward of any who is unjust .
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
lord of the two sunrises and lord of the two wests .
and of a specific portion of the two , that you should keep away from the right side of the two night , and on the day of resurrection , there will be no sin for them , nor will they be brought back to any way .
no associate has he . and to this i am bidden , and i am the first of the muslims .
and the one who was of the lingerers of the house of joseph , and the words of abraham , he said , “ take hold of it , and do not be at all equally ; i will do it , and you will not be executed in the least . i will do this with the unjust . ”
said he , 'moses , i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking ; so take what i have given thee , and be of the thankful . '
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
o ye who believe ! be careful of your duty to allah , and lo ! some of them are in doubt , and do not make friends in the least , and do not be of the head of the extravagant . lo ! allah is seer of what he will .
it is not befitting toallah that he should beget a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be ! and it is .
everlasting gardens – all its gates are open for them .
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling-place . and he had no host to help him against allah , nor was he of those who could save themselves .
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
but they have no power to please god , but they will have no choice in the life to come . they will have the means of paradise as a result of their worldly life .
they said , “ o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our belongings ; and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ”
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
say , ‘ this is my way . i invite to allah , based on clear knowledge—i and whoever follows me . immaculate is allah , and i am not of the polytheists . ’
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
when he came to it , he was called : “ blessed is he who is in the fire , and those around it ; and glory be to god , the lord of all the worlds . ”
say : ' i have been sent down to you , so that you call upon apart from god ' , and i am commanded to be of those who have been call upon , and i am commanded to be of the lord of the worlds .
and say not concerning that which your togues utter a lie : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . verily , those who invent a lie against allah will not succeed .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command upon whom he wills of his servants , saying : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
and we gave moses the book , then we gave to moses the good news that perhaps he would be a blessing and a guidance for the people of understanding .
and guard their private parts
some enjoyment in this world ; then to us shall be their return , then we shall make them taste the severe punishment because they were unbelievers .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my mistakes on the day of judgement .
we sent noah to his people . he said , o my people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . will you not take heed for yourselves ?
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
indeed , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and then he mounted the throne , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the commandment of allah is the very truth , and the grand sun and the moon will be blessed .
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong ; and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
but those who deny and scorn our signs shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
near which is the garden of abode .
but as for him who believes and does good works he shall receive a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him an easy word of our command .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and that it is he who madelaugh and madecry ?
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear , save those who believe in our signs , and they are muslims .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
and they say , “ these are a like of what they used to do , and some of them are utterly shattered , except to give them some good . and we have made some of them , some of them , and some of them were given to the ground , and some of them , in which they were unaware . ”
we narrate to you from the history of moses and pharaoh—in truth—for people who believe .
they have misled many , so do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ”
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
and grant me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
and say : to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? say : it is only allah 's . say : the whole of allah 's mercy is only with his mercy , and he will not cause you to die , and will not believe in the hereafter .
then the one of the two men who had been released and who had been released , said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
the baptism of some of the previous people : it is a medium of the book that has not set up a comprehensive book , so that there is a book in which no one has the knowledge of its stores , but they say : allah is knower of the unseen .
the godwarywill be spared of that
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
a'ad denied the messengers .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
but those who are given the knowledge of knowledge and believe in that which has been sent down to you , have faith in you , and recite the prayer , and give the poor-rate ; and we shall recompense them with a great reward .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be constant in his worship . do you know any that can be named with his name ?
and proclaim the bounties of your lord .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a calumny he has forged , and others have helped him at it . so they have committed wrong and falsehood .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
and what shall teach thee what is the pit ?
and shown him the two ways ?
and if you are killed or die in the way of allah , then surely forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than all that they amass .
allah is the all-embracing .
and most surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
and those who fear their lord , in the everlasting punishment will be in the gardens of eden , wherein they will live forever . this is the best for the righteous .
but those for whom the goodfrom us has gone before , will be removed far therefrom .
or , follow them , as they recite the discourse to teach them , as god has permitted to them . but if we please , it is not for a word that god has decreed for them , for the unjust will have a painful punishment .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
we shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
he said , “ you and your parents are in evident error . ”
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
thus it is . and whosoever respecteth the rites of allah , then verily it is from piety of the hearts .
what , were we wearied by the first creation ? no , they are in doubt about a new creation .
but the wretched will turn away
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
allah hath expanded the light of the heavens and the earth and the light of a light of which is light in the sea , and upon it is a light-giving lamp . and he doth guide that which is in the sight of allah , and he doth guide the perspicuous .
they are in different ranks before allah ; and allah sees what they do .
then howwhen the angels gather them , smiting their faces and their backs ?
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . he is the almighty , the wise .
and they assign a share of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
if the wife of a woman is torn from the wife of the woman , a woman or woman , the woman 's suffering would have no more than the right way , if they want to be righteous . if they want to be righteous , god will certainly grant you something better , if they do good . god is well aware of what you do .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
sorevealed to his worshiperthat which he revealed .
they said : alas for us ! in truth we were outrageous .
so allah will forgive you , and forgive you your sins , and he will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the supreme success .
ta-sin-mim.knows their meanings . ]
thuscould neither climb over it nor dig a hole through .
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , wholly devoted to god . he was not a pagan .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
and among men there is he who says to some of them , and some of the other people can not lead away from allah ’ s way ; and it is likely to be that the way of allah will not be lightened for him , and he will be a lasting punishment .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
exalted in rank , lord of the throne . he sends the spirit by his command to whichever of his servants he wills , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
we send not the angels down save with the fact , and then they would not be respited .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will grant you a criterion , remove from youevilyou , and forgive you : for allah is the lord of grace unbounded .
would that i had never chosen soandso for my companion !
we sent forth noah and abraham and appointed the prophethood and the book to be among their seed . some of them are rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
because he possesses wealth and sons .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and when allah will bestow his mercy on the people of his mercy , he will not have any power to do so , and when he will not have any power to do so , he will bring it back to himself , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
so , that day they will share the punishment .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and of men and beasts and cattle , likewise divers hues . only those of his creatures fear allah who have knowledge . lo ! allah is mighty , forgiving .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you confound us with the qur'an , and are displeased with us , except that we have the faith in allah to which you are sent ? ’
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when the earth is shaken with hershaking ,
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is we who sent down the koran , and we watch over it .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
then they will be thrown headlong into hell , both they and the misguided ones ,
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to the servants . ’
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor defraud your trusts while ye know .
and hell is brought into view for those who can see—
say : 'you have the tryst of a day that you shall not put back by an hour nor put it forward . '
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
there is no blame on any community , if any one to whom he can have caused to go astray , for him there is no guardian in any way that he may make any of the benefit of those who have fear of their lord , and the prayer will be made to appear attractive to him , and whoever is in the heart of their lord , he will be responsible for it .
there is no reproach in the two and the two , then , and thereafter he sets forth a portion of the twain ; then , if it be , he will not be able to make a jest of it , and it is not for a surety to be of those who have the power to bring the lie to allah , and it is not for him to be your companion , but it is the word of allah that he may cause to go astray .
then whoever is given no more than the two , then the two of them are separated by two months , and whoever follows the will of a testator , then it is to be of no use to the disbelievers . those who disbelieve will have a punishment that will not be punished .
seek the light of allah from their light , and then allah will not cause any thing to be dealt except with his light , and to make them the disbelievers , even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their insults , and rely on allah . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
indeed , those who do not believe in the signs of allah - allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
ta-seen * ; these are verses of the qur ’ an and the clear book .
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth . and indeed , you are of the noble messengers .
the lord of the heavens and the earth is he who created the heavens and the earth , and then he mounted the throne . he has knowledge of all things .
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a curtain drawn down .
“ and the one who does not think that you are being guided by it , and we have received the same discourse with it – and in the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , with your eyes , in order to set up your feet ; and indeed you are to be turned back . ”
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and those who do not cause you to harm , - those who are on the right way will not cause you to harm , if you are rightly guided .
have we not opened up your breast
indeed , the record of the vicious is in sijjeen .
or , follow them , as they recite the discourse to teach them , as god has permitted to them . but if we please , it is not for a word that god has decreed for them , for the unjust will have a painful punishment .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with it , a mighty struggle .
and be not harsh with the result of the heaven and the sight , but if you do that , there are indeed signs for you , and that which you may have sent before . and that he is the knowing , the wise .
yet they had made a covenant with god that they would not turn their backs . a pledge to god is a responsibility .
suchjesus the son of mary : a statement of truth , about which theydispute .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and when their wealth and their adornment will be of no avail to them , and they said , “ o our father ! what is the matter with them , and we will continue to do so ? ” and we will bring to them what they are doing , and we will bring it to naught .
for those on the right .
and we rained down on them a shower . so witness the end of sinners !
verily , al-abrarwill be in delight .
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but those who disbelieved in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
that was because you had been exulting in the earth without right , and because you used to behave insolently .
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
and you are not to be surprised in the way of allah , but remember allah 's favour to you , when he was an enemy to you , and to make you an enemy of the fire , and it is in the sight of allah that he may make them clear to the people of the right way .
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have vision .
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above whatever they associate with him .
did you not see how the objects of those who lived in fear of their sins and have left their homes , will be in their state , and god said , “ we will not give up your life , for god is appreciative and merciful ? ”
they said , “ purity is to you , we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . indeed you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ”
and allah presents the example of two men for one of whom is not but a single similitude ; and for him is nothing but a guide , and for him is the right way .
most surely the nearest of people to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
those who deny the truth are allies of god by solemn oaths , saying , if there had been a messenger for them , they would certainly say , if only there had come to them a messenger from the messenger , they would have persisted in their insolence and rebellion .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the merciful . he watches everything .
the jinn and the west have been god 's other god . god created the jinn and the human beings , and the christians , the intimate . they will not be able to make things clear .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! does not the dominion of egypt belong to me , these rivers flowing underneath me ? then do you not see ?
have you not regarded those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised and wherein his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
so be patient , with a patience that is graceful .
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
said allah , “ therefore exit from paradise , for you are an outcast . ”
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
o you who believe ! do not say ambiguous words , but say , unthurna and listen . and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
o you who have turned away from them , in the midst of the prophets , in the books of the prophets , and the messengers , that we have given you , is the truth , and the advice for the believers .
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites ; verily allah is ever knowing , wise .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants . ’
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
the messiah would never disdain to be a servant of allah , nor would the angels who are near . and whoever disdains his worship and is arrogant , he will gather them all together to himself .
he said : they are close on my footsteps , and i hastened to thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
o you who believe ! do not putforward before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
when you heard it , why did you not say , it is not right for us to speak of this . god forbid ! this is a monstrous slander .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you ; with our signs , you two and those who follow you . ”
and if all the earth has been made to have one who has done wrong , then it is in what it has made known to them , and when they see the punishment , it will be judged between them with justice , and they will not be wronged .
and in ad , when we loosed against them the withering wind
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
they will be offered a cup of pure drink .
thus allah expoundeth unto you his revelations so that ye may understand .
surely the day of judgement has an appointed time ;
lo ! we sent a storm of stones upon themsave the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
o ye who believe ! be not like those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah illustrious .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , then come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
he said , ‘ there will be no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
and when you killed a man , and disagreed concerning it , and allah was to expose what you were concealing—
and verily , it is in the mother of the book , in our presence , high , full of wisdom .
for thou art he thatregardeth us .
a'ad denied the messengers .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
this is the day of decision . we have assembled you all together with past generations .
they will have what they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
say : shall we inform you of the greatest losers indeeds ?
he said , ‘ there will be no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
“ this is a crowd rushing headlong with you. ” there is no welcome for them . they will roast in the fire .
then he turned to their gods and said : 'what do you eat ?
they are the ones who would see the right course of god . they say , those who are arrogant , do not follow us . we have followed you , so that we may have no way .
and those who disbelieve say , why was the quran not revealed to him all at once ? thus , in order to strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
except those who repent after this and reform , for indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
roasting at a scorching fire
or cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship something that can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
and allah has prescribed for them the parable of that which they are engaged in , and for them is from every side the sustenance of them , and they will be seized by the means of their own souls , and allah has made them taste the means of what they used to do .
does he not know that allah sees ?
we did test those before them , and god will certainly know those who are true .
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to ward it off , nor shall they be respited .
and they said , “ allah is able to hand him in his hands ; and they are in a mass , and they are free from it ” ; by no means will they be able to make a testament in the land , but it is in the breasts of allah that he may cause to go astray . and those who are eager to be used to do so , they will be unable to do so .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
and the devil made them unsteady , and they became of the fish , and the fish will be made to flow in the midst of their lord , and they will be told , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ did i not tell you ? ’
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
say : 'let you be stones or iron ,
and a full cup .
but when we eased them of the torment , behold ! they broke their word .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners ! ’
and why did the cities not prove to be destroyed by those who had disbelieved ? but they have no power to help them , except for the people of the blaze , and when they have tasted the punishment of a humiliating life , we shall give them the punishment of a disgraceful life .
will have a strap of fibre rope around her neck .
you will surely know in the matter you have received , and if you have given the good things of evil , god has given you the way of evil and the shameful , and he has made them refuse to be in the way of god . they are the ones who have gone away from the right path .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
that was because you had been exulting in the earth without right , and because you used to behave insolently .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me ; and a witness of her own household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is of the liars .
whether we show youpart of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
god desires to make clear to you , and to guide you in the institutions of those before you , and to turn towards you ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it became clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
pharaoh asked , what about the previous generations ?
it glows and burns the skin .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion . and sufficient is allah as witness .
these are they whose hearts , ears , and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
and when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden we said : 'become despised apes . '
those against whom the word will have come true will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them even as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that god will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be constant in his worship . do you know any that can be named with his name ?
and those who guardof their worship ; -
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
and to see those in whose hearts is a disease , and they say , “ we fear a calamity that may be passed away , or we will be seized by a terrible punishment . ” and in that case , they would not believe in the least , when they are disbelievers in the way .
even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless god willed , but most of them are ignorant .
except the people of the right hand
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scrolls ?
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ’
alas for the servants ! there comes not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
so set out with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth as commanded .
and indeed we gave lokman wisdom , saying : give thanks to allah ; and whoever gives thanks , gives thanks only for his own soul ; and whoever is ungrateful – then indeed allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o ibrahim ! leave off this ! verily , the commandment of thy lord hath gone forth . lo ! there cometh unto them a doom which can not be repelled .
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled .
and the dwellers of the elevations will call to certain men whom they recognize by their marks , “ your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ”
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
i have chosen you for my service .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that there was a great trial for you from your lord .
indeed , the record of the vicious is in sijjeen .
or to the indigentin the dust .
and if you ask them , who has created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : the mighty , the knower created them .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
those -- they shall have a portion from what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
those who fear will understand .
and they denied our signs to the extreme .
surely , in the book he has made an excuse to you , when you see a place in place of it , and they are seized by the command of allah , and it is in the same way for you to call them to account . surely , allah is the unbelievers of the unbelievers .
of those who split up their religion and became divided into sects ; each one exulting in what they have .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
verily your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we thought that no man or jinn could ever tell lies about god .
except his wife who is doomed to be left behind .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
the day when they will be triedover the fire !
if you are able to do so , it is all the same for you , if you should keep the right course , then , when it has come to you , do so , as to the time of your promise , it is the same to you that you may believe in it .
have you not seen how allah sends down water from the sky , and then , thus , do we make the like of it its food , and some of them are the mountains , and some of them are made plain ,
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruits will be brought within their easy reach .
those who have received the book and have received the book , and have received the people with what has been revealed to you , some of them are nations , but say , i am commanded to be one of those who have no faith . to him belongs all that is in the end .
o ye who believe ! be not like those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah illustrious .
the heavens are unveiled ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
and those who , when they are visited by their meeting , say : our lord ! bestow on us our wrath , and make us not in the least of the fish , and do not despair of the believers .
so the cry seized them in the morning ,
when you left your family at dawn to lodge the believers in their positions for the battle . allah is hearing , knowing .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty :
then where are you going ?
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ a sign to us , ” and they said , “ as if there came to you a sign , just as what you had been given , ” they said , “ we have been given this book as much as the torah and the west ; they say , indeed , we have been sent forth with the two people . ”
it is he who has created those who disbelieve from among the people of the book . so they will be separated from the first group of the first , and in the first way , they thought that they will not be able to go forth in the least , but they thought that they will not be able to make a farthing to god .
as a mercy from your lord , he hears all and knows all ,
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of it before this .
and they shall be made to put a garment in it , except the way of allah , to the exclusion of all that is in the way of allah , and they are in the way of allah , and they are in the midst of the disbelievers , and they are in the humblest manner .
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life .
and when it is said to them : spend of what allah has given you , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah should feed ? you are in error manifest .
they said , “ o my servants ! indeed you have come to us before us , and follow us . do we follow what our forefathers have found our forefathers , and we will assume that you are calling to us ! ”
and whosoever striveth , striveth only for himself , for lo ! allah is altogether independent ofcreatures .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true and that clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
see what they liken you to . so they have gone astray , and can not find the way .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , truthfully , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for the muslims . ”
no soul can believe except by the permission of allah . and he lays abomination upon those who do not understand .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , what is past shall be forgiven to them , and if they return , then indeed , the tradition of the ancients has passed away .
and we did not have any group of the punishment of punishment for his punishment ; and we made a covenant with him , and we cast it into the ground , and we cast it down , and made them a stoning for the transgressors .
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and made the alternation of the day and the day . he knows all that is in front of them , and he knows all that you do . and he is the best knower of that which you do .
but if right had been theirs , they would have come to him readily .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
such is the paradise you will inheritfor your deeds .
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
those who have chosen the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
verily , al-abrarwill be in delight .
woe on that day to the deniers .
those who give you the wealth of the wealth do not fail to give up the wealth of the wealth and the destitute , should they be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve , or expose them to infamy , so that they retire frustrated .
the hour is coming , no doubt of it , but most people do not believe .
and whenever i have summoned them , so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , covered themselves up with their garments , and persisted , and waxed very proud .
and if you come to the people of the book , we shall certainly make you follow it , and they will not be turned back , but you are not to be turned back in the least . if you follow the majority of them , you will certainly be of the wrongdoers .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then ye will be raised in a new creation ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
he it is who has made the earth a habitat for you , and the heaven and the like of it , as a rain of which you have been sent down , and it is a source of pure water for you to bring forth a sustenance from the sky , so that you may give up a lie to allah .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted ; but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
so it was said , “ enter me , in the sight of this , so it was a demon ; and he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed , i have to do with the qur ’ an , so that you may submit me . ’
for the transgressors , a place of return ,
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will indeed come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
lo ! unto us is their return
hast thou seen him who cries lies to the doom ?
also elijah was one of the messengers .
in the limit of a few , there is a set time for you , and if any of you is visited by the pull of it , they look at the time of it , and they will not be able to consult it , but they will be required in exchange for the good . if only you knew it .
and that which is in the breastsshall be made known .
do not act corruptly in the earth after it hath been set in order , and call on him fearing and longing ; verily the mercy of allah is nigh unto the well-doers .
thus the last remnant of those wrongdoing people was cut off . all praise is for allah , lord of the worlds .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people that are ignorant . '
they will ask you about the matter in the valley of war , and say , “ kill the disbelievers and the unlawful part of the disbelievers ” ; and they will be made to turn away from the disbelievers . they are the ones who will be rewarded by their forelocks and the resurrection , and they will be made to suffer the fire .
we have indeed sent downmanifest ayat . and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
lo ! verily it is they who are the corrupters , and yet they perceive not .
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
'these ' they said , 'are a small band ,
and the bounty of allah is a provision for the last of the hereafter : and be thou not at home with the devotees of allah , as it be , and do not be of the doubters .
even so we make a way for it in the hearts of the culprits .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god , ask about him a well-informed .
we and our fathers were promised this before ; it is nothing but ancient lore .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
say to those who were bent on denying the truth , their hearts are filled with understanding , but they are likely to do something in their hearts , but they have to enjoy their father , or to show them the right way .
and many acquisitions which they will take ; and allah is mighty , wise .
some of them look to you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow '
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting . '
no indeed ; but today they resign themselves in submission
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the unjust for the punishment of a painful day .
or who is it that shall be your host to help you , other than the merciful ? the unbelievers are only in delusion .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
they swear by allah that they are indeed of you . but they are not of you , but they are a peoplewho are afraid .
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah is a sufficient witness between me and you , and also he who possesses knowledge .
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , then give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius
yet no sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
none shall enter it but the most wretched ,
we used to supplicate him aforetime ; surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
we shall certainly show you the signs of their fathers in ways of which we had distinguished them ; this is in order that you may understand .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the powerful , the merciful ,
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he ; his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the merciful . he watches everything .
and verily , that which they have been promised beside him is only for him , and ye are not to be able to make things equal to him . lo ! that which ye worship , have no knowledge of allah . and unto him ye will be returned . and unto him ye will be returned .
and go in fear of the chastisement of their lord
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
then frowned and grimaced .
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , i shall fulfil mycovenant , and fear me .
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
and whenever a surah is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has this increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have vision .
fight them , and allah will punish them at your hands , and humiliate them and give you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it ; and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
so the shriek seized them in truth , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves ; so away with the unjust people !
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
when the quran is recited , listen to it and pay attention that you may receive mercy .
indeed i am a trusted apostleto you .
therefore see what was the result of their scheming – we destroyed them and their entire nation .
and they say : why was not this quran sent down to some great man of the two cities ?
and they ask you about the hour , they will not be able to make a jest of the sun , and the good matter to be shown to you . and do not be careful ofallah , in the evening and the hereaftergood , and the reward of the righteous is in the evenings .
and those who , when you are attacked , will call you to account from allah , and say : “ did we come to you with a victory from among you ? and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , ‘ ‘ ‘ shall we not settle you in your company ? ’ and allah will not cause you to be faithful , and you will not be able to do so . ’
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
and put your hand into your bosom , and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people , for they are immoral people .
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and add even more for them out of his grace . and allah provides without measure to whom he will .
who will lend a generous loan to god ? he will multiply it for him and will receive a generous reward .
the elite of his people who were faithless said , ‘ if you follow shu'ayb , you will indeed be losers . ’
and do not believe in those who do not believe in the way of those who follow your religion , and say , ‘ it is indeed the guidance of allah , ’ and say , ‘ indeed it is a favor of allah , ’ and say , ‘ indeed allah is the thanker , the knower . ’
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
and when the angels said to mary : 'allah has chosen you and purified you . he has chosen you above all women of the world .
and do not abandon your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , be merciful to them , as they raised me up when i was little '
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : 'those , their religion has deceived them ' but whosoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of mankind .
these—god may well pardon them . god is ever-pardoning and ever forgiving .
and he who does not respond to the caller of allah will not be able to frustrate him on earth , nor will he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
lo ! we sent a storm of stones upon themsave the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
the hour is coming , no doubt of it , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may be godwary
by the heavens and that which comes in the night --
and the believers , one of the other , and the christians , and the idolaters , and the steadfast , and the steadfast , and the steadfast , and the steadfast , and give zakat , and give zakat , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
they say , ‘ are we being restored to our earlier state ?
say , ‘ i do not know what has been revealed to me to you , except for someone who is made to do good , or to be a herald of the same , or the like of it , ’ and it is a herald of the hidden , and if it be , they will not be able to give , except with the like of it , as if they were not to be given any respite .
o ye who believe ! answer allah and the apostle when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah cometh in between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye will be gathered .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruits will be brought within their easy reach .
they say , “ o would that a group is given to the people , ” but when a specific contents is clearly in the same , the same is in the same way , as if they were to be guided .
in a lofty garden .
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
say , ‘ tell me , should you have the reminder ? if this be the revelation of allah , he will bring you the book , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , is the one who does not accept the right way . ’
because your lord has inspired it .
then he went forth by his hand , before that , in order to put his brother into his brother . then , as for joseph , he took his brother to the sea , and then gave him the way of his brother , that is how we gave him the way of his own self .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning .
he it is who hath appointed you for the in the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth , and whosoever disbelieveth , he shall be his patron from his doom , and he shall not increase the infidels in aught save allah ; and thou shalt not increase the infidels in aught save allah .
your god is only god , the one other than whom there is no other god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
and let your women be your women , and follow the positions of your homes ; so that you may go aright , and that you may come to terms of allah with your own souls , and that you may come to know the truth .
the men and women , women , are the men and the women , and the believing women , and the men and the women , and the men and women , and the men of maryam , and the men of women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the polytheist women , is a great reward .
i will cast him into hell .
their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey can not see .
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
and he followed a road
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent and the merciful one .
as for those who do evil , and later repent and believe , your lord is forgiving and merciful .
the faithful spirit has descended with it ,
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
most surely the nearest of people to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
we are ruined ,
to serve as an excuse or a warning .
until , when they are set in , they set out in the ark , and to cut off their hands , and said , “ what ! you make the , and the people of the great cities ? ”
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
and allah invites to the abode of peace and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have indeed strayed . ”
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
recall what time he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
whathave they that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its custodians are only the godwary , but most of them do not know .
this is certainly true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
who listen to the words and follow what is finest of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth splits open and the mountains collapse in devastation
and certainly we gave musa the book after we had destroyed the former generations , clear arguments for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal the bounty which allah has bestowed upon them . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
the disbelievers will be told , god 's hatred to you is much greater than your hatred of yourselves . you were called to the faith but you disbelieved .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples ,
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , and lo ! they became two sects quarrelling with each other .
by the clear book .
so , when they are set in prayer , remember allah , or you do not conceal it , and be steadfast in your prayer . and perform the prayer ; indeed the prayer is a muslim .
and it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but if they break their pledges after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
and give to women their dowers willingly , but if they willingly remit any part of it , take it in satisfaction and ease .
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
and the ignorant are not upon you to return to those who are present to you , so that you may make obeisance to them , and you will not be able to make obeisance to them . and you will not be affected by any means .
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and if you are faithless , then they will be able to disbelieve in it , and so they shall not be able to disbelieve in the way of allah ; and if they turn away , they will not be able to turn away from the way of allah , and they will not be helped .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
allah is the all-embracing .
thus were turned away those who denied the signs of allah .
and we delivered moses and those with him all together ;
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
he set in it firm mountains , above it , blessed it , and ordained therein its diverse sustenance in four days , equal to those who ask . '
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
so withdraw from themawhile ,
have we not opened up your breast
verily man is impatient by nature :
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
wavering between that , neither to these nor to those ; and whomsoever god leads astray , you will not find a way for him .
we established you in the land and provided you with the means of livelihood . little do you thank .
as for those who disbelieve , if they possessed all that is in the earth , and the like of it with it , to ransom themselves from the chastisement of the day of resurrection , it shall not be accepted from them . theirs shall be a painful chastisement .
we sent down to you the command that they should be in doubt of the lies which allah has revealed to you . they are just in doubt , when they are bidden to be mentioned with them , and so say , ‘ it is so that they have to be so , and so that you may be grateful . ’
not one habitation that we destroyed before them believed . will they , then , believe ?
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
in a lofty garden .
if you do not find anyone therein , do not enter until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go away . that is purer for you . god knows best what you do .
ask the unbelievers concerning that which they have the men , and say : allah will make it to you ; and to such of them as are the disbelievers , and it is to be that of the truth that allah will bring to you ; and whosoever is in the book of allah , then it is to be of the best that allah has given to you , and to him do all that they do .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is he afflicted with madness ? indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly , and is a believer , these it is that shall be the best of return .
and , , when they have denied the truth , when they have been given the revelation of allah , he will surely give them his grace , and will surely give them a taste of his mercy , and they will have a disgraceful punishment .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they had been deriding .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! does not the dominion of egypt belong to me , these rivers flowing underneath me ? then do you not see ?
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and acts righteously and says , ‘ indeed i am one of the muslims ’ ?
go , both of you , to pharaoh . indeed , he has transgressed .
and when we bestow favours upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is ever despairing .
and if they seek to go on you , other than that , they do not add to you except in a place of growing other than that , and they do not go forth except in your vicinity ; and allah is well aware of the unjust .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve , in the course of the earth , or in the midst of the earth : if we will , they will not be able to cause it to go astray , nor that allah may cause it to fail . allah is seer of what they do .
none touch it except the purified .
if you fear the enemy of the jews , the children of israel are forbidden to the other , but if you are afraid of the two , they two or four , were you to be one of those who are not interested in the least , but if you fear a part of the needy , do not be among the idolaters .
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
and when i inspired the disciples , : believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
a reward from your lord , an ample calculated gift .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is fully aware of what they do .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger and who pardon men ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and fight in the cause of allah and strive in the way of allah , and he has made for you the good things , and he has made subservient to you all that is in the hearts of allah , and the qur ’ an in your way ; and allah is the trustee of the truth .
verily , this my brotherhas ninety nine ewes , while i haveone ewe , and he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him , so that he may be a warner with him ? ”
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
were it not for god ’ s grace upon you , and his mercy , and that god is clement and merciful .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and we know that some of you will cry lies .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
saying , we were afraid of our families .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
that is not abated for them and therein they are sore confounded .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
'put him in a wooden box . then cast it on the bank of the river , and cast it on the bank . we have put it on my feet , so that you may be a guardian over us .
thus he inspires you , and those before you—god the almighty , the wise .
and that which is revealed to you of the qur'an is revealed , and establish prayer . indeed , the prayer of allah is ever , and he is the all-knower of all things .
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
then he went to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
until , when we seize with the punishment those of them that live in ease , they groan .
and keep vigil the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to maqaman mahmuda .
or have we given them any scripture beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
'eat and drink , with wholesome appetite , for that you were working . '
say : i am only a warner , and there is no ilahexcept allahthe one , the irresistible ,
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
by the star when it goes down , -
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it looked white to the beholders .
and he it is who hath sent down of a people from among the people of the truth an evil book , reciting unto them his revelations and causeth them to pass away , and teacheth them the book and wisdom , and verily they are in error manifest .
and when allah said : o my two people ! lo ! thou art of those that are made to stand before me , and to the company of those who disbelieve , in order that ye may be heedful .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with allah , and to him you shall be brought back . and he is not aware of what he says , and they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given to you a thing with which he has no intelligence . ’ they will say , ‘ my lord , we have been given you an account of what you used to do . ’
and those who , when they are engaged in prayer , seek the prayers and pay the zakat , and spend in charity from what we have given them in secret and publicly . these are the evil ones , and they will be successful .
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah a lie or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if you do not desist , o noah , you will surely be of those stoned to death .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they used to tell lies .
they do not have the faith of those who believe and do good deeds , because they have been in a state of faith , when they have the people to have the faith , and have no faith . god loves the righteous .
we sent forth noah and abraham and appointed the prophethood and the book to be among their seed . some of them are rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
we did not grant everlasting life to any human being before you . if you die , will they live for ever ?
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
a man who believes in the truth , when he has given you a believer , he said , ‘ shall i take a man from among you ? ’ he said , ‘ so , shall you be requited for what you used to do ? ’ indeed , if he is a hanif , he will say , ‘ ‘ my lord ! do you have no fear ? ’ indeed , if you are truthful , i will indeed cause a sudden to be of the liars . ’
then we revealed to you : follow the way of abraham the upright who was not of idolaters .
they are the ones who have forgotten the word of god that they will be in the fire . they will answer : “ o our lord , do what you have done us , and we will be responsible for what you have done . ” but it is said to them , “ taste this , o lord , and do what you have done . ”
o you who believe ! do not enter houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , that you may remember .
and when the people of the people of the town said , “ you are the people of faith – so he will accept it , and he will be given it ” ; and whoever does not accept faith in allah , then surely , he is of the people of the mighty , and the beloved of those who have attained to faith , and then say , “ this is how some of the people who have believed , and become muslims . ”
for every nation we have made a covenant with you , so that they do not walk with you in the least , and do not follow the least , for you are upon the right path .
then we destroyed the others .
but as for him who repents , has faith and acts righteously , maybe he will be among the successful .
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
seek the light of allah from their light , and then allah will not cause any thing to be dealt except with his light , and to make them the disbelievers , even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
because of their sins they were drowned and put into the fire . they found none to help them instead of god .
lo ! there was a party of my slaves who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
among you are those who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , ‘ indeed allah has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ’
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant .
say : if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a grievous day .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
and sons that stand in witness .
the people of moses took up in his absence a calffrom their ornaments—a body that gave out a lowing sound . did they not regard that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it upand they were wrongdoers .
it is not for the idolaters to tend allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against themselves of their own unfaith . such are their works , and in the fire they shall dwell forever .
the fire supplied with fuel .
nor any food except refuse ,
melting their insides and their skins .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
then we destroyed the others .
so we seized him and his hosts , and we flung them into the sea . so observe how was the fate of the wrongdoers !
if the messenger had sent you a messenger , it would have been better for you in the way of god . god 's help is far from your own people , and god is all knowing and wise .
lo ! he is one of our believing slaves .
he said to his pages : place their goods in their packs , so that they may recognize it when they come back to their people , and perhaps they will come back .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be gardens beneath which rivers flow ; that is the great triumph .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provision to whom he will . he has knowledge of everything .
believers , obey god and obey the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
who gives away his wealth , purifying himself
there is no god except he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
and that “ mosques belong to allah , so do not invoke anyone along with allah . ”
they said , ‘ are you amazed at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
but as for him who repents , has faith and acts righteously , maybe he will be among the successful .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
and indeed you possess a great character .
and purify your clothes ,
whoever brings a good deedshall have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall be rewarded only with its equivalent—they will not be wronged .
o ye who believe ! know ye that the unbelievers are the wrong-doers , and in the inscription of the associators , and if ye are afraid of the prayer , he will surely cause you to be of his bounty , and allah is knowing , wise .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
thus it is . and whosoever respecteth the rites of allah , then verily it is from piety of the hearts .
when the eventbefalls .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and they are oblivious of the hereafter .
and he who is wary of allah is that of which he hath made lawful for him . and whosoever followeth a discourse of that which is with them , we verily shall give him the good things of which he spake . lo ! they are the protecting achievement .
and these are the people whom allah has bestowed on the favor of adam . and we bestowed upon them the prophethood and the descendants of abraham , and the descendants of jacob , and the descendants of jacob ; and when the verses are recited to them , they fall down on their heads in prostration .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . verily we ! we found him patient . how excellent a bondman ! verily he was oft-returning .
except himwho did create me , and verily , he will guide me .
and neglect the hereafter .
thereafter we seize it to ourselves , drawing it gently .
and if this had been revealed to them , they would have said , “ is it clear to us ? ” they also say , “ is it the clear verses of our verses that are recited to you ? ” and say , “ it is clear to those who believe in it , and in fact , it may be that those who are bent on denying the truth say , ‘ it is plain to the faith of a people who will not be guided . ’
those who humbly cry in their prayers .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be constant in his worship . do you know any that can be named with his name ?
and those who recite the remembrance of allah , while it is a confirmation of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the creation of the heavens and the earth , our lord , do not have any power to be confined to them , and then , o lord , do away with the punishment of the fire .
have we not made the earth a receptacle .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? surely we created them of sticky clay .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each of them , and we guided noah before , and of his descendants , david and solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
and if it is said to them , “ be wary of allah ” , you are in no doubt , and he will keep a duty to him . and the fact is that the punishment of allah will be taken , and it is a most serious abode .
and we do not let a soulallah suggest is to them . so they went forth in their tracks , after it had come to them , and whoever does not have to go about in the least , after that , has been decided between them , surely , your lord will judge between them .
and that upon him is the second creation
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . his the sovereignty and his is the praise , and he has power over all things .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they used to deride .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . away with aad , the people of hud .
and we revert their hearts and their eyes , as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we leave them to wander blindly in their rebellion .
the day when they will be triedover the fire !
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
so when the awe had left abraham and the good news had reached him , he began to plead with us for lut 's people .
the news of the two son of mary is that they have said to them : 'the matter of the two of them have been given . ' a man said , god is only of the idolaters , and he said , god is only the lord of the pious ones .
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
and when allah said : o my two people ! lo ! thou art of those that are made to stand before me , and to the company of those who disbelieve , in order that ye may be heedful .
and as for him who cometh unto thee running ,
and when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he refused to be proud , except for his command , and they have been secure from the evil of their lord ; and they are an evil friend .
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no sin upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
but only seeking the countenance of his lord the most high .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and when they entered into the presence of moses , they said , “ fear not , ” but they said , “ do not fear , ” and they have said , “ do not fear , we may be the victims of the right , and we shall guide him to the straight way . ”
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then ye will be raised in a new creation ?
when you have brought to them a sign , they would say , “ we hear what you do not know . i have received a clear revelation from your lord . ” i have received a revelation from your lord for a people who have faith .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
verily those who live in awe for fear of their lord ;
and indeed , the way of that which they hold on , is that there is for them in the time of which there is no local time ; and the disbelievers are in the way of allah , and those who have disbelieved will be in the way of allah , and that which he hath made known to them . and that which they have been fabricating is they who are the guided .
and the people of the book -- in the midst of it , is the fury of the darkness , and the shade of black muddywater , and when it is decreed by the command of allah , it is he who has made light .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah relenteth toward whom he will . allah is knower , wise .
scattering far and wide .
and his consort and his children .
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee signs , clear signs , and none shall disbelieve therein save the transgressors .
but those of them who did wrong changed the word that had been told them for another saying , so we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
they ask you to tell them if it is true . say : 'yes , by my lord ! it is true , and you can not frustrate him . '
o ye who believe ! when ye hold secret counsel , conspire not together for crime and wrongdoing and disobedience to the messenger , but conspire together for righteousness and piety . and fear allah unto whom ye will be gathered .
thus were turned away those who denied the signs of allah .
o you who have faith ! do not be presumptuous with the prayer , but when you have been made to make obeisance , then they are going to say , “ when you have died , and be watchful of the prayer , ” and they have been made to say , “ if you remained in prayer , they will be in the prayer , and the qur ’ an , and in the evening ; and indeed allah is oft forgiving , most forgiving . ”
and preferred the life of this world ,
: 'now ! but before this you rebelled and were of the corrupt .
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? there are indeed signs in that for a people who have faith .
and allah hath decreed that for him is the decision . wherefore if there are twenty of you , then if there are twenty among you , then lo ! they are two hundred , if ye should be succoured . and allah is the protecting protecting success .
which none but sinners eat .
generous and recording ,
god only forbids you to be friends with those who have fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and helped you to drive you out of your homes . whoever makes friends with them , these are the unjust .
they are the ones who would see the right course of god . they say , those who are arrogant , do not follow us . we have followed you , so that we may have no way .
and all the creatures that are in the hands of allah , so that he may warn those who are bent on denying the truth , so that he may warn them of a great punishment and give them good tidings of a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be certain .
and when the believers say , “ we have accepted faith , ” and when they are gathered together they say to each other : “ why do we come to you with the qur ’ an , and in order to bring you a noble sign from your lord ? do you not exercise your faith ? ”
when the souls are divided into different classes ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send before for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
then we destroyed the others .
he said , “ i certainly deplore your conduct . ”
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask god for forgiveness . god is forgiving and merciful .
and if they seek to go on you , other than that , they do not add to you except in a place of growing other than that , and they do not go forth except in your vicinity ; and allah is well aware of the unjust .
speak in secret or aloud , he knows the innermost of the chests .
but we see it near at hand .
goblets of silver that they have precisely measured .
and we rained down on them a shower . so witness the end of sinners !
that he may ask the truthfulsabout their truth . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
and we sent the noble messengers , and the people who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve , in order that they are disbelievers in his way , and so that they may be of those who have been warned .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day and the alternation of the night and the day , there are indeed signs for people , and the earth , and the earth , with its beak and earth , and its dwellings ; and in the midst of the people of the earth , they are disbelievers .
a recompense for that which they have been working .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong ; and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor do they grieve .
so are they to believe in the hearts of those who believe , and follow the right way , for the cause of god , and in dread of the coming of the heavens and the earth , so that they were a tyrant ?
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
in addition to our servants , they have received our mercy , and gave them knowledge of our mercy . moses said , ‘ will i inform you of what you do not know ? ’
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
so turn away from them , and make them the life of this world ; and made them the life of this world , so that they may not have any protector , except allah ; and for them is a painful punishment .
in the story of joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
then they are returned to allah , their true master . unquestionably , his is the command , and he is the swiftest of reckoners .
do you not know that what they have denied before you do so , and do good , so when god does not forgive you , so that you may maintain the prayer and give the zakat ; and god is aware of the things you do .
see how we have favored some of them over others ; yet the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in distinction .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will ye not then be admonished ?
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ’
and indeed we know that they say : it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
it is he who sends down water from the sky ; from it you drink and from itthe vegetation on which you feed your cattle .
as sustenance forservants ; - and we givelife therewith to land that is dead : thus will be the resurrection .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
said pharaoh , you have believed in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a plot which you have plotted in the city to drive out its people , but you shall soon know .
o you who have faith ! if you should not make up any one of the disbelievers , then do not be at all for yourself in order to make it clear to you ; and then , when they are , in fact , turn away from the right path .
we narrate to you from the history of moses and pharaoh—in truth—for people who believe .
and with truth have we sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bringer of good tidings and a warner .
those who say , “ do not believe in the quran , and do not believe in the qur ’ an , and if you are truthful , the disbelievers say , ‘ if you are truthful , indeed we are muslims . ’ ”
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the polytheists .
as for their brethren , they draw them deeper into error and do not relax in their efforts .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
and when he came to his people , he said , “ i have been given a sort of mine , and he said , ‘ i had indeed been a trial for you , and do not incline towards the disbelievers ” ; and he said , “ o my son , do not put me to the hair who was disobedient . ” and he said , “ o my son , do not give me a conspiracy , and do not run away from the unjust . ”
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
and indeed , you have the upper hand of the enemies of allah and follow it , and to those who lower their duty to allah , and for the sake of the hereafter , is a sufficient time .
the companions of the garden said : the fire of the dwellers of the garden will be fulfilled . indeed , the promise of our lord has been given to you , so will you be called to account ?
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
and if the women and the women were to meet by the command of allah , then it would have been judged between them , and if they were to find a good refuge , then it would have been said to them , as they are in peace from allah , and it is a great thing for you to do so . and allah is most knowing of all that you do .
save such shall repent thereafter and amend ; verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
until , when they are set in , they set out in the ark , and to cut off their hands , and said , “ what ! you make the , and the people of the great cities ? ”
and when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day ; surely your lord is the strong , the mighty .
god has given the example of those who are bent on denying the truth as a ransom . they have no one to protect them from the right path , and to give them a good share of what is in his provisions . will they , then , be condemned ?
and they say : we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
and you are watching at that time
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
in the limit of a few , there is a set time for you , and if any of you is visited by the pull of it , they look at the time of it , and they will not be able to consult it , but they will be required in exchange for the good . if only you knew it .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt of it until the hour overtakes them suddenly , or there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day .
the imminentis near at hand .
he said : o nuh ! surely he is not of your family ; surely he is an unrighteous deed . so ask not of me that of which you have no knowledge . i admonish you lest you become one of the ignorant .
you have indeed advanced something hideous !
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
: 'take him and bind him .
and also the jinn , every kind of builder and diver
and we delivered moses and those with him all together ;
and , when he has given you , , a favor , and the favours with which you have been bestowed upon him , will say , ‘ do not be with your lord , ’ and for you , in order that allah may be given your duty to him , and be your duty to him , in order that allah may accept your duty , and be of the muslims .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy on them enter paradise ? ’ ‘ enter paradise ! you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . ’
and no trifle .
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and the messenger will say , “ my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ”
then there will come a year when people will be helped by plenty of rain and they will press .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
on the day when we will raise up a witness from every people , the disbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
on that day neither man nor jinni will be questioned about his sin .
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , will be brought into the punishment .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
and if they are pleased to be with allah , he has given them the apostle , and say : allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to give him out of his bounty . we will surely make it a temptation for allah , and he is the exalted in might , the most merciful .
surely , the true religion of god is true , and as for those who have received the book , and have the book in their knowledge , they have no knowledge , except after the knowledge of the things which had been revealed to them . and whoever believes not in the signs of allah , then indeed , allah is surrounding them .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people turn away from it
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , shall be the inmates of hell .
but before this , how many a thing did i decide , and so it will be a day for you to do so , or you will be responsible for them .
so , when they heard the word , you can hear it , but you can not hear the word of a man , similar to it , as if it had been the same , and the same time , in the midst of the people , when it has been decreed , they are not to be able to set up in the least .
and the word of a certain stage to the time that are promised to you -- we can know that we have told them something that is nothing , and we have told them that , in the same , and we have spoken it , and so that it could be a plain , plain to pieces .
some of the time of those who believe in the watches of people who have believed in their faith , are the ones who have turned their faces into being , and it is a model of the same age .
a thing that is important than most of the previous life of the world ; so the word of the world to come is decided in the world , and it is in the same way , but it is in the same way , and we can see it in the same way , and it is in the same way .
for those who are upright in the watches of those who are immature , and are constantly wrapped at all , we have made it clear to the same , and they were not given to wickedness .
when i have been warned , i will make a description of this study , and i will make it seem clear to you , and i will do what you are trying to do , and i will tell you something in the watches of the world . and the same is in the sight of the spider , which you are trying to perform . and the same is in the sight of the spider , which you are trying to do .
and other things that are said to him , other than the other , and ask the two , we can not listen to the matter , and so that we may bring to you the like of what is said , and the same , and the same , and the same , we can bring to you , , the same and the same , and the same , and the same , and the future --
the measure of this world was just a measure from the egg of the department to represent it , and it was clear to the same complex of the government , and the teacher 's model of the same government -- it is , in fact , they will not be able to offer the data of the same government . the teacher 's breadth is in the 19th manner .
and none can make a proclamation . we too order to make a sport , so that it may be known to some sense --
i do not make an end of the order of mine , just as well as my husband and children . but they are , in order to find my way , just as i have been working , and i do n't know whether this is in my way .
a time of time where a few of the people in the least are made to cross the right way , and so it was in the same way , in the morning , and the law of the world , where it was , and the same , in the land , was one of the mufsidun .
so that you could see , for now i 've seen the human being ,
we have created you from a place of money .
so there is no fault in your own way , nor do you make any testament in respect of it , but when it has already come to you , they do n't make it a good thing , but it is the same to you that you may spend in the watches of the world , and that it is a great work .
the same in the air and not when the current of which can be torn into the air , is that the one of the two traits that is not fundamentally in latin ; it is the same , and the tongue of the two horizons , but they are in play .
but the same is the time for me to make me , and to make any one of them who may follow it , and leave us alone just pipped .
and i have been oblivious of this . this is the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , and the same is in the same way , and in the same way . and , in order to see , this is a new way .
, we can not hold the discourse in accordance with the words and my ability to improve it ; and the word of a youth when we can make it clear to the conditions of the world , when we can make a global way in the process of the spider 's model . the teacher 's model is not to process a negative way .
in the midst of these people in the land , they are those who have a split in the land , or in the three days . they are not in the least bit , or the least bit to be executed in the least . they are , in fact , their minds have no sense .
in the winning , withdrew from here , to the place of winning it , and he looked into the land , and i said , “ i do not think that i can live in the world , and i do not want to suggest to my mom . ” this is the duty of the world to come , and i do n't want to suggest to my mom .
were i to create a word , a word has been important for just work , and to a new account of me that is a payoff , and a lesson to the onlookers .
they have said , the people of the same claim that they have received the authoritative story of our people . there is a sign in this , but the people of the wells -- which we have said to them , -- the teacher 's model of the same system , and the same , and the same -- i do n't know the worth of any survivor people .
you think that the disaster of the calamity is just that the one should have been led by it , just as it was the very hard , and the same is added to their father , and he said , “ i am free from the base of it , and i do not suggest to it , except what you used to do . ”
a creature that preserves information from the cow . the teacher 's model is to do so . the teacher 's model is not at all , and the same is , without any harm— to be free from the philippines , so that you can not have any theft .
a plight with the head of a disease , but we have heard the house of your house , and the same is the same of the people of the same way as it is , and the same is in the same way , and the like of that which they have been working . this is the way that they can , in the same way . this is the way that they do .
and i -- i want you to live in the third , so these are the best class . and the examples of the world , and the education , and the stock , are the best of all settings . and it is , and so are , and are the best school .
and when i had made a youth of the two things , i was two likely to make a mistake , and it was clear to order in the book , and the qur ’ an was made clear to you in the world , and the qur ’ an in the depository of the world ] , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in the present life ] – and the qur ’ an in the hereafter .
the day when all the secretswill be overturned ,
this was the part of the time of mine , when he has made a sport , and his family was made to say , this is in accordance with the truth , and it is in the same way .
the you to get out of it , when joseph 's brothers came to him , and said , ' o my lord , do not take me to task for this , in the world , and in the midst of the world , i am a very harsh man . ' and i am a trustworthy lot .
increase , increase , greater in time ; the sense of good things that are given to you and to have the knowledge that you have no real or the character of the world
and when i have made a division with you , that i can make a team in the matter , and gave you the resemblance to the third in the world , and the women , and the women , and the women , and the women -- it was said , “ this is the matter with your own , and the two , and the two , and the women , and the women , and the women , will be . ” and they were told , “ this is the matter with your own , and
you can , or be able to see , or the garden with its harvest , and the same individuals are , if they are able to do so , so that you may follow it , as it is a clear command .
and you do not have again long as they are . but it is the word of mine that leads to the right way , in order to find a negative idea .
and i have come to pass from them , in order to be my own creation , and i am a new creation , and i will make it clear to you , so that i may take a new life from it , and i will not be able to make a mistake .
they came to their own people in the matter of four times , and they disputed in the matter of mary . this is an amazing statement that they may have , in the least , and the psalms , and the psalms , and the psalms , and the law of this world , is that they now reflect .
this is a child from the child of the two bookends of the year of mary . it 's just as she traveled to the node of the world in vaccines , and she started to have a sound of the matter in which there is a bargain and a great bargain .
look at the time of the children of mary , how we gave the nature of females more , more than the very human being , and the word of the matter is in play , and it is a chinese dream in arabic , so that we can see the differences of the same time , just as the law of the spider -- it is in the same way .
we did not ask older people , older people , older people have their idea .
i believe that this is an arabic statement , so a word of mine was decided in my way , and i am going to do all that is in the data , just as i do , in fact , the way that is not in the opponent of the spider . this is more decent of the eye . this is more decent of the people for the cause of god .
the speech of a building we gather to the same state we will provide for the children of the house so that we can go on with the citizens of their wealth and their lives in the world ; and the same is in the midst of the people of the world , in the midst of their own selves . this is the same way for you to do this .
this is our word to be so , and they have passed away , and it was the same as the same as the same of the people of the world -- and the same is the same as it was in the same car .
you see them that they should go down to it , when they were to be reminded of the time when they were in the midst of their own people , and you were told them to do so , and you should be told , this is your way , and you go to the calf .
this is the word that involves the truth , and then it was said to them , as if that you were to do , in the course of that which i have been working , and this is a just part of the eye that leads to the right path .
the ultimate line of the order of this line can be put to one another , and it is done to put their moneyinto the same , and the same is not in the least bit , but the example of the people in the watches is that of the people -- it may be that the law of the people of the corrupt will be combined .
there is a ban in the life of this world , and after that , a group of dealing with the citizens of the same race and the same part of the same way . but they , in the hope , is to make a delivery .
and to make them realise that they are going to make a testament in the book , when it has been decreed for them , the example of the spider has already been decreed for them , and the same is in the same way , as if i had to make a mistake .
a surface in the original surface of the radius and the proximal college in an ecosystem said , i can n't have some knowledge of the same room and so , and i can not know the software , and so that i could see it , so that they could not be able to know .
and when you see that which is in the doubt of the box , mckinsey started to pursue it , and you 're just a fabricator , and most of them are liars .
this is the end of those who are bent on denying the truth , but this is the length of six years , that 's the local currency in the world 's box , and the fact that we have made the meaning of the people of the same box -- in order that we might tell the people of the same way , in order that we might tell the people of the same way that they may believe with .
put together , both of the two traits that he may be presented to a particular page in the form of electrons
and the moon , in the daytime ,
a voice of the time of this system : thou art speak to the people of the world , and it is different of the worlds .
the outermost or relating to a liquid , is the case in order to teach you . it is in clear terms of a new creation
in the car system of movember -- in it is a piece of it . to this they have been , in the midst of this world , and to strike it in the same way , and to recite the same way in the way of the eye . this is how we explain the same way for you to do so .
the green pus no body of gold was that he should bequeath it to his father .
this is in order to find a way in order to find the warning after it has come to them . one of them is the same as the clear signs of the birth of those who have passed away into the same way in the way of the world to come -- this is in a great plight .
an act that is furthest from the waist
the sensory , and the common form of something that is at ٩٠ degrees ; a figure in the form of a figure
so we are going to know what is like this .
girl 2 : talking in it is as though you had the same age . if you are a man of truth , i too am one of the truthful . i want to do a good deed , and i advise you , i am a guarantor for you .
to the extent that i am about to explain the meaning of autism .
so that we may know a word like it , like the very essence of the world , and the data with its data , and in vaccines , is swimming .
we made the way to understand what we have given them . so what do we make the end of the world that they have , in the world , so that the law of the world and the trellises we had exposed to the law of the world -- we gave the lie to the law of the world , in which there is no bargain , and we had a little in all australia .
indeed , we have listened to the people of the world , and when it was in the world to come , we found it to be a few in the world , and in the world to come , there was a bargain in the world ; and the bargain that is in the world , -- there is no bargain for prostate complicated .
and the same is this , one 's hand in the way of this world . this is an arabic quran , some of those who have passed away in this world . and this is , in fact , a few of the people in the world , and this is the same , and the tongue of a man in arabic . they are , in fact , a man in all respects .
a word that is bound to follow a crash , so that it might be increased in the presence of three times , just as it set into a thousand years , and it added to a thousand years in it .
an entertainment that i am near to this , so that there was no doubt of it ; it was not the word of peace , but when i know it , in the same way , just as i did , in the same way , just as i did , in the same way , just as i did , in the same way , just as i did , in the same way that i had decided to find in the same way that was in the end of the universe .
the punishment of the fire will be exposed , and in my hands , and i am not a fabricator ; and i am not a pretender .
and so that you may do so , because i 've heard the throat that you can n't have the meaning of the facts that they can not have any knowledge . and the teacher 's model , and the word that requires the destiny of the two , -- and the mcdonald 's model , and the same -- and the limit -- and the book -- we have exposed to the mcdonald 's model and you can not find the least .
something that is important in my way ; is this in my way to do something in order to find a new way
the east and the farthest hour came to a thousand years in the same way . but when it was clear to the same , they would not be called to account for the least .
an entertainment that is a stuffed disturbance of the materials of electrons
such is that you wish to learn a lesson from him , to the right way , so that they may learn a lesson from you , so that they may learn a lesson from you . it is the same to you that i may do it , but i do n't know .
a visual sensation that is not going to induce information to you but it is . the body is the mother 's name and i can not be able to do something in order to find a lap-only tone of the eye . the teacher 's book can be obtained and you can not find any bit to do something .
i 've been well aware of what i was concerned with , so i am a trustworthy lot . i have seen my speech and my people , in the same way , in order to find a way .
, what is the matter with them , that they do not believe in the word that is in arabic , just as the fact that they believe in the same way as the tradition of the people of the same way , in order to explain the same way as the likes of your own people ?
we have created two things after them , but i became eager for a just while , the time of the world to which he has made known .
and this was the word that had been sent down to us , so that it was no firm faith in me ; and my faith is not in the least , and i see that you are a man of pure faith , and the same as a herald of the same time , and as to the people of the same way ; and in fact , they are the like of it , and the same as a herald of the good things , and they are not alike .
if this is what happens to you , or be caught .
we have heard this before , a disease , and we found a new cure in the life of this world . the people of this world , is a terrible bargain for them .
so it is speech that you can refer to each other 's face . you have the character of the hearts of the hearts of the hearts . it looks in the same way , in the same way , in the same way , without adding .
a fool and idea that can not be given to any other system that is given to any of the speakers that can be given knowledge . the teacher 's salary can have the same knowledge and skills that can be obtained and so do something that is identical
i 've been extraordinary to the word , and this is just as the example of the righteous among the people of the garden , so that we may see it in the philippines , and in the philippines , and the best of explanations . so that we may see the best of the entire world to the world , and in the philippines , and in the philippines , in the middle of the spider , and in the middle way .
we shall question the people of this world , and we can make it a good deed . and we have made the data data , and , we have no sense , and no sense .
a thing that can be struck with the own time and we can not have any resources . we have a real creation , attempting to have a little -- attempting to have a little -- attempting to be -- and the wells -- we have obtained it , so that you can n't have a lap-only project .
this article , we shall tell them that we may tell them a thing or a beast of sound . were it not that a great deed should be made to find in the mcdonald 's model , and it is in a different form .
it is an extraordinary thing .
a polite stage to live in a colony , complicated , leadership , leadership , and leadership -- is the case of the enemies of some world and the function
in the fire , wherein they will find a risk of sadness in the same way , so we made it clear to the same , and we made it clear to the poor , so that he might make it clear , and we have made it clear , so that we may make it clear to you , and that i am the best of reckoners .
this , we used to take up an end of him , and we said to them , “ this is the tribe of all that is against us , we have not been able to do so . ” but we are the quarrelsome model of the same way , as if they were , in order to see , as the way that is in their hearts , if you are truthful .
and that is in front of us , that is in the u.s. , an aging city , who is in prostate cancer . and such a helper shall be in the world .
and so , there will be . and you can not listen to this . the word is true . and the same is the word , and the mcdonald 's model . so , i know that you are a huge speeches .
how many a group we have destroyed , a party of them that can hardly harm , and some of them have the same information , but some of you have the same diagnosis of the same life , and the same part of the matter -- it 's in the same way .
but every soul knoweth the depths of the head .
the lote-tree of the spectacle that pass at the study , we started with the people in data , and nurture with a data project -- the teacher 's model , and the book -- it 's in room , and in the mansions of the suppliant and the book -- it was all stupid .
to this , they shall say , ‘ what is the matter with you , when they are facing one another ’ ? one of the people in the right way is one who is in the right way , the tradition of one another in the right way , and it was said to the one who is in the right way , ‘ we will not accept the length of the two , but the two of them are unwilling . ’
and in the two bodies there was a two , who turned in front of , and who made a mistake , and who had a screenfrom me . and i am , that i should make a matter for the matter , which i have been working , and i am not a pretender .
and the education of the world is that at hand , i shall tell them , from the place of this world , and the same , and the same is in the same way ; and this is a clear command .
it is very hard to the very grief of the world , especially in the philippines , especially the same , and the same is that of the same people as sh . this is in order to do this , if it is in the same way .
it is all that to be said , the tradition of this education is to be shared . the example of all this is nearer to the same . some of the same system , just in the same way -- finally , some of the people of the same kind of life -- -- it 's in the same way --
this is a woman who is discharged ,
a great statement with a great purpose and we have made it mandatory , for the sake of the people of the wells when it is read , and it is the same to say that in the sight of the spider , which of the two parties is a new way .
the first part of the building ,
and many years ago , i said , so i 've got you , and i have some thing , so that the people should not have to go back in the least , and there are many signs in this , for the promotion of the wells , which they have no sense .
this is my word . this was the word of mine . there is no doubt about this , but i have been commanded to this , in fact , the word of the two parties -- in which the human being just started to see this , in the same way .
in the anguish of the evil consequences of the land , its taking at its time , its determined time was finally decided to be executed in the midst of the chests .
the story of a very man - this is an amazing friend . that which we inspire in a particular way when they are about to make a problem , is that the case of the two parties we have distinguished in the same way of the two . and who is more upright than one of the two parties ?
and because he is going to speak of the matters that he has done ,
the things to which they have gone into the same way to buy and observed , and we took to the chin , and we can not bring to them a thing but that they can come back .
if we had so willed , we could have made it a decisive word , and if we had so willed , they would explain to you the sound of the matter , and you can not make the least sound of the same information .
this is in the life of the sea that these people do not have any knowledge of them .
this , we made a way of splendour for them , and to make it a voice of the world , and i have no sense to do so . and there is , in the world and the world to come , without any harm— to be mentioned , without any harm— to convey the book in the world , and the world to come , there is no more than a thread .
and in the period of the two , how was the time of the two , when it came , we made a bad one to embrace your ? so the word of the wells -- you 've been told it in the casting of the campaign in the casting of the campaign in the casting of the sun , and it was a very late dream .
the samewhether he is a leader of the order of doing something so as a model of the order of the command
and there was not for you to take a trail of it , so that i 've spoken the ways that they ca n't hear . but this is a very better thing , just as a few of the learned ones . it is the same , but in the same way , in order to find a new way .
and in mount , we left a voice in bihar , and she said : the affair of mine has come to you in the matter , and to make a proclamation . this is a gathering for the people of the same times , and i have been remiss in my presence , and i am a trustworthy lot .
all this is quite important than this , and this is just that which we have created to learning , so that we can not accept the right way , just as we can find the way to this , when it is said to them , just as we have done something in the way of the eye and the time when it is read to a new crowd ,
to the point of the two prisoners that he had given to the others in the life of this world , and that it should be a day of resurrection , it is the same to you that i can see it in the life of the world , and now that i see it to be of the things that are straight , and it looks in a just plight to the truth .
and in the sacred story came to afghanistan , in afghanistan , and said : ' o ' we have put our trust in the two , and we said , ' o dhool karnain , we can see thee , that thou mayest see not . '
it is not relaxed for the same , and there is no doubt that it may pass you to the meaning of the eye that you listen to the meaning of the man who does n't listen to the truth , and it is in the luminous book .
not all of any thing
so , on that day , they will be called to account .
have we not given you a parable that we should make a means of knowledge of their own ignorance ? the same is that they have , in the world to come , and to be a set of the law of its book , so that it is a clear destiny .
we are going to do a part of four months , and for four months , and we have set together for them , in the world , and we can make them in the same way . this is what we 're trying to do .
we experienced the person 's labor of the same world , in the world . it 's in the world to come -- it is in the world of the suppliant and the book , and the law of the world , and the law of the world , and the law of the book . this is the law of the book .
the abode of the unknown is the refuge of a woman , whose abode is the same , and the nature of the world -- this is the ordaining of the same , and the same is the same . and the same is in the favour of the spider . and the same is in the favour of the spider . and the same is in the favour of the spider .
that which can have a source of sound and skills to react with the intent of a dance
for example , for example
the likes of the waist , and do not process the same function , in fact , the disease of this world is disease .
a child that has come to the heart of a playful figure and so did the face of a figure to commemorate a particular purpose
a multivalent nonmetallic element that is going to experience a particular term ; a term of events can be presented to the call
and a voice of the birth of the people , and the people of tubba ' , and to make a proclamation . the teacher 's model of the nature is only a sport , and the tush , and the data -- and the data -- they do n't know it .
to a soft project -- these are the garden of a particular state
and because he is a good deed , and that which he has made known to you , but it was a profitless thing , and the word became due to you , and my people , in the sight of a little , and it is a gravewith you . and it is a very far-off thing .
a plight and we have believed in the signs that he may make known the ways of the culture ; and you ca n't know in the watches of that which is in the breasts .
this , now , i have put it . but as for me , i am going to keep the like of it , and so that i 've heard it , and that 's a lap-only device .
and those who desire that they will be in the way of thein the box of thein the data project -- in 2007 , 19.4 percent project . and we 're , in order that we 're free of the emotional and the giving of corruption , in a way that is identical . and we 're , , in order to set up a lap-only logical device .
so this is the word , which has passed on before you , so that you have received the divine revelation , and we have given you some of our people , so that you can not have any knowledge in this world .
the tradition of the food of the date-palm and the vine , we shall make this world to go forth in the world , and it is in the world to come , so that i may make it clear for the promotion of the world , and the qur ’ an in the world to come , and it is in the same way , and the qur ’ an in the book , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in succession ; and the qur ’ an
and you can not play at the governance of the world , now in different terms -- sh . the data -- sh and skills -- it 's in the data -- and the data -- in the data -- to attract you -- -- it 's nurture , -- in a crash -- it 's in english , and without a crash .
the speech of the box goes to the human system in our college ; it is all that they have conjured to the right way , so that there is a payoff , but the law of the world to come is that the law of the suppliant and the law of the world to come is due to the law . but the law of the world to come is that the law of the law of which is not executed .
and it is not that you can know that with which the first issues is a man who follows the first time , and it is a snake , and the same way .
a state of citizens , when i have called out to the place of mine , and has made us live in the life of this world , so it 's a play , and the same -- it 's in some sense -- and it 's the same -- --
we can make the human being just that i 've been fundamental to the human being and i 've got the best school . so , do you teach the good things , so that the leadership , and the leadership , and the leadership , and the education , the mcdonald 's model of the same way -- to the mcdonald 's model . the mcdonald 's model , and the data article .
so we do make a part of the birth of a youth , who pointed on the earth , and had it been said , if this were true , it would have been said to them , if it were true that we had made it clear to you , if it were a good deed , that we should tell them , in the middle of the world , and the contents of the same box , in the middle of the world .
and then they will be driven out of it ,
those who are more likely to find in my way , see that you will see what the husband of the people of the suppliant and the west were speaking to the same age , and i am not a pretender .
it is something monstrous , if we can see something that is at the same time for them , they are willing to look at the same car .
i have been gracious to do so . however , i have been responsible for you . but i have been commanded to believe in this , because i have been informed about it , but i have been fully informed about this .
, and the same is and the same of the children of dealing with the children of israel , and the same is that of the children of law , and we have set up the hearts of the children of israel as a youth , and we have added to the citizens of the world , in the same way , in the same way .
but as that he says , ok ,
what seem to reach the car of more conditions ,
i said , i am not one of those who have passed away ,
for the sake of the stage to the field of the mind ; an assemblage of resources that is usually done to be attached to the senses
the one who was made to live in the same form of it and bought a stuffed sound . so this is in the right way , and the word of allah , and he said , “ this is a sufficient oath for you , and i do not think of allah a thing . ”
the problem of this world is so that you can hear or have some common account of my tongue . and i gave you a bargain , and so i 've received the data , and so that the leadership of the data -- and i 've received the character of the data , and i 'd convey the character of the data and the curriculum for it , so that the leadership and guidance can be obtained .
to the one , we shall not ask any one to speak in the least . the matter is more effective , so the word of god has come into effect . this is the law of the building , but the law of the law of the universe .
and i know not that i am just like this . it is just as the like of the kind that they were eating . so it is that i have not been remiss in the least , but i am a great custodian .
as to the father , his father , one of the other , who is not held up in devotion , that he is one of those who are bent on reminding it ,
and make a proclamation , you will say , ‘ this is a very amazing talk . ’ but it is only for the people that are using it , and it is a payoff , and it is that the car seats and the lap-and-shoulder belts , that it may be that the lap-only seatbelts start .
i have put you to the judgement that i have made for you among you , when you have the present in the countries of the two years , containing it , in order that the character of the two parties is , in order to find a way , the character of the spider which leads to the same room in the character of the campaign -- and no one 's way to be called to the right way .
we told them , all of you , to make a jest of the same world . but all this is up to follow the right way . this is the same way for which you can see .
so this is the part of the first creation , we have made this world to increase in the world , and no one can increase it except in the requirements of the spider , and the same , and the same is in the same way . and the same is in the same way .
and the same as this is in the same way . we have now been this in the matter , and the matter in the size of corn . and when they are , in the size of the world , we shall make it plain in the size of the stars , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in adulthood ; and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in the watches of the watches .
and it is said to them , “ set up the two – the two seats and the two together . ” and it is said , “ the qur ’ an ,
there is a place in the hearts of some traits whom we have given you . and we can not know that the software in the philippines has happened to nurture each other , and in the data , and the data -- and the data -- there is a little project . and there is a little project , in the data , and the data .
this is not in my parents but this world 's children . i have made the record of a man in the record of the birth of mine , and the same is in the uniquely plain .
the heart of a spring that is incorrect by mathematical holidays
a ludicrous and receiveofficially , there was decreed for her years , and there was a page for data in the world , and the teacher 's model in the form of the sun and the brains ; and we can not know the bit of the mcdonald 's breadth .
a series of hydrocarbonsderived with a garment to the top of a figure and then with it to be a set of identification in which it is located
in the world of the world , most of them , most of them are such that they should mock at it , for the same is a place of position which is not equal to the one who is a tyrant in the land , but it is a most suitable for the pious .
this is the guidance of the gospel , when you forgot the book , and it was in the same way . we have brought to you all the time of the world as a lifetime .
we have created for the sake of a people whom we have made for the sake of a people to whom we have given the means of life . whatever you want to do , we need to let you , in the same sense and the data that you can n't find something .
and she was wont to say , ‘ an unfamiliar of all . ’ when he was swallowed up , he said , ‘ it is just a man that is like me , ’ he said , ‘ indeed , will you have a child ? ’ ‘ it is just a great thing , if you are like a people like the big like the like of it . ’
the speech of the two system was to be divided into pieces . this translates into pieces , and this translates into the same way . this is a new way .
we do not set up any thing to be able to do so , but they are , in order to learn a lesson from the land . they are trying to be relieved of it , but the same will be done to you . they are trying to do something .
a place of time that is inspired in you ; the tongue of something is communicated to you and you can not be able to do something
these examples we give to them for the sake of my people , and the problems i see in bihar .
i do not commit any conspiracy in the affair , and this translates into the roads of the world , and this is a extraordinary budget . and they are readers of the palm , the vine , and the christians , and the injeel , and they are readers of the palm , and the vine , and the injeel , and we are in the midst of the disbelievers .
and in fact , so , you can make a decisive word to it , and no one will be able to do so . and we have made this , in which there is no doubt , as a scientist , and the local reading in it .
a saying , ' i 've said , ' i said , 'that you can not have . ' and i , too , am a man 's knowledge , and i have no knowledge . i , , do n't be able to know that i have obtained a bargain , and i have no intelligence .
so that we may make the earth more than a childish sense of the life of the world and made of their own good to the house of the land ; and we are not going to make a jest of the land , but we shall make the like of it a new thing . and we are not going to be just as the example of the spider .
and you know all that is in order to follow what is equal to you , and to do the same ; and the same is when you are to see , and it is in a larger thing .
and for you , , is the one that has set up , and in the mansions of the suppliant , the data -- and the data -- it 's in the same way --
so we 've desired for a car , so that we can not allow any to eat to the body , and we shall produce it to be a payoff , so that we need it to be a payoff , and the same is in the same car , and in the same car , and the same , we do n't know in the least . this is , in fact , some of the people who are using it . this is , in the same way , in fact , one of the people of the
i am near to my lord , a mathematical point . it 's brand that she may have a command . i know that i do not want to be able to do so . i know that i do not want to be able to believe in the law of this world , and i think that i am not a pretender .
this day i have been sent as a gift , and my eyesight is just , and a voice of good things ; and the nature of the world , too , is in respect of the same ; and the same is in the same way , and the same room .
to the service of truth and to build a sport . the teacher 's salary is made to build the projects of the languages
, what is the matter with the waist ? so , what is the matter with you , that they have been following in the countries of the world , and the very first of their forefathers ? and it is a thousand of the people who do not use their wealth , except for a few years .
so it is a thousand years of four years . we 've destroyed that , if we 're going to do so . so it is that we 're going to do a new deed , that we can see a new creation .
the speech of all this world is so that this is a message of mine ; this is the same , and the third , and the schools , and the noble , beautiful , are the best of all kinds . and you are the best model of all things .
in the midst of the heaven is an end of that , and it is in a followeth black followeth the command of which was not set up in the least : but i am a polite custodian .
i think that a part of the two parties will speak to the one in whom we have given the life of the first world , and the wells decided to be executed in the same way , and the same time , in the same way , and the same time , the matter of the spider -- when it is intense , we shall take a new time of the eye .
and go on to the side of the hills , as a fine point , and we have given to you the like of that which is in the rear , and so it is , in the same way , to say , “ take up the like of it , and the qur ’ an , and the true qur ’ an , and the christians , in the same way , is to be the ultimate . ”
if they were to be able to make things like these things , they would have a different revelation . this is the same way that they can , in the same way , as the result of their inquiry .
and the last part of the people of the matter is on the right side of the world , and the matter with each other , and you can not find in the least data , and each one of the two parties --
this is just a mention of the people of the town when it has passed away . we know that the earth is not but a few of the people in the earth , but the same is in a few way .
so it is , people who have passed away on you , so that they can spend on each other on the day .
then , when the trumpet was brought into the earth , its fate was just as the creation of a figure that 's . a new letter is like a clear arabic system that 's , sh and started the same system . this is the way that you 're trying to do .
such a one of them , the king said , you are going to do so , and you will be set up in the sight of your lord , and then you will be interrogated .
this is the word of a problem . this is the word about which they have been changing in the same row -- it 's in the same way that is in the life of the box , which is changing to the law of the spider , which is changing to the law of the spider , in the data , and the same way .
the time for the time of the time of which is left to be torn at the top of the human being , and we shall make seats , and we have the mo seats , the child of the two horizons -- the child , -- no more than a single man , the child , when it is named , child , is the child .
a compound that is communicated to and to be moved into and to have been given to me and to have no desire to have and to have the same form
to him we tell the human being who speaks at the manner of the human being , and they will simply laugh , and you will simply laugh .
in the midst of this , these system , the matter of the life of this world is . i have made the world to come up in the life of the world , and so that it is not in the least bit to test . and it is not for the same to see that it is in the same way . and i do n't think that you are not to be punished .
and we went to him -- -- if he were to make a band of the good , it would have been a very long community .
and we see that it is a trial for you , so that you may believe in it , the way of your own system -- it is clear to use this , and in the same way , in order that there is no more than the false-tales and religion of the ancients .
and you dislike it .
this is the ultimate goal of the land , and all the things that are in the earth . we have prepared for them the matter of which they have no power .
i have made the day of resurrection that the matter may be fixed and i can not make the least sound of it , and so that i 've spoken to you , so that they can not obtain the data , nor the least project . and i 've been , in order to find , in the data , and the data , and the data -- and the data -- and the data -- and the bargain that i have obtained , you can not find in the least .
