but that 's not the case .
the last three of the five , i 've grouped together .
and this is all relative to unrestrained -- the bigger the bar , the better . okay .
my girlfriend at the time , who 's no longer my girlfriend — — hated it .
i could n't improve on this as a good example of how flow enters the workplace .
i wish for food for my children .
later , i joined the world bank , which sought to fight such poverty by transferring aid from rich to poor countries .
the other kind of reviewer is a certain flavor of feminist who thinks they know what little girls ought to be .
i resolved to give back .
in addition , there can be some infectious agents that can also cause autism .
so the highest bar is what you 're striving to beat .
so , this is the data i just showed , ok ?
they often hit their target but miss the point .
there are two basic types of innovation .
so i want to share with you a couple key insights about complexity we 're learning from studying nature that maybe are applicable to other problems .
because i had a 61 percent average out of high school and then 61 percent average at the only school in canada that accepted me , carlton --
and fewer older people answered affirmatively to that question than middle-aged people , and younger people as well .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the personal computer is a miracle . the internet and its services are a miracle .
so you 'd think , with all this extra space , we 'd have plenty of room for all our stuff . nope .
later , i understood why my father got so upset .
rockett : but what ? is n't he coming ? miko : i do n't think so . i mean , i heard his band is playing at another party the same night .
but the more we learn about aging , the clearer it becomes that a sweeping downward course is grossly inaccurate .
just as citizens are demanding voice and accountability .
and this is just a very simple way of understanding what kind of innovation , what kind of different design we need .
i do n't want to get alzheimer 's disease . what i want is a cure in the next 20 years , soon enough to protect me .
and in fact , among all the diseases that existed in this land , it was the worst . it killed the most children .
the botanical names are in front of you . areca palm is a plant which removes co2 and converts it into oxygen .
anita roddick is another one of these ceos we interviewed .
this is a real medical need ,
we 've asked older and younger people to view faces in laboratory studies , some frowning , some smiling .
then in early 2007 , a really interesting thing happened .
you eat on the floor , you sleep on the floor , you work on the floor .
they 're all over the world .
i heard a telephone tone , and it felt green because it sounded just like the color green .
they know what to expect , even though it 'll be subtly different and the colors will be different and the name will be different .
and then , here 's how the crash test works .