not adding that on after all the learning has been done and you 've eaten your cognitive greens . so el sistema in venezuela uses a violin as a technology of learning . taio rocha uses making soap as a technology of learning .
and the study showed that , compared to other buildings , there is a reduced incidence of eye irritation by 52 percent , respiratory systems by 34 percent , headaches by 24 percent , lung impairment by 12 percent and asthma by nine percent .
so i knew there were two cars with two license plates on each . if i could n't sell all four , i could at least get one . i learned that at a young age .
 where did they go ?   went to india and back .  went straight to the president . he said ,  do you know there 's a solar-electrified village in sierra leone ?  he said ,  no .  half the cabinet went to see the grandmothers the next day .
and he decided that maybe he should leave the country for a few days , and seek out some more intelligent , open-minded people in a place called oxford , and come and try and tell the story at that place .
and that traditional approach to development had three key elements . first , transfer of resources from rich countries in the north to poorer countries in the south , accompanied by reform prescriptions .
sheep , goats -- domestic chores . so we thought of starting a school at night for the children . because the night schools of tilonia , over 75,000 children have gone through these night schools . because it 's for the convenience of the child ; it 's not for the convenience of the teacher .
so that 's when i started to feel like a cyborg . it 's when i started to feel that the cybernetic device was no longer a device . it had become a part of my body , an extension of my senses , of my official image .
this was one of the leading composers of american music back in the '70s . and the interview was 40 pages long . but this little excerpt is a very good summary of what he was saying during the interview .
what the poor thought was important would be reflected in the college . i went to this village for the first time . elders came to me and said ,  are you running from the police ?  i said ,  no . 
and then we asked them how happy they are again . and what we see is sort of amazing because there 's human universals on what you do with your money and then real cultural differences on what you do as well .
but this man does n't need to go there . he needs just a piece of paper where he can put down little marks , and as he does that , he can imagine sounds that had not existed before in that particular combination .
are governments delivering services to the citizens ? so for instance , several governments in africa and eastern europe are opening their budgets to the public . but , you know , there is a big difference between a budget that 's public and a budget that 's accessible .
and here 's just two of the ones we saw that are just really interesting to think about . one person wrote in ,  when i win , i 'm going to buy my own little mountain and have a little house on top . 
 but car seats are so expensive and complicated , and they have this big tangle of latches , how could they possibly not work better than seatbelts because they are so expensive and complicated ?  it 's kind of an interesting logic , i think , that people use . and the other logic , they say ,  well , the government would n't have told us [ to ] use them if they were n't much better . 
donorschoose.org is a non-profit for mainly public school teachers in low-income schools . they post projects , so they say ,  i want to teach huckleberry finn to my class and we do n't have the books ,  or  i want a microscope to teach my students science and we do n't have a microscope . 
it was consuming so much of our time after hours on weekends that we thought , we either need to close this down or figure a way to fund movember so that i could quit my job and go and spend more time in the organization and take it to the next level .
so , let me show you what happens . these are three-year-old dummies , by the way . so here -- this is the car seat . now watch two things : watch how the head goes forward , and basically hits the knees -- and this is in the car seat -- and watch how the car seat flies around , in the rebound , up in the air .
that was actually removed from vaccines in the year 1992 , and you can see that it really did not have an effect in what happened with the prevalence of autism . so again , there is no evidence that this is the answer .
 what 's the story .  so he summoned me and said ,  can you train me 150 grandmothers ?  i said ,  i ca n't , mr. president . but they will . the grandmothers will . 
boredom begins to be very aversive and apathy becomes very negative : you do n't feel that you 're doing anything , you do n't use your skills , there 's no challenge .
only in her underwear . when i asked ,  who is that ?  she said ,  that 's wei . the meaning of her name is pig . her mother died while giving birth to her , and no one had any idea who her father was .  for two weeks , she became my companion , slept with me .
at seven years old i figured it out . i got three and a half cents for a thousand coat hangers . i sold license plate protectors door to door . my dad actually made me go find someone who would sell me these things at wholesale .
and i was lying in my bedroom with one of those long extension cords . and i was calling all the dry cleaners in winnipeg to find out how much would the dry cleaners pay me for coat hangers .
as we age , our time horizons grow shorter and our goals change . when we recognize that we do n't have all the time in the world , we see our priorities most clearly .