and we had a lot of fun , and in 2004 , i said to the guys ,  that was so much fun . we need to legitimize this so we can get away with it year on year .  so we started thinking about that , and we were inspired by the women around us and all they were doing for breast cancer . and we thought , you know what , there 's nothing for men 's health .
the next thing is that if you want to predict the effect of one species on another , if you focus only on that link , and then you black box the rest , it 's actually less predictable than if you step back , consider the entire system -- all the species , all the links -- and from that place , hone in on the sphere of influence that matters most .
which we hopefully will do some more . who knows ? the new york timesselect , the op-ed page , asked me to do a column , and they said , you can do whatever you want . so , once a month for the last year , i 've been doing a column called  the principles of uncertainty ,  which , you know , i do n't know who heisenberg is , but i know i can throw that around now . you know , it 's the principles of uncertainty , so , you know . i 'm going to read quickly -- and probably i 'm going to edit some , because i do n't have that much time left -- a few of the columns .
waiting 10 years for the payoff from education is too long when you need to meet daily needs , when you 've got siblings to look after or a business to help with . so you need education to be relevant and help people to make a living there and then , often . and you also need to make it intrinsically interesting . so time and again , i found people like this .
we subscribed to a lot of magazines , did our homework , but really everywhere you look around , we were surrounded by images like this . and we went into parenting expecting our lives to look like this . the sun was always streaming in , and our children would never be crying . i would always be perfectly coiffed and well rested , and in fact , it was not like that at all . rg : when we lowered the glossy parenting magazine that we were looking at , with these beautiful images , and looked at the scene in our actual living room , it looked a little bit more like this .
you can just say you like the design . so , i 'll finish with just one thought : if we all work together on creating value , but if we really keep in mind the values of the work that we do , i think we can change the work that we do . we can change these values , can change the companies we work with , and eventually , together , maybe we can change the world . so , thank you .
so the question we are trying to address -- and i 'm way over time -- is how to put more and more of everyday life in that flow channel . and that is the kind of challenge that we 're trying to understand . and some of you obviously know how to do that spontaneously without any advice , but unfortunately a lot of people do n't .
and they actually monitor and supervise 150 schools for 7,000 children . she got the world 's children 's prize five years ago , and she went to sweden . first time ever going out of her village . never seen sweden . was n't dazzled at all by what was happening . and the queen of sweden , who 's there , turned to me and said ,  can you ask this child where she got her confidence from ? she 's only 12 years old , and she 's not dazzled by anything . 
and he says that his hand seems to be moving by itself . now , i could look at my hand for two weeks , and i would n't feel any awe or wonder , because i ca n't compose . so what it 's telling you here is that obviously this automatic , spontaneous process that he 's describing can only happen to someone who is very well trained and who has developed technique .
and , up there , you see uganda . they had almost five percent infected , and quite a big bubble in spite of being a small country , then . and they were probably the most infected country in the world . now , what has happened ? now you have understood the graph and now , in the next 60 seconds , we will play the hiv epidemic in the world . but first , i have a new invention here . i have solidified the beam of the laser pointer . so , ready , steady , go ! first , we have the fast rise in uganda and zimbabwe . they went upwards like this .
unfortunately , a lot of people 's experience is in apathy . the largest single contributor to that experience is watching television ; the next one is being in the bathroom , sitting . even though sometimes watching television about seven to eight percent of the time is in flow , but that 's when you choose a program you really want to watch and you get feedback from it .
societies with millions of talented , emotionally stable citizens who are healthier and better educated than any generations before them , armed with knowledge about the practical matters of life and motivated to solve the big issues can be better societies than we have ever known .
and we women are going to lead the way in this new revolution , this new feminist issue . we are literally going to sleep our way to the top , literally . because unfortunately for men , sleep deprivation has become a virility symbol . i was recently having dinner with a guy who bragged that he had only gotten four hours sleep the night before . and i felt like saying to him -- but i did n't say it --
now we always focus , naturally , on how much we raise , because it 's a very tangible outcome , but for me , awareness and education is more important than the funds we raise , because i know that is changing and saving lives today , and it 's probably best exampled by a young guy that i met at south by southwest in austin , texas , at the start of the year .