and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
o mankind ! fear allah , and keep your duty to him , and create you from a man who created you , and of the women women . and fear allah , for he is over them guardians .
those who disbelieve are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , so that they will be swallowed up as a thing of their own invention , and allah will not be able to keep their duty to allah .
when you heard it , why did you not say : `` it is not for us to speak that which we say ? glory be to allah ! this is a great slander . ''
an army of deserters of the factions will be routed .
and when you said to moses , `` shall we not feed you on the day of resurrection , and that you will not be allowed to please your lord ? '' and it is said to them , `` will you not take heed to us in the way of your lord ? '' and it is said to them , `` are you to take a foolish sustenance from the law of the law ? '' and it will be said to them , `` do you take to other than a few of the things you have
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth concerning which they are doubting .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and an example of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
and he will say : `` we are a jew and a christian . '' say : `` then why do you commit the guilt of evil ? '' say : `` then do you commit the guilt of evil ? '' and he will punish you with the like of that which he has created ; and he punisheth whom he will , and unto him is the journeying .
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea . so see how was the end of the wrongdoers .
and they will see the punishment of the day when they followed their souls , and the followers of the woods turn away from the evil of their believing news , and they will be one of the ignorants .
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees , and in the trees and in what they erect .
on that day allah will pay them in full their due reward , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
they said , ‘ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and when hell is set ablaze ,
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
by the lote-tree of the boundary
and if allah had the punishment of the people an evil place to see the evil of their deeds , it would have been settled on the earth . but allah will not turn to his servants a day when he is observant of his servants .
they said : `` the son of allah , has the son of allah , and the birds . '' they said , `` the angel of allah is the word of allah that they do not know . ''
on the day they see it , they will be as though they had not remainedexcept for an afternoon or a morning .
why did not the believers , and the believing men and women , think that they had a good mention of it ? and say , `` this is a clear slander '' .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and for them is a painful punishment .
moses said , `` you throw first , '' and behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic because of their magic .
he said , “ go down from the garden , all of you , both of you , one of you . but if you follow my guidance , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray nor will he go astray . ”
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
and recall what time we delivered you from the folk of pharaoh with the worst torment , slaughtering your sons and sparing your women , and therein was a tremendous trial from your lord .
then he took his brother in the midst of his brother , even though it was the time of his brother , and then we gave him his brother his brother his brother his brother , and he is the exalted in might , full of knowledge .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will certainly be victorious . ”
and if we had sent down this qur ’ an , in the mountains , you would have seen the mountains , and all that they would differ , and it is they who will be in awe of allah ; so that they may take heed .
and we know that we can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor can we frustrate him by flight .
your people have denied it while it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
verily thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is aware of his slaves .
even if we opened to them a gate from the sky , and they mounted through it ,
when the sun is rolled up .
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us , and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from heaven , because they are evil-livers .
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
this is of the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they agreed upon their plan .
a provision for you and your cattle .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us the cow ” ; he said , “ he says to the cow ” ; he said , ‘ the cow is that neither old nor too young , but what you are commanded . ’
therein they will live for ever . an excellent abode and abode !
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers : `` we will drive you out of our land , or you will return to our religion . '' then their lord inspired them : `` we will destroy the wrong-doers ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may take heed .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was no longer for escape .
and those speeding along with ease ,
when the earth is shaken with a shock .
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far off .
in scorching wind and boiling water ,
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they say , `` we will not believe in what we have sent down to the messengers , and allah has full knowledge of what is in it . and allah is the knower of the chests . ''
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the sacred mosque , whose precincts we have blessed , so that we may show him some of our signs . surely he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place
he said : `` this is your lord . '' he said , `` it is easy for me , and we may make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us . this is a matter decreed . ''
and do not take the consequences of what they do , lest they fall down upon themselves by their own hands , and we will not give them the record of their own deeds ; then they will be returned to their lord . then they will be returned to their lord .
say : `` who can protect you from allah and of those you have done ? '' if he so willed , he could not cause you to harm you , or to make them a mercy from you . and if he will , he can make them a mercy and help them .
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you may taste the evil way of god , and you will suffer a great punishment .
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay ,
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
but he turned away with his warlords , and said : `` a sorcerer or a madman ! ''
or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? if so , let them ascend by ropes .
he would have remained inside its bellytill the day of resurrection .
and the birds , too , gathered together . all echoing him .
say , `` is there the news of you better for you ? '' but those who fear allah will have gardens of eden with streams running in them , and they will be in the midst of their generosity . and allah is seer of his servants .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
o our lord ! keep your duty to him , and we follow the muslims , and we have followed thee , and we have the faith in thee . and we have made us a believer .
those who took the calf , and incurred wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world . thus do we reward those who fabricate lies .
there is none who can avert it .
whatever you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and the glitter of the life of this world , and that which is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
the people of noah denied the messengers .
it is god who has created the heavens and the earth , and then on the day of resurrection , he has established the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon will be settled ; and it is the ordinance of your lord , in order that they may be subjected to a long time .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and they went at early morning , able to deprive .
who created and shaped ,
and theyschemed , and allah schemed ; and allah is the best of schemers .
so that they may understand my speech .
and when their eyes are turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doers .
the evil of all these is hateful in the sight of your lord .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
like satan who says to man , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
and among them are those who made a covenant with god , saying , `` if god gives us of his bounty , we will certainly give alms and become righteous . ''
“ and speak to him courteously , that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ”
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking god 's pleasure , and allah is gentle to his servants .
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
for those who do wrongwill be like the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
the unbelievers say : `` when we have become dust and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants , so fear me .
and recall what time we took from the prophets a covenant , and from thee from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of mary . and we took from them a solemn covenant .
has he penetrated to the unseen , or has he taken a covenant with the all-beneficent ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any thing from allah .
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
by the brightening dawn ,
taught by one mighty in power ,
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk who were afflicting you with evil , slaying your sons and letting your women live , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
you attend to him ,
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and whosoever worketh righteously , male or female , and is a believer , they shall enter paradise and shall not be wronged a whit .
surely those who recite the book of allah , and establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them secretly and openly , hope for a trade that will not perish .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
and you certainly are one of us who created the first heavens and the first that we had created , and you were bidden to have a matter about which you have been commanded . and you will surely have a thing in which you have been made to appear in your presence . indeed , you have been made to find a way .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
then the sects differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers for the scene of a dreadful day .
he merges night into day , and merges day into night , and he knows what is in the breasts .
woe to me ! would that i had never taken so-and-so as friend !
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? we will requite the guilty .
he who does not think that allah will not be able to give a benefit to him , nor will he be able to make a testament on the day of resurrection , so that he may bring them a clear light .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and you will know who is the owner of the right path , and who is guided . '
so when they returned to their father , they said : `` o our father ! a measure of truth has been denied . so send our brother with us , so that we may give him measure . ''
and facilitatedfor him .
he said , “ this is how your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’ ”
and we have set a glance on the things we have given to us . so there is a matter between them and that which has been decided between them . and that is the ordinance of your lord on the day of judgement .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they were arrogant .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has taken it as they forget , and allah is witness over all things .
if they could find a place of refuge or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
when it was said to them : there is no god but allah , they were scornful
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
the wayis only against those who oppress people , and terrorise the land unjustly . for such there is a painful punishment .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
those who , if we establish them in the land , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong . to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
when it is said to them , “ do not make mischief in the land , ” they say , “ we are only reformers . ”
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
there is not a messenger for the prophet except that he may obey the command of allah ; and if they had followed the way of allah , then he came to them and asked them for forgiveness . and indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ”
and you did not send down a messenger from us , nor did it be , but when satan wished , he would have made it in a matter , and he has made a covenant with him . and allah is the all-knower of his wills , and he is the knowing , the wise .
lo ! those who do wrong themselves , they are wronging themselves . they say : `` what is your own power ? '' they will say : `` what ! is it that allah is a dominion of the heavens and the earth ? '' they will say : `` is it a kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? '' for it is an evil abode .
is he then who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the wrongdoers , `` taste what you used to earn . ''
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and if any of your wives , then , are brought back to the disbelievers , they would then have been attacked from among you , and the disbelievers are in the same manner . and fear allah , to whom you will be believers .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
which penetrates the hearts
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
thus do we relate to you some accounts of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
if they accuse thee of lying , say thou : your lord is owner of extensive mercy , and his wrath shall not be withdrawn from the culprits .
a guidance and mercy for the righteous
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
and reminder is a reminder to you , and to deliver the book to him , and to make it clear to him . he is the guidance and the most merciful .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ''
god has promised you to your promise . he is the guardian of it , and they will be given to you a respite until the certaintycomes upon you , so that you may be of the same for them , and indeed allah is gracious to the believers . god is gracious and bounty .
and we command the command of the human being to the best of the human being who did not take your parents and his father , but if you had been idolaters , then you would have come to know that you did not know .
they said , ‘ do you wonder at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings are upon you , o people of the house ; indeed he is praiseworthy , glorious . ’
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you turned away ?
if you ignore the commands of allah , you will corrupt the land and sever your ties of kinship .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , your people laugh at it .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
the people of al-hijr also rejected the messengers ,
then we shall make laterfollow them .
say , “ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony ; then you ascribe partners . ”
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the hour overtakes them suddenly or that there will come upon them the chastisement of a barren day .
o my father ! surely i have come to you with knowledge , so follow me ; i will guide you to a straight path .
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you believe in his signs .
exalted , purified ,
and of the people are some who pray to one another , and if there comes upon them a sudden , and if there comes upon them a part of it , it will be in the case of the hereafter , and that is the manifest loss .
whenever a surah is sent down , be sent down in the faith of allah and his messenger , and be wary of allah , and do not ask you to be saddened .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
we have made it a reminder and a provision for the needy .
thou art but a mortal like us . so bring a sign if thou art of the truthful .
they say : `` why were not signs sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
thus do we relate to you some accounts of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
those are their houses , fallen in ruins , because of their iniquities . in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
or were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
and he gave to the human being what was to be shown to man , and that he might warn the people of the warnings , and that he may give good news to the believers , and that they shall have a reward that is best .
o children of adam ! if there come to you messengers from among you relating to you my signs , then whoever practices piety and reforms , shall have no fear nor shall they grieve .
do they not see how every thing allah has created the shadows , the right and the left , prostrating themselves before god , prostrating themselves to god in all humility ?
and his signs are clear evidence of his own people , and the one of the people of abraham who chose the house of abraham , and his people , and that he should have made a covenant with him . and allah is free of all wants , of those who do not believe .
or do they have gods besides us ? they have no power to help them , nor can they help themselves .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
and when thou seest them , behold , they are going to hear , and when they are invited to the like of it , they are the like thereof . and it is they who will be of the same to it ; and will be the same for them , and will be of the same to them ; and why do you not see ?
so it tasted the evil result of its conduct , and the end of its affair was loss .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
and when allah 's grace from his mercy reaches mankind , there is no averter . and when there comes to them a good thing , there is no averter . and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed reminder from the merciful but they turn away from it .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , so that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world ; and the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
leave them to eat and enjoy , and lethope beguile them . soon they will know .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
then why did those whom they had taken as gods whom they had taken as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they went astray from them , and that was their lie .
say to those who deny the truth , “ you will be overcome and driven to hell . ”
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of allah and then do not follow up what they have spent with reminders of their generosity or with injury , their reward is with their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
abraham was one of his followers .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , obedient , and upright , and was not one of the polytheists .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
those who break the covenant of allah after the camel has been made to be made to fail , and make mischief in the land , and spread corruption in the land . these are the companions of allah .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in this are signs for a people who believe .
and do not take the wealth of the orphan except the benefit of it , except for the benefit of it , until he comes to them with measure , and bring up what is with him , for what you have been commanded . and we have made for you the measure , so that you may be reminded of allah 's covenant , so that you may take heed .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
no prophet came to them but they mocked him .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them from his bounty , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
some of the people of the right and the right desire that he may mislead others from the way of allah , and that he may make clear to them what is in the way of allah , and that they may make a mockery of him , and they will have a great punishment .
he said : my lord ! verily i have wronged myself . so forgive me , and he is the forgiving , the merciful .
and that is not hard for allah .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and to allah do all things return .
then reduces them to rusty rubbish .
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` god has no way . he whom he will , he will guide whomever he wishes , and they will face the guidance .
and on the day when he will say , `` call upon those whom you pretended . '' they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
do they desire a religion other than the religion of allah while to him belong the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you wish to throw . ''
so do not think that allah will break his promise to his messengers . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
and when they are reminded , they pay no heed .
messengers as bearers of glad tidings and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
yet they play in doubt .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
so when moses came to the mount of the mount , the image of a fire : `` wait ! '' it is the same for you : it is you who are the one to bring you a fire , or that you may bring you a brand from it .
and as for the qasitun , they will be firewood for hell .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , the impaler ,
and the mount sinai ,
bring your book , if you are truthful .
like satan who says to man , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and when the word is fulfilled against them , we shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth that they will say : verily the people have not believed in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said to them , “ enter the gate prostrating , ” and we said to them , “ do not transgress the sabbath ” ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . that is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
and when you said , ‘ o moses , we will not believe in you until we see allah openly , so the thunderbolt seized you while you were looking on . ’
except iblis ; he was proud and he was one of the faithless .
and the most heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and all that is in them , glorify him , and praising him ; and he is the most appreciating and the most forgiving . he is the most appreciating and the most forbearing .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky , so their necks will remain bowed in humility .
who seeth thee when thou standest up
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and to him belongs all that is in front of you , and in the presence of the enemies of allah , so that you may be subject to the enemies of allah , and keep your duty to him , and do not follow the enemies of allah . you will not be able to make such as go to your own enemy , and you will not be wronged .
surely those who believe and do good works will enter gardens of bliss .
they ask you to hasten the punishment , and if we had not given them a promise , we had already decreed for them the punishment , and the punishment came upon them suddenly , while they were unaware .
say thou : allah is the knower of all things ; and whosoever thou shalt be able to see , thou shalt be able to see whomsoever thou shalt be able to see . thou art the guardian of all things .
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from heaven , because they are evil-livers .
the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance .
allah knows what is in their hearts . so leave them alone , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
he was created from a drop emitted-
as if they had never dwelt there . away with median , as was done away with thamood .
and by him who created the male and female ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
surely the day of decision is a time appointed .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
you can not frustrate him in the earth , nor have you any guardian or helper .
allah has promised you abundant spoils that you will capture , and he has restrained the hands of you from your own hands . this is a sign for the believers , and that he may guide you on a straight path .
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
and indeed , allah is the most acceptor of all the night , or a part of the night , and a part of the night ; and allah is the lord of the night and the day , and that you may make a testament in the way of allah ; and for you is the most honourable , the most honourable , and the most honourable , the most honourable , the most devoted to you , you will have the upper hand in the land ; and god is all-forgiving and all-merciful to you . so do
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
and exalted your fame ?
he hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which he hath given them . shall he keep it in humiliation , or bury it in the dust ? ah ! evil is that which they judge !
for every people is a term . when their term comes , they will not be able to delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and say : my lord ! i seek refuge in thee from the whisperings of the satans ,
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for friends ; they are allies of each other . whoever takes them as allies among them , is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
that which you are promised is coming ; and you can not escape .
they say , `` they will not be able to invent god . '' but if allah has heard them , they will not be able to hide your own hands , nor will you be questioned . god is aware of the innermost of the chests .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
snatching away the scalp ,
certainly allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
when the eventbefalls .
he is the omnipotent over his servants . he is the wise , the aware .
blessed is he in whose hand is the dominion , and he is able to do all things .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : `` shall i direct you to a household of a household who will take care of him ? ''
messengershave been derided before thee , but that whereat they scoffed beset those who scoffed at them .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
you cause the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night , you make the dead enter into the dead , and the dead will be brought forth from the dead without reckoning .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men disbelieve not save infidelity .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
risethe night except a little ,
those are the two ones who have said , `` enter the gate of allah , in the midst of the heavens and in the earth . '' they will have the upper hand to be in the presence of god , if you are believers .
we know what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the wrongdoers deny .
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my reminder , and they were not able to hear .
say , `` my lord , if you should show me what they are promised ,
the people of al-hijr also rejected the messengers ,
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
o you who have faith ! do not take your devotional obligations , when you have reached it , when it comes to them , and they have no good speech until you reach their footsteps , and do not be in a narrow place of the matter . and indeed , allah is forgiving and kind .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
it is he who made the earth as a rich carpets to you , and sent down water from the sky , and sent down water from the sky ; and it is in order that you will have the means to make it equal to god . god is aware of the things you do .
except the path of hell , wherein they will live forever . and that is easy for allah .
and indeed , allah 's is the abode of the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah . and who will be responsible for the law of god . and who is the guardian of the things that is in the law . and that is the ultimate achievement .
and the people of noah before , surely they were a transgressing lot .
you will not be hungry therein nor naked .
these , our people , have chosengods beside him , but why do they not bring a clear authority over them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and as for those whose scale is light , they will lose their souls because they have no injustice .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency while you see ? ”
do you not think that any one of you will be admitted into the sky to be admitted into the sky , and then let them turn away from you ? then you will be victorious .
he has revealed to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you ,
we have brought to them a book which we have detailed with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
and they worship besides allah that which has not been sent down upon them , and that which they have no knowledge of ; and for the wrong-doers there is no helper .
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand lazily , showing off to the people , but little do they remember .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so walk in its tracts , and eat of his provision ; and to him is the resurrection .
these two opponentsdispute with each other about their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire shall be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured down over their heads .
and they will not be absent from it .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed from you your covering , and your sight today is sharp .
and those who believe and put their trust in the hereafter , we shall make them enter in the garden , and we shall not give them the reward of a thing for which they have been working .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and who is the farther astray from his own soul , and the day of judgment will be of no avail to him , if the day of resurrection , worship it , and they will not be unaware .
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
you pleaded on their behalf in this life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe because they are returning to their lord .
say : i am not a new creation , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner .
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
and indeed we seized them with punishment , yet they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
have they not seen that we have appointed a safe sanctuary , while all around them are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
and collectand hide it !
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a lodging for the unbelievers ?
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
and recall when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! verily , you are going to go to him with the calf , and you seek to seek his repentance , and then you will not repent , and he is the one who accepts repentance , the most merciful . ''
and he taught adam the names , all of them , then said to the angels , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
and if you disbelieve , allah is all-sufficient for you , though you will not be pleased with the servants of the believers , but if you do so , they will be pleased with it , and then you will be well pleased with your lord . and indeed , he is the all-knower of the innermost of the chests . he is aware of what you do .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal . repel evil with what is better . then you will see that he is a sympathetic friend .
and they wish to disbelieve as they disbelieve , and disbelieve in the unbelievers , and disbelieve in the disbelievers . so if they turn away , then they will have no friends until they turn away from allah 's way . and if they disobey you , they will not be friends with it .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : 'call on your lord to lighten for us a day of doom . '
so they have denied , so there will come to them news of that they mocked at .
have you not seen that allah will cause you to meet with the heaven , and will cause them to die , then he will turn away from them on the earth , then he will cause them to go forth from the clouds ?
the hypocrites and the hypocrites are in the same manner of their men and women . in that wise is the command of evil , and that they may commit evil , and allah has made them hear ; and the hypocrites are averse .
believers , if you help god , he will help you and make your feet steady .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , `` indeed , i am commanded to serve allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
as for those who have divided their religion , and set forth in fragments , they will not be able to keep you in any way , nor are you going to be responsible for their deeds .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
and the fifththat the wrath of allah be upon her if hespeaks the truth .
those who deny the signs of allah and the meeting with him -- it is they who have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and it is not for the merciful to take a son .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . who is more astray than he who follows his own desires without guidance from allah ? god does not guide the unjust people .
if you do not help them , allah will certainly defend them when those who disbelieve , and when they are destroyed in the cave , they will not be able to make a cave in the cave , and he has made them to be victorious in the cave , and he has made them to be victorious , and allah is the exalted in might , the wise .
are they gods other than allah ? say : `` call upon me to be of those who have associated others with me . '' say , `` the message is only to those who have associated others with me in the way of truth , and most of the people of the truth are the truth . ''
o you enfolded in your mantle ,
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the morning while they play ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has taken it as they forget , and allah is witness over all things .
he said : `` verily ! this is my favour with me , which i have given knowledge . is it not possible that god has destroyed many generations before him ? '' and he was not of the evildoers .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
so do not compare allah with a similitude . god knows and you do not know .
when moses had said to their brothers , `` moses , seeking to kill you as you should kill me , '' he said , `` you want to kill me as you were arrogant in the land , and you are not a tyrant to be blamed . ''
surely they were not expecting a reckoning ,
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will live forever .
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
confirm my strength with him
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is behind you , and his bounty , and complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
of jinn and men .
but they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what it has .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they used to carve homes in the mountains , feeling secure .
and those whom you call upon besides him can not help you , nor can they help themselves .
when they come to you , they say : `` we believe , '' but they have come with disbelief , and they go with it , and allah knows best what they hide .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book , but only wishful thinking and only conjecture .
and we have made lawful for you their wives , and the giver of good things , and the women of the women who have made a war on them , and the women of the women who have taken their homes , and the women of the marriage . and allah is ever all-potent over what you do .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said , `` we believe . bear witness that we are muslims . ''
and when misfortune befalls him , he says , “ this is only a trade , and if we give him mercy , the only business is only a business ; rather , this is a trial for most of them , but most of them do not know . ”
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
or that he will not seize them by a fright ? surely your lord is compassionate and merciful .
do good , what i say to me , and that i will say to him : `` in fact , it is a thing to be made to appear to him in hell . '' in fact , it is the word of the ancients .
he created man .
do they not know that allah knows what they hide and what they disclose ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
tell my servants who believe , to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
they said , `` have you come to us that we may worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the eternal , the self-subsistent him ; and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and there will go round boy-servants of theirs , as if they were hidden pearls .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from their lord ,
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed ; he has power over all things .
god is the one god . he is the knower of the living and the last , and he is the knower of what he wills in the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
they try to hidefrom men , but they do not hide from allah , but he is with them when they meditate by night with night , and allah encompasses what they do .
and be patient on the day of judgment , and remember the remembrance of their lord , and sing his praises in the morning and in the evening , and to him do we please .
o you who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you , so that you may become righteous .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
mobilize , light or heavy , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the way of allah . that is better for you if you only knew .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
allah does not like the disclosure ofevilin speech except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
moses said : `` woe not to allah ! '' he said , `` do not lie in the name of god , he has the power to make the birds to pass away , and he has the power to do so . ''
and those who avoid heinous sins and indecencies , and when they are angry , they forgive .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
“ and fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ”
o you who believe ! take your duty to allah , and have no means of intercession , but he has taken to you a part of that which is right . so fear allah , for allah is aware of what they do .
sovereignty on that day belongs to god , and he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
what they are engaged in is doomed to be destroyed and what they have been doing .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter be steadfast , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
why did not the believers , and the believing men and women , think that they had a good mention of it ? and say , `` this is a clear slander '' .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
noble and pious .
so we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we will surely question the messengers .
`` and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , except that my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and those who recite the reminder ,
they have led many astray . do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ''
you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
`` seize him and manacle him ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them . enter paradise , and you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would take heed ?
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ''
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay , allah hath cursed them for their infidelity , and little is it that they believe .
he it is who created you from weakness , then after strength , then he gave you strength after weakness , and after strength weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah is sufficient as manager .
if you could see , when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , `` would that we were sent back and never deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the believers . ''
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? rather , he is an insolent liar . ''
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving is thanked . '
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , how they are turned away ?
so we brought forth from there the believers .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
upon whom it is decreed that whoever befriends him , he will mislead him and lead him to the punishment of the blaze .
allah does not like the disclosure ofevilin speech except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
though you are not liable if he does not purify himself .
each of them did not deny the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve , so woe to the unbelievers .
they said : we give you glad tidings of truth , so do not be of those who despair .
he will have no strength or helper .
we created them only with truth , but most of them do not know .
and know that your possessions and your children are a trial , and that allah is a mighty reward .
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter are their hearts , and they are proud .
when you have finished the prayer , remember allah standing , sitting , and lying on your sides ; and when you are secure , perform the prayer ; indeed prayer is a timed ordinance for the believers .
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to make lawful for you wives and children , and for them are the male and the female , and for you there is no one to make things equal to them . and there is no one to be of the doubters .
or do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , and he will multiply it for him ? and he will havea liberal reward .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` shall i prostrate to him who created you from clay ? ''
say , `` if all mankind and jinn were to bring the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of this quran , if they were to help each other . ''
and if you want to replace a wife with a wife , and you have given it to drink , then do not take any thing from it . would you take it with a calumny and manifest sin ?
and every small and greatis inscribed .
who gives me food and drink ,
is not he able to give life to the dead ?
say : `` is this better or the garden of eternity which is promised to the righteous ? it will be their reward and their destination .
wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in this are signs for a people who believe .
and do not be of the cheats , and do not ask those who are before you , after them ; and if you have a severe punishment , they will be responsible for what you have earned . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
those who do not believe in allah and the last day , and do not forbid what allah and his apostle has forbidden , nor forbid the true religion , and those who are given the book will be given the tribute of the book , until they pay the tribute .
he said : ye will not eat of that which i have been sent to you , but what i have been commanded , and that i am a people who do not believe in allah and the last day .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah and obey his messenger , if you are believers .
to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . allah is witness over everything .
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe because they are returning to their lord .
“ were not my verses recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
all praise be to allah , who has created all the human being with his son , and he has not taken his son as a son , and he has not made any one of his own family with his own son , and say , “ he is the one who has no strength , and he is the all-exalted , the all-exalted . ”
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a covenant with god ? ” say , ‘ do you have a covenant with god ? or do you not know about god what you do not know ? ’
when it is said to them , `` believe in what has been sent down from god , '' they say , `` we believe in that which is sent down to us , and do not believe in the quran , if you are believers . ''
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god is aware of what they do .
he hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which he hath given them . shall he keep it in humiliation , or bury it in the dust ? ah ! evil is that which they judge !
surely paradise will be the refuge .
have you not seen those who have been given to die in fear of death ? they have no one to intercede for them . god is the lord of the bounty , even though most men do not give thanks .
and olives and palms ,
if the punishment of the punishment seized them for a while , they would say : `` what is the servants of your servants , who have come after it ? '' in fact , it is a day that will not be lightened for them , and it will be a recompense for them .
we have not sent down the book to you except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
and to those before you were the people of the city who had done evil in the land , except for a few of them in the land , except for a few of them ; and most of them are transgressors .
and when you killed a soul , then disputed with one another , and allah disclosed what you were hiding .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . he is your open enemy .
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
my lord ! save me and my household from what they do .
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
say , `` nothing will befall us except what god has decreed for us . he is our protector , and in allah let the believers put their trust . ''
on the day when the first blast shivers
whether you disclose something or hide it , god is aware of all things .
so they denied him , so we destroyed them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
the most merciful
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
which none can touch except the purified .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he . so do not be of the cheats ,
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
on the day when every person bears witness from every nation , and we have sent down to them a witness , and a witness to them , and a guidance for the muslims .
in them are benefits for you until a time appointed . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
and by the day as it appears radiantly ,
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
say : `` i do not know that the thing has been revealed to me from one who has been able to make things known to it , or that it is the same for him who has been given to it , or is the same for him . if only you were to be able to give the fruits of their numbers , it would be the same for them , and if only you were to be blamed . ''
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : 'call on your lord to lighten for us a day of doom . '
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better place than this . ''
they denied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
before them the people of noah belied . they rejected our servant and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
and that which she worshipped instead of allah prevented her . she was of a disbelieving people .
are the mercy of your lord , when they are made to grow out of their provision and provided them with sustenance in the life of the world and in the world to come ? and in order that they may be of the mercy of his lord , and in the mercy of your lord , the most honourable , the most merciful .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with justice ; and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
but the devout will avoid it .
those who are upright in the truth of your wives , if they do so , they will be responsible for their own children , and if they do not desist , they will be a prey to the same , and for those who have fear of allah , will be the same for them , and that allah may make it easy for him . for him only is the destination .
and to you is it that you should make your daughters a war , and your daughters , and your lord is your lord , and of your own women . and if you will , it is a man who has given you a theft . and if you will , it is a man who has made you equal to your own relations . and if you will , it is a man who has made your own wife , and you are the one who is the pardoner , the all-seer .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
do they not see the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? it is the same for them , and the seed of the heavens or the earth will be made clear to them , and in the heaven is a clear deliverance .
they devised their plots , but their plots are in the sight of allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and we bestowed favor on david from us : `` o mountains , sing the praises of him and birds , and birds . '' and we softened iron for him .
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
some of the people of the book say , `` believe in that which has been sent down to the believers in the morning and disbelieve in the evening , so that they may turn back .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
she said , `` indeed , the angels are among the guards of the truth , '' but it will be said to them , `` do not become a single object of the end . it is the same for them , who will be the one who has the power to do so , and they will be victorious .
by the clear book ,
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
those whom they call upon themselves are the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus do we deliver the believers .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
their security during winter and summer journeys .
what is the clatterer ?
and remember , when abraham said to the dead : `` have you disbelieved ? '' he said : `` have you disbelieved ? '' and said : `` is it not a lie ? '' and say : `` be '' , and said : `` be ! '' and say : `` be ! '' and say : `` be ! '' and say thou : `` be ! '' and lo ! allah is mighty , beholding .
how many were the gardens and springs ,
and they will have no auliya'to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray - for him there is no way .
those who believe and do good works are blessedness and excellent resort .
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in this are signs for a people who believe .
did they not ponder over the word , or did it not come to them that which came before their fathers ?
and those who came to them and said : our lord ! forgive us us and we are the ones who have been guided before us , and that we may drive thee out of our way , and thou art compassionate and merciful .
except your chosen servants among them . ''
it is he who has made for you the stars that you may be guided by them in the darkness of land and sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
then we gave you back your return , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you greater in number .
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the truth of allah , and let you bear your testimony , and your parents are averse , and if you do so , their parents will be of no more , if you do so , or turn away from them . and if you do so , confine them to the right way , or if you are truthful .
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
and among the bedouins are those who give what they spend for a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . on them will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is hearing , knowing .
and they say : `` o our lord ! bring to them the like of it , '' they will say : `` bring us what you have been doing in this world , and we will not be among the righteous . '' so , they will be told , `` taste now the punishment of hell , so that you will have no punishment . '' so they will have no punishment .
and we turnedupside down , and rained on them stones of baked clay .
the blind , the lame , and the sick will not be blamed , and he who obeys god and his messenger will enter gardens beneath which rivers flow . whoever turns away from it will be a painful punishment .
it is he who has created you . some of you are unbelievers , and some of you are believers . god perceives what you do .
seek help in patience and prayer ; but it is hard except for the humble ,
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : 'this is a magician , a liar .
on the day when he will gather them all together , they will know that the people of them will know . but those who deny the truth will be called to one another , and they will not be guided .
so celebrate the name of your lord , the all-supreme .
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and if we send a wind and they see their tilth yellow , then they will become ungrateful .
and when he said to them : `` o my lord ! make this a single place of all that is in the heavens and the earth , and give sustenance to those who believe in allah and the last day , and say , `` but do not disbelieve in the life to come . ''
if you have a trust in this , then i will make clear to you the message that is revealed to me . i have been commanded to bring to you the book of allah , and you will not harm it . my lord is able to do all things .
such is allah , your lord , there is no god but he . the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
do they not then meditate on the earth , and then see how was the end of those who were before them ? and the end of those who were before them will be destroyed , and they have not been able to protect them from the land ; and allah has no power of refuge .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
hast thou not seen those unto whom a portion of the scripture is of a portion of the scripture , that is not a part of the people of the book , and those who have faith and are wont to believe in it ?
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them . how terrible was my punishment !
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
but no one believed in moses except some of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his nobles , lest the pharaoh should persecute them . indeed , pharaoh was haughty in the land , and he was of the transgressors .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts met , only satan made them slip because of some of their deeds . god has forgiven them . god is forgiving and forbearing .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
do they not see that allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
it is he who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what is the matter with you that the hour is nigh ?
and when you travel in the land , there is no sin for you , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you , if you fear the unbelievers .
and we sent forth the israelites from the sea after the people of the heights , who divided their hearts into the sea , saying , `` o moses , do not be a people who are divided in their religion , and say : `` you are a people who have no faith . ''
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , because of what they have earned , and that they may taste a part of it , so that they may return .
and noah , when he called to us , so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
o ye who believe ! be ye in charge of your education , and those who go astray , for that which ye are wont to go astray , if ye are guided to allah 's way , and the tidings of that which ye are wont to do .
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
then he made his offspring from an extract of insignificant fluid ,
except those who repent and believe , and act righteously . these will enter paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
the human being is called to mind when he calls to his lord , and can not turn away from it , and then , when he has made a covenant with him , he will be responsible for his good deeds ; and say , `` a little , '' and say to the people of the fire , `` indeed , you are a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
if it had been a glory for him , it would have been made easy for him , or the true explanation . the hypocrites would say to you , `` if you could not have any faith in it , the people will be tested by you , and we will certainly make it clear to you , while they are liars . ''
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are the truthful ones , their reward is with their lord , and those who deny the truth and deny our signs ; they are the people of hell .
the unbelievers from among the people of the book and the polytheists would not desist from disbelief until the clear proof came to them .
and leave the earth a levelled plain ,
neither limitednor forbidden ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will remain in it forever .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return ,
and grow therein ,
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who do not ask , `` do not follow the truth , except as one who is visiting them with the right path , and they say , `` other than allah , who has taken no means to serve , except for a number of their own hands . '' those who take their duty to god will have no power to help them , and they will be in the fire , and they will abide in the fire .
when you recite the quran , we place between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
say : `` are you one of the righteous ? '' but they are content to reach themselves , and we will be waiting for them , and we will be waiting for them , and we will be waiting for you . indeed , we are waiting .
it was just one shout , and they were extinguished .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
by no means ! by your lord , those who do not believe in you , do not make a single problem , and they will not be able to make you in any doubt . and after that there will be no doubt in their heart , and they will be well-pleased .
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
do you not bring itback ?
and to solomon the stormy wind , blowing at his command toward the land which we had blessed , and we have knowledge of all things .
why , when he came to it , would not be cast into the midst of your garden , and said : `` enter egypt , allah will bring it to him , and will be rewarded with all that he wants . '' and if thou seest me , there is no increase for him .
and ask forgiveness of your lord and ask forgiveness for him . then , if you turn back , then he will give you a good life , and if you turn away , then i fear for you the punishment of a mighty day .
on the day when it comes , no soul shall speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
and when the truth came to us from us , they said : `` not as a sign of that which was sent down to moses , except if they had been bent on denying the truth . '' but they were not going to be disbelievers , except for a people who were bent on denying the truth .
`` but we are a multitude amply fore-warned . ''
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
o you who believe ! do not take the enemies of me , nor do you hope for your own hopes , while they are conscious of god , and that you may have the faith of your lord , and what you have been doing . and indeed , those who do not believe in allah , to make things clear to you , are indeed the ones who do not believe in me . indeed , i have been innocent of what you do .
the believers are only the ones who have faith in the truth of what they say , and their hearts are covered with their own , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
on that day no one can benefit or harm one another . we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and none will help you .
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the inhabitants of paradise are the achievers .
in which are valuable writings .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses and stairs whereon they ascend ,
this is the true story . there is no god but allah . and indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we have blessed for all people .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
and of the people of the people of the book will be given a great provision for you . so tell them : `` have you come to know that some of the people of the city have no faith ? '' they will know it .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a home . the spider 's house is the house , if they but knew .
and you love wealth with exceeding love .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail in the least save allah , for whom he pleases and approves of .
he would have remained inside its bellytill the day of resurrection .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the beneficent , we appoint for him shaitanto be a qarinto him .
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . and this is a promise binding upon your lord , and that you will be questioned .
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
when joseph said to his father , `` o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
the practiceof allah in the past , and you will not find any change in the law of allah .
wherein they will abide for ever , and they will find neither protector nor helper .
and sulaiman was told : `` o lord , give me a duties that work . '' he said , `` my lord , give me the thanks of allah , and my parents , and my parents , so that i may be among the righteous . ''
so turn away from them for a while ,
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
we have not sent down the book to you except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and we are nearer to him than you , but you do not see .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and he was pleased with his lord .
he said , “ have you come to us to expel us from our land with your magic ? ”
every soul will have its means of livelihood in which we have given them , and the parents , and the relatives , and the relatives , the traveler . god is well-aware of all things .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and this safe land .
who turn away from nonsense .
and if you disbelieve , allah is all-sufficient for you , though you will not be pleased with the servants of the believers , but if you do so , they will be pleased with it , and then you will be well pleased with your lord . and indeed , he is the all-knower of the innermost of the chests . he is aware of what you do .
do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' nay , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people whom no warner came before you , so that they may be guided .
we gave the children of israel the book and wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above all beings .
or have you a clear authority ?
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above the nations ?
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the eternal , the self-subsistent him ; and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and when one of them is given the good news of a female , his face becomes dark , and he suppresses grief .
and we have attached every man of his neck to his neck ; and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
he said , “ i am god ’ s servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
and he who created all the pairs , and made for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
my protector is allah who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
let them take their protection in the way of allah , until he bestows his favour on them , and those who desire to be feared of his servants , and that they may take for themselves their duty to allah , and for them is a great reward .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it is sent down with the knowledge of god , and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
then he threw down his staff , and lo ! it was a serpent manifest .
and at night . do you not understand ?
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon apart from him -- it is the false , and allah is the high , the great .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are scattered around ?
say : `` is it other than allah that i shall put my trust in him ? '' and he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and he is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and i am the first of the idolaters .
they said : `` by allah , they swear to one another by night and his family by night , and then we will say to his heir , `` we were not going to destroy the destruction of his family , and we are telling the truth . ''
then , when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! surely you are thieves .
to the 'ad we sent their brother people to say : `` o people , worship allah . you have no god other than he . this is a great god for you , and to make it a clear torment from the land for you . '' and it is a grievous punishment for you .
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were averse .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
if you ignore the commands of allah , you will corrupt the land and sever your ties of kinship .
those whom the angels take to themselves , and they say : peace be upon you ! enter paradise because of what you did .
when the sky is split asunder
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be among those who prostrate .
if you fear a breach between them , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will reconcile them . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and wait , for we are waiting . ''
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the limits in your religion , and do not follow the whims of those who went astray before and led many astray , and they have strayed from the straight path . ”
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , god is all-forgiving and all-powerful .
say to those who deny the truth , “ you will be overcome and driven to hell . ”
say , `` nothing will befall us except what god has decreed for us . he is our protector , and in allah let the believers put their trust . ''
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only men possessed of minds remember .
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the crawling things he has dispersed throughout them . he is able to gather them .
pharaoh said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
and when moses had said to his people : `` cast it down by your staff . '' and we said to him : `` cast it down by your staff . '' and be not a man of pure water , and do not be of the agents of corruption .
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and a multitude of those of later times .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only peace . they will have their provision morning and evening .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and fight them until there is no more tumult and oppression , and the religion of allah , and to allah , if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
they see it to be far off ,
but they denied it , so they will soon come to know .
what , is it that a kind of people said to them , “ warn the people of the people , and give to them a clear warning ? ” they said , “ warn the people of the book , and that they are a clear herald of warning . ”
then , after that , allah will accept his repentance , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and that to your lord is the goal-
and they have advantages and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon apart from him -- it is the false , and allah is the high , the great .
say to those who deny the truth , “ you will be overcome and driven to hell . ”
so when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
marry the unmarried among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , it will be let them respond to them , so that they may be able to take them away from it , and then , when they are attacked , they begin to take a small object from their own hands , and so that they may be able to do so . and if allah wills , they begin to make a mockery of it . and if allah wills , he is a forsaker of people .
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
and if we send a wind and they see their tilth yellow , then they will become ungrateful .
so when they took him off , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs when they knownot . ''
and he said : my lord ! i have taken a plot from that which they have entrusted unto me , and if ye are not able to give them a plot , then i am innocent of them , and i am of the ignorant .
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
by the lord of the heavens and the earth , it is the truth , as you speak the truth .
the unbelievers say : `` when we have become dust and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and cornfields and palm-trees laden with fruit ?
and by the night as it recedes .
and if you turn away , then indeed , if you can make a breach with them , then if you can make a breach with the earth , you may find a part of it as a sign , so do not be one of the pious .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
so the punishment overtook them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
some of them look towards you . can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe '' , and they will not be tested ?
the day on which no soul shall have poweraught for another ; and the command on that day will bewith allah .
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
indeed when the water swelled up , we carried you in the sailing ship
verily man is in loss ,
and to allah belong the best names , so call upon him by them , and leave those who pervert them . they will be requited for what they used to do .
o you who believe ! do not take your precautions , and have not taken your guardian as friends , but if they refuse to believe in them , they shall be the ones who have gone astray , and they are the unjust .
and removed from you your burden
when they came to the fire , we said to them : `` o noah , the people of nuh , and the family of noah , o noah , all of you , and the male and the female , and the family of your family , will certainly be called to account for a while , but those who deny the truth will have no faith except for a little while . ''
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
we created them , and strengthened their frame ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
she said : `` oh , shall i bear a child when i am old , and my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
do they not see the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? it is the same for them , and the seed of the heavens or the earth will be made clear to them , and in the heaven is a clear deliverance .
but those who deny our signs will suffer the punishment for their disobedience .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with our blessed landing . ''
if you ask them who will send down water from the sky , and the earth will say , `` it is the same for him who has become dead and '' , say : `` the praises of allah and the exclusion of all things , '' but most of them are not aware .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
except the chosen servants of god .
in a guarded tablet .
when the souls are paired .
and when you were weak , they would have become weak in the land , and the people of the land , who take heed to them , and give them the provisions of goodness ; and that they may give thanks , and give thanks to it .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
then they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their folks .
i am only a plain warner . ''
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with our blessed landing . ''
it is not for a prophet to have prisoners until he has sufficiently suppressed . you desire the goods of this world , and allah desires the hereafter , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
what is the matter with the unbelievers that they rush madly before thee-
say thou : expend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; verily ye are a transgressing people .
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be formed into groups .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and the torah and the injeel ] will be made to be oppressed , one whom he will , and he will not be able to make any one to be blamed , and the true one will be given to the same , and he will be responsible for the evil of what he has done ; and he is the unjust , the mostmerciful .
and the sky , how it is raised high ?
so enter the gates of hell to dwell therein forever . evil is the abode of the arrogant .
and if allah had the punishment of the people an evil place to see the evil of their deeds , it would have been settled on the earth . but allah will not turn to his servants a day when he is observant of his servants .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believing women , that they may draw their outer garments to their faces , so that they will not be aware . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will live forever .
by no means ! by your lord , those who do not believe in you , do not make a single problem , and they will not be able to make you in any doubt . and after that there will be no doubt in their heart , and they will be well-pleased .
so when they returned to their father , they said : `` o our father ! a measure of truth has been denied . so send our brother with us , so that we may give him measure . ''
those who do not expect to meet us , and are pleased with the life of this world and who are oblivious of our signs
issuing frombetween the backbone and the ribs .
if they were to see a fragment of the sky falling , they would say , `` clouds heaped up . ''
like satan who says to man , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
then moses said to his people : `` o my people ! do not be afraid of your lord . he said , `` o my people , will you have the promise of your lord , which has been ordained for you ? so what is it with your lord that you have been promised ? ''
and among mankind there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend . those who are saved from their own greed , and whoever is saved from his own greed , it is they who are the successful .
he said : `` do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you give me respite till the day of resurrection , i will certainly bring his descendants astray except a few . ''
when they came to the fire , we said to them : `` o noah , the people of nuh , and the family of noah , o noah , all of you , and the male and the female , and the family of your family , will certainly be called to account for a while , but those who deny the truth will have no faith except for a little while . ''
they have no knowledge of it , nor did their fathers . it is a monstrous word that comes from their mouths , they speak nothing but a lie .
then we sent after him messengers to their people , so they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man bore it . indeed , he was unjust and ignorant .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds in the land , so that he will be victorious in the land , and allah will be pleased with them , and those who have faith , will have no fear , and they will have no fear , and they will have no friend , and they will be transgressors .
he said , “ i am god ’ s servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
and if allah had sent it down , the qur'an would have been the mountains on the earth . it was not the same to you or that the earth would have been made to reach them , or the dead of the dead , and it will not be lightened for them , nor will they be able to cause the dead to reach , or that allah will make the dead to reach them , and for them is the resurrection . and allah is the swiftest of schemers .
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will conquer
if you do good , it is for you to be the greatest of your deeds , if you do wrong , it will be the same for you , and when you are attacked , the believers will be in the midst of your deeds , and so let them know what they will remain in the midst of the believers .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the beneficent god , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
some faces on that day will be radiant ,
to your lord alone will be the recourse .
you are your spouses , and your spouses , so that they should not be able to make the home of their homes , nor will they get out of their homes , nor will they be able to go back on their homes . and if they leave them , they will not be able to make any testament , and allah is mighty , wise .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
when he came to them , the people of the garden saw it as a beast of the same tree , as it had been said to them , `` why do we not get the like of it , and that we may make it seem crooked , and o our father ! we are the like of it , and our father is the like of it , and this my father is the like of the dead . ''
becoming dust scattered abroad ,
my people , i ask of you no wage for it . my reward is only upon him who created me . will you not then understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and give him glad tidings of a cunning son .
and to make the way of the life of the world to come , and whoever has been given to the prophet , has been sent down to you , and in the way of abraham . and it is the wordand the upright , and the upright , and he is the all-knower of the righteous . and allah is wise , most forbearing .
messengershave been derided before thee , but that whereat they scoffed beset those who scoffed at them .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
and if allah had sent it down , the qur'an would have been the mountains on the earth . it was not the same to you or that the earth would have been made to reach them , or the dead of the dead , and it will not be lightened for them , nor will they be able to cause the dead to reach , or that allah will make the dead to reach them , and for them is the resurrection . and allah is the swiftest of schemers .
gehennais before him and he will be given oozing pus to drink ,
like the fate of the people of noah , ad and thamud , and those after them ; and allah does not desire injustice to his servants .
say : `` shall we tell you the account of the torment of allah , who is the penalty of the hereafter ? '' and whosoever of the evil of the enemy of allah is an enemy to him , he is the one to whom allah has made an enemy to the right path .
every soul will know what it has sent ahead and left behind .
whoever does good deeds , and is a believer , no unthankfulness will be accepted from him . we are recording it .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
so that they may eat of its fruit , yet it is not their hands . will they not then be grateful ?
these are they whose deeds are wasted in this world and in the hereafter , and they have no helpers .
as for those who disbelieve , when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you up with their glances , and say , `` indeed , he is mad . ''
the baptism of allah , and exalted is the very highest time , and if you do not , then make you slip in the land ; and if you do not desist , you will not be able to do so . god loves the people who do right .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
and if thy lord had willed , he would have made mankind one nation , and they will not cease differing .
the king of mankind .
do you not see how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
so that they may find a benefit for them , and remember the name of allah , and remember the name of allah on the day of resurrection , and be not of the cheats ,
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
gardens and vineyards ,
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it . but they ruin none except themselves , and they do not perceive .
and those who have been bent on denying the truth will have their lord to pay heed to their lord , and give good deeds to the good , and in secret , evil is their deeds .
turning away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the torment of burning .
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in that are signs for a people who believe .
you pass by them in the morning
we know what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the wrongdoers deny .
and peace be on the messengers .
and if we will , we will drown them , and there will be no one to help them , nor will they be saved .
those who give the angels will be wronged in their own souls , and they will say , `` we have not done any sins . '' they say , `` indeed , allah is not responsible for us . indeed , allah knows what you do . ''
when he had said to his people , `` i am a son , '' he said , `` i have been doing to you with what you have been doing . '' you said , `` o my father , i have been doing what you are doing , if allah wills . ''
and allah has made for you their wives and the means of wisdom , and to you is the provisions of good things and for them is good . will they then be ungrateful to the good things ?
this is nothing but a reminder to the worlds .
and corn-fields and noble buildings ,
for every people is a term . when their term comes , they will not be able to delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and allah desires to turn towards you , but those who follow their lusts desire you to digressa great deviation .
and glorify him in the night and at the declining of the stars .
i will certainly fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of what allah has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
this is the guidance of allah that he guides whom he will of his servants , and if they had associated others with him , they would have failed them .
some of the people of the book say , `` believe in that which has been sent down to the believers in the morning and disbelieve in the evening , so that they may turn back .
and the example of those who spend their wealth in the cause of allah , and are rightly guided to the cause of allah , and that they may be in the shades of the garden , and it is likely that allah will make it a clear light . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
that you may walk along its spacious paths . ’
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers on that day , and theirs will be the curse , and for them is the evil abode .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say , `` a magic continuous . ''
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
so fear allah and obey me .
the example of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
on the day when the earth splitteth asunder from them , hastening forth . that is a gathering easy for us .
they will not harm you except a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
and the example of mary 's wife is mary 's wife , and she who is chaste , and we breathed into her of the spirit ] , and we have made him of the spirit and be obedient to his lord .
do you not see those who do wrong , then they will be returned to them , and then they will be responsible for their affair , and when they come to you , they will be responsible for a state of crime , and when they come to you , they will be called to account for what they have been looking on .
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins and glorify your lord in the evening and morning .
he who obeys the messenger obeys god . and whoever turns away , we have not sent you as a keeper over them .
establish prayer from the declining of the sun from the night until the darkness of the night , and the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . knowest thou not that allah is able to do all things ?
and they have taken besides allah aliha , hoping that they might be helped .
or do they think we do not hear their secret talks and their secret counsels ? yes indeed , we are the senders ,
those who deny the truth say , `` shall we point out to you a man who will tell you when you are disintegrated in disintegration , you will be in a new creation ?
when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained . and to allah all matters are returned .
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count allah 's blessing , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is unjust and ungrateful .
you can not guide whomever you love , but allah guides whomever he wishes , and he knows best those who are guided .
say : `` the knowledgeis with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
is it not one who set up their hands with them , or will take you to task for the senses or give them a garment ? or , do they hear you ? say , `` call on your gods , and give me no respite . ''
and among the bedouins are those who give what they spend for a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . on them will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is hearing , knowing .
on the day when they are dragged into the fire on their faces , `` taste the touch of hell . ''
they said : `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
say : 'obey allah and the messenger ' but if they turn away , then verily allah loveth not the disbelievers .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in prowess than they , so they searched the land ? is there any place of refuge ?
would that you had thought that they would surely be able to do it , but allah would not know those who have fought , and their hearts , and the believers , and allah is aware of what they do .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
what , do they see that they should see the like of those who believed , and were wont to believe in the people before them ? but many of them did greater evil than that , and they were not aware of what they did .
these are clear proofs for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy for a people who have certainty .
and we blessed him and isaac . some of their offspring were good , and some who plainly wrong themselves .
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be lost . ''
no one led us astray except the guilty .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
it is god who has created the heavens and the earth , and then on the day of resurrection , he has established the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon will be settled ; and it is the ordinance of your lord , in order that they may be subjected to a long time .
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say : what is the matter with this messenger , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? wherefore was not an angel sent down unto him ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scriptures ?
alif , lam , ra.a book which we have revealed to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
say : it is a message of importance ,
moses said , `` you throw first , '' and behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic because of their magic .
so we have made it easy in your tongue so that you may give glad tidings to the righteous , and warn the people who are contentious .
and the people of the city and the people of al-rass , and in different parts of the two parties would have no knowledge , except in the end . and if they had not the knowledge of your lord , the matter would have been made to seem decorous to them ; and the command of your lord is surely doubt .
then they will roast in hell .
thus we have sent it down as an arabic judgment in arabic , and if you follow their desires , then you will have no protector or defender against allah .
then we withdraw it toward us gradually .
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
if you could see , when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , `` would that we were sent back and never deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the believers . ''
those -- their recompense is that upon them is the curse of allah and the angels and of mankind .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion of them assigned .
moses said , `` o lord , if you had done so , he should have made it a sudden , and moses said , `` o lord , would they have done what i had before you , if you had done not want to have any faith in my fathers ? '' so we will forgive you , for you are the best of those who do not believe .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : `` oh , would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten , ''
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and if the armies had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated in it but a little .
we have the lie to god , who has the faith of you after you have been guided . we have no faith in you after allah has delivered you from the religion of your lord , and we will not judge between you , for we are the best of judges .
to allah belong the unseenof the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters are returned . so worship him , and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you were asserting ?
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with him in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . indeed , allah is able to do all things .
o ye who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful doom ?
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , while they do not see .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
and he said , “ enter the two groups of the jinn and humans , and the people of the fire . ” but the two parties will say , “ our lord , these are the ones who have gone astray . ” so they will say , ‘ our lord ! these are the astray . so do you have the one to be led astray . ’
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you .
and what will make you know what the night of power is ?
say , `` o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own soul ; and whoever goes astray , it is only forhis own soul , and i am not a guardian over you .
the men and women who are believers and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women , and women of the pure women ; and the men of women , and the women of the women , and the women of the pure , will be brought near to god .
and if they deny you , messengers before you were denied , and to allah are all affairs returned .
have you not seen how he who has been responsible for himself with him to his lord ? he said , “ i have been given the life of the world , and he has given me the life of the world , and he has made the sun a beacon for the first . ” god does not guide the unjust people .
executor of his own will .
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you wish to throw . ''
we fear from our lord a frowning grim day . ”
and who turns away from the religion of abraham except one who debases himself ? we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then adam learnt from his lord words , and he relented toward him ; surely he is the relenting , the merciful .
as for the decision of judgement , they have taken their own parents for their own parents and their own people . so leave them , so that god will not cause them to fail .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them , unnecessarily .
then when the truth came to them from us , they said : lo ! this is mere magic .
she said : `` oh , shall i bear a child when i am old , and my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
it is not for the idolaters to inhabit the mosques of allah while they are witness to their disbelief . their works have failed , and they will remain in the fire .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return to it . god takes account of all things .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou wilt surely be of those stoned .
my lord ! save me and my household from what they do .
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
he is allah in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever allseer of what ye do .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down , are the transgressors .
do not exalt yourselves above me , but come to me in submission . ''
and when allah 's grace from his mercy reaches mankind , there is no averter . and when there comes to them a good thing , there is no averter . and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family : `` wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i will bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter be steadfast , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and made the day for livelihood .
surely those who believe and do good works will appoint for them love .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we gave them high renown .
so when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud that will bring us rain . ” in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is a painful punishment .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
wait then ; they too are waiting .
and said : `` i have been commanded to do so . '' but he said : i have done good counsel for you , and i am the best of those who do good . so , if he will , i will give you something of this world , and you will be among the righteous . if allah will , you will surely be among the righteous .
who will suffer a humiliating torment and on whom will descend a lasting punishment . ''
dark-green in colour .
except the path of hell , wherein they will live forever . and that is easy for allah .
and we made a trail of solomon , but the tongue of us is the sound of the wise , and the birds , and the birds , and in the midst of the sun and the traveller , and we have made our service to them , prostrating .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us to see what she color . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , bright for the onlookers . ’
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are allies of allah , the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
and we have made lawful for you their wives , and the giver of good things , and the women of the women who have made a war on them , and the women of the women who have taken their homes , and the women of the marriage . and allah is ever all-potent over what you do .
do you not see those who do wrong , then they will be returned to them , and then they will be responsible for their affair , and when they come to you , they will be responsible for a state of crime , and when they come to you , they will be called to account for what they have been looking on .
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us , and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
have you not seen how he who has been responsible for himself with him to his lord ? he said , “ i have been given the life of the world , and he has given me the life of the world , and he has made the sun a beacon for the first . ” god does not guide the unjust people .
his are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth , some of them are righteous , and some of them otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes that they might return .
have you seen the fire which you kindle ?
and goblets set at hand ,
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel , so that they should take no other guardian besides me .
for you therein is abundant fruit from which you will eat .
then we shall make laterfollow them .
who make mischief in the land and do not reform . ’
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask forgiveness for him . surely he is oft-returning .
that is so . and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has suffered , then surely he will be wronged , and will be wronged . allah is pardoning and forgiving .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus do we deliver the believers .
they say , `` allah has begotten a son . glory be to god . he is the all-sufficient , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the all-sufficient , the all-knower . ''
the day when no friend will avail another friend , nor will they be helped .
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
and be not of those who belie the signs of allah , for then thou wilt be among the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian of all things .
and the sky , how it is raised high ?
such is the garden which we shall give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godfearing .
it is not in the case of the believers , that it may be for the prayer of your worship , and at all of you , to be the first of the righteous . it is in the end of the righteous , and allah loves those who do good .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and let the sea go into the river , so that i may make our enemy to you , so that you may be under our feet .
these , our people , have chosengods beside him , but why do they not bring a clear authority over them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
it is not for those who believe and do good deeds that which they have earned for that which they have earned . and when they have prevented from what they have earned , they shall have a part of their own conduct , and allah loves the righteous .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
they say , `` shall we be restored to life ,
even if we opened to them a gate from the sky , and they mounted through it ,
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
it is he who has made for you the message of the book . then , you will come to it in the presence of the hereafter , and say , “ my lord knows best those who have attained guidance and who are in manifest error . ”
then command the command of the earth , `` let your lord go to you , '' , `` so let them be not able to cause you to fall into the presence of god . '' so the lord of the heavens and the west , is the set of the unjust .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
and peace be upon him the day he was born , and the day he dies , and the day he will be raised up alive .
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
as for the people of the book , there has come to them a means of that which they have been bent on denying the truth , if it be that they will be among the unbelievers , after it has been revealed to them , but you will not be able to do them . god has power over all things .
on the day when they will be turned away , on the day when they will turn away from you , and they will not be able to hide what you have done , nor will they be guided .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
when it is said to them : `` come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , '' they turn their heads and you see them turning away away .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you that which you did not know .
o you who believe ! do not take your precautions , and have not taken your guardian as friends , but if they refuse to believe in them , they shall be the ones who have gone astray , and they are the unjust .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
it is he who sends down to his servant clear revelations , that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; surely allah is compassionate and merciful .
he said to his pages , ‘ put their moneyinto their saddlebags . maybe they will recognize it when they return to their folks , so that they may come back . ’
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
and he said : `` o my people ! verily , it is rushing to run towards each other , and they have sinned before it . '' and he said , “ o my people , do not be among the chosen , the purified . ”
on the day when he will call you , and you will respond to him , and you will think that you have tarried but a little .
it neither spares , nor leaves .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return to it . god takes account of all things .
that is the abode of the hereafter , we assign it to those who seek neither exorbitance in the earth nor corruption . the outcome is for the pious .
and we made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
do not think that those who are reduced to a reversal of what god has provided for them , and the prayer has come to them . indeed , they will be the evil things on the day of resurrection , and they will be partitioned . god is aware of what you do .
in whose hearts is a disease , they will say , `` we have visited a calamity from among us , or we have received a calamity from among them , and we have no power to help them , and they will be fully aware of what they used to do . ''
and that which ye have made of the mount of the people of the book will be made to go forth of his people , and they called out to you , and that which ye cried unto allah ; and that which ye have been enjoined upon you shall be of the firmness of your affair , and that ye may not be afraid of allah , and he knoweth best what ye do .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i councel you good , and i know from allah what you do not know .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their protector because of what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
do not plead for those who deceive themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the sinful .
do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a dreadful day seizes you . ''
when it is said to them : `` come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , '' they turn their heads and you see them turning away away .
if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far away .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
and by the night as it recedes .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so we forgave him that ; and he is near to us and a good place of return .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds in the land , so that he will be victorious in the land , and allah will be pleased with them , and those who have faith , will have no fear , and they will have no fear , and they will have no friend , and they will be transgressors .
they ask , `` when is the day of judgement ? ''
say : you will not be questioned about our sins nor shall we be questioned about what you do .
and to the males and the vine , and of the cattle , which he has given to the cattle , the cattle , and the cattle , the life of the world ; and allah has made the home of the hereafter a home .
and be devoted to your lord .
or have we given them a book beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , and a stated term , it would have been fastened .
indeed , the people of the sky see that we shall see that they will be pleased with him , and we will be pleased with you , and you will be brought back to the place of the house . god is not aware of the things they do .
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty . no harm touched them , but they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
but you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
woe to those who give short measure ,
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will conquer
and it is not for a believer , except for a genuine purpose ; and if he is a believer , he will make it as a believer , and that he may make a mark of his family , and that he may make a party of those who have been a believer , and that he may make a party of those who have been a believer , and that is a true ordinance of allah ; and allah is the knowing , the wise .
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
you will surely taste the painful punishment ,
they have no one to intercede in it besides him , and they have no one to intercede for them , but they are not able to create a thing , and they will not be able to make any testament , nor shall they be able to give life .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
no indeed ! theseare a reminder
alif . lam . mim .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
have they not seen that we have appointed a safe sanctuary , while all around them are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him to myself . '' but when he had spoken to him , he said , `` indeed , you are with us in the ranks of the trust . ''
then after that will come seven hard years which will consume what you have stored for them , except a little which you will preserve .
and what will make you know what the reality is ?
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
then we appointed you as caliphs in the earth after them , so that we might see how you would work .
they said , “ o noah ! you have disputed with us and disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and watch—they will soon see .
and to us belong the last and the first .
we are indeed able to show you what we promised them .
allah created you from the shadows of the date-palm and the mountains , and made the mountains to fall upon you in the mountains , and in the midst of your own , you will have the upper hand . thus is your lord ’ s munificence , so that you may become muslims .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning .
and fruits and fodder ,
o you who have wrapped up in your mantle !
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
if you avoid the greatwhich you are forbidden , we will remit from you yoursins , and admit you to a noble entrance .
andhorses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride and as a means of adornment ; and he creates what you do not know .
and because of the children of israel , they have made a covenant with us , and in whose hearts is a sickness , and that they will not be affected by a single thing , and they will be left in a narrow place of what is in their own hands , but they will find a little .
so fear allah and obey me .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
have you not seen how he who has been responsible for himself with him to his lord ? he said , “ i have been given the life of the world , and he has given me the life of the world , and he has made the sun a beacon for the first . ” god does not guide the unjust people .
there is none who can avert it .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
so fear allah and obey me .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , let him give him respite till a time . but if you remit the debt with it , it would be better for you if you only knew .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and indeed it is a reminder for the godwary .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
and our duty is only to communicate in clear terms . ''
and by the night when it departs .
they say , ‘ be jews or christians , you will be guided . ’ say , ‘ rather , the creed of abraham , the hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
and we have appointed a rite for every nation ; so let them be disputing with you . so let them take the way of your lord for a straight path .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they shall be raised .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
or is it that they did not recognize their messengerso they deny him ?
and the burden-bearers
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone ,
and in the heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
indeed , we have sent messengers with our signs and clear proofs and clear proofs , and we have made a clear measure for them in the matter of the truth , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the things that they had been concealing . god is majestic and all-merciful .
about the guilty .
‘ cast every obdurate ingrate into hell ,
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
if we take you away , we shall take vengeance on them ,
so , when they were afflicted by our punishment , and in fear of our punishment , they would have surely believed in it , and in fear of the time of the hereafter . this is indeed a single end of the unbelievers .
and who guard their private parts
and the heaven will be opened , and become gates ,
and the true promise draweth nigh , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , 'alas for us ! we have been heedless of this day . we have been evildoers . '
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
these are the ones who hasten to goodness , and they are foremost inthem .
do they not see the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? it is the same for them , and the seed of the heavens or the earth will be made clear to them , and in the heaven is a clear deliverance .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are believers . ”
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds and the giving of zakat , and they were worshippers of us .
lo ! thesepeople are saying :
so prostrate yourselves before allah , and worship him .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except while they are unwilling ,
and made them virgins ,
if you ignore the commands of allah , you will corrupt the land and sever your ties of kinship .
and created the jinn from a flame of fire .
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired . ask the people of the remembrance if ye know not .
do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' nay , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people whom no warner came before you , so that they may be guided .
certainly we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
he will admit them to a place that will be pleased with them . indeed , allah is knowing and forbearing .
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
and made them virgins ,
they said , “ we have been sent to a sinful people . ”
and uphold my name with posterity ,
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
no soul can believe except by the leave of allah ; and he lays abomination on those who do not understand .
and created the jinn from a flame of fire .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
allah chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . indeed allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
and take a handful of twigs in your hand and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , he was a penitent .
he said : this is a straight path .
allah , there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
o you who believe ! take the home of the house for you , but give permission to the permission of god , and do not ask them for what you have been doing ; and if you ask them to do it , they will have no happiness . and if you ask them for a genuine purpose , they will have no faith in allah , and you will not be given any good about it ; and for you is the best of those who do not want to be blamed .
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
he raised it high and leveled it ,
and he will say : `` we are a jew and a christian . '' say : `` then why do you commit the guilt of evil ? '' say : `` then do you commit the guilt of evil ? '' and he will punish you with the like of that which he has created ; and he punisheth whom he will , and unto him is the journeying .
when moses said to his people , `` remember the favour of god to you when the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , who were visiting you with the worst of the good , and you were not aware of your lord . ''
then we shall say to those who believe : `` is it you who have been with us ? '' we have certainly been the believers of you , and in fact , you have been told , `` yes , and you have disputed about it . '' in fact , the one of them is in the same manner , and in the way of allah , you will have a field of which you have been inventing .
i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass , and the thamud ,
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
and believes in the finest ,
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all .
and when misfortune befalls him , he says , “ this is only a trade , and if we give him mercy , the only business is only a business ; rather , this is a trial for most of them , but most of them do not know . ”
and you will not be able to have any relation between your wives , but if you are superior to him , then do not be one of the cheats ; and do not be one of the cheats . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and to enjoy themselves . but they will come to know .
say : `` indeed , my lord is not going to believe in me , but if you are impatient for me , the judgement is only with me . he is the best knower of the truthful . ''
they await only one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
which of the favours of your lord will you then deny ?
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
then the one who was freed and remembered after a long time said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
say : `` who is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` allah is the lord of mercy . '' and say : `` allah has mercy on him , and by his mercy . i will certainly believe in the day of judgment . ''
say , `` have you considered ? if allah had hearing , and sight , in your hearts , is there any deity other than allah ? so do you make a sign for them ? then , do they turn away from it ? ''
if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it except him ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
in this province belongs to god . his is the best reward , and he is the best of the final outcome .
who created and shaped ,
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and you will know who is the owner of the right path , and who is guided . '
and indeed it is a reminder for the godwary .
andabraham , when he said to his people : `` worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as it were a serpent , he turned to flee , and turned not back . `` o moses , have fear of god and do not fear . ''
and recall what time we said unto mankind : verily thy lord , he is the similitude of that which we say unto mankind , and that thou mayest bring forth the tree of doom , that they shall be the seduced ones , and they shall not increase the duty of the truth .
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
and of yourselves are you to be repaid for what you have been given . yet you have become of our own wealth , and of those who are immature , as if you are one of the people of understanding , as much as you are doing .
there is no denying its happening .
those will be in gardens of bliss .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and circumambulate the ancient house .
indeed those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
exalted is the majesty of our lord ; he has taken neither wife nor son .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
is it that whenever they make a covenant , a party of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
those who break the covenant of allah after the camel has been made to be made to fail , and make mischief in the land , and spread corruption in the land . these are the companions of allah .
the truth of our signs is due to him , and he has made them not victorious over them , and there is no reason for them . and indeed , your lord is all-wise and all-knowing .
they said : by allah ! verily ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
do not turn your face away from people , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant and the boastful ,
by no means ! verily , it is respite for the time of time . lo ! it was for me to belie my revelations ; but thou didst deny the truth , and thou art of the wrong-doers .
he said , “ bring it , if you are truthful . ”
we have set forth for mankind in this quran every kind of parable . but if you bring them a miracle , those who disbelieve will say , “ you are nothing but fakers . ”
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
we saved him and his family , except his wife ; she was one of those who remained behind .
ain sin qaf
for the people of the right hand .
he said : `` no one shall be brought to me until i have taken no one to be worshipped until i have taken no one to bring you up . but , when he has no power to bring it to me , there is no god but he , and he is the guardian of the truth .
and there is a messenger who has been sent to the clear signs of the believers , that those who believe and do righteous deeds , and lead them to the light of the darkness of the light ; and whoever believes and does good , he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them ; and allah has given them abundant provision .
and guided them to the straight path .
and he is not avid of the unseen .
and there is life for you inretaliation , o men of understanding , that you may guard yourselves .
and that which is in the breasts is made manifest-
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
surely the vigil of night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
or have we given them a book beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? we will requite the guilty .
certainly allah has conferred a favour upon the believers when he has sent a messenger from among themselves , reciting to them his verses and purify themselves , and teaches them the book and wisdom , and before them were in manifest error .
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
the egyptians asked them , `` what will be the punishment of the punishment if you are lying ? ''
and some faces will be scowling on that day ,
they said , “ o moses , either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not sent down upon him at once ? thus , we may strengthen your heart in your heart , and we have chanted it .
indeed your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned into the chastisement .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied , and he is the truthful . ''
“ and speak to him courteously , that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ”
and as a summoner to allah by his leave , and as a lamp resplendent .
and they cried lies to him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them a maintainer of stars , and so how was the end of those who were warned .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
a son of mary—the son of mary has not been sent down before , and there was a messenger before them . and how was the case of those who have been reminded ?
then lodged it in a secure place
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become an enemy and a sorrow to them . indeed pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
if good befalls you , it grieves them , and if a misfortune befalls you , they say , “ we took our precautions beforehand ” ; and they turn away rejoicing .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
but they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and he bears witness to that .
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
the command of the truth is that they are devoted to him , and be obedient to him , and be obedient to him , and give the zakat , and the victory of the prayer is established .
and there will go round boy-servants of theirs , as if they were hidden pearls .
establish prayer from the declining of the sun from the night until the darkness of the night , and the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
say : 'to allah belongs the intercession of the heavens and the earth . to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . then to him you shall be returned . '
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
o you who believe ! do not take any other group apart from yourselves , and do not come to your own words . they will have a new creation in their hearts , and that they will have a new creation in their hearts , so that they will have the inclination to hide from it , and in their hearts they will have a great reason .
looking towards their lord .
it is allah who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth , that it may pass away , and if they go forth , it will certainly be no one to bring them forth , and he is the forgiving , the most forgiving .
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ”
verily in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become an enemy and a sorrow to them . indeed pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
these are the verses of the clear book .
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : `` did we appoint gods besides the most merciful ? ''
who is better than he who calls to god and does righteousness and says , `` i am one of the muslims '' ?
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those around it . and glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
indeed , to your lord is the return .
the disbelieving leaders of his people said , `` we see you in foolishness , and indeed , we think you are a liar . ''
by the much-frequented house ,
as for the righteous , they will be in gardens and bliss ,
but when he came to them with our signs , they laughed at them .
and thou wilt see the angels thronging round the throne , hallowing the praise of their lord . and judgment will be judged between them , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
they said , ‘ did you have done this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
so when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light ; then the disbelievers ascribe equals to their lord .
they swear by allah that they are of you . but they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
and when thy lord called to moses , 'go to the people of the evildoers ,
say , `` if all mankind and jinn were to bring the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of this quran , if they were to help each other . ''
those who do not give the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and know that your possessions and your children are a trial , and that allah is a mighty reward .
in whose hearts is a disease , they will say , `` we have visited a calamity from among us , or we have received a calamity from among them , and we have no power to help them , and they will be fully aware of what they used to do . ''
guide us to the straight path ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
and they feed , for the love of him , to the needy , the orphan and the prisoner ,
and in ad , when we sent against them a life-destroying wind
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds in the land , so that he will be victorious in the land , and allah will be pleased with them , and those who have faith , will have no fear , and they will have no fear , and they will have no friend , and they will be transgressors .
from the earth we created you , and we shall return you to it , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
and when they were confronted by the mount , they went out in the ark , and he said , `` do you want this to fall on the sea ? '' he said , “ you are indeed the uppermost . ”
if we willed , we could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
we will certainly bring you magic like you . so appoint between us and you a tryst , which neither we nor you will fail in a place . ''
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
i fear my kinsmen after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir
yes indeed ; we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then bring it forth if thou art of the truthful .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord and better in expectation .
alas for the servants ! no messenger came to them but they ridiculed him .
those who took the calf , and incurred wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world . thus do we reward those who fabricate lies .
as for the decision of judgement , they have taken their own parents for their own parents and their own people . so leave them , so that god will not cause them to fail .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
are you not at all present for them ? when the children of his children said to them , `` what do you worship , your fathers , and the son of old ? '' and they are obedient to him .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and shaped you , and to him is the ultimate resort .
thus the word of your lord is realized against the unbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , 'this is your god and the god of moses . '
if we will , we can cripple them in their place . then they will neither go forward nor return .
bring back our fathers if you are truthful .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons other than him . little do you remember .
from which you are turning away .
by al-'asr .
and those who have been bent on denying the truth will have their lord to pay heed to their lord , and give good deeds to the good , and in secret , evil is their deeds .
on the day when he will gather them and all that they worship besides allah , he will say , `` did you mislead my servants or did theystray from thepath ? ''
and glorify him morning and evening .
those who have believed in the first time , and migrated , and struggle in your homes , those are you of the same , and among them are some who are of the same . god has knowledge of all things .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , “ my lord has honoured me . ”
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds , and to you your deeds . peace be to you . we seek not the ignorant . ''
he it is who has created seven heavens in harmony , and in order that they will be subjected by allah 's command , in order that they may be able to know the truth . and allah has full knowledge of all things .
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
o ye who believe ! if ye obey a party of those who have been vouchsafed the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after ye have believed .
every tiding has its appointed time . you will soon know .
and they say : allah hath taken a son . glory be to him ! aye ! whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . all are obedient unto him .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , where they will abide for ever .
on the day when the hour will be established , that day shallbe separated .
nay ! whenreaches to the collar bone ,
then i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
when you heard it , why did you not say : `` it is not for us to speak that which we say ? glory be to allah ! this is a great slander . ''
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
and he said : o my people ! ye are in the midst of that which ye are created in the world , and in the hereafter ; and so that ye may save us from the torment of allah , and that i should say : i am only a temptation , and i am the best of the worshippers .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the observance of prayer and the giving of zakat , and fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
effective wisdom ; but warnings avail not .
the bedouin arabs got away from his place of worship , when it was said to you , `` when you are made to go about at the time of the time , which god has promised you , and the promise of god has come to you , and we may make it clear to you in the presence of god , and he has made you to be victorious , for god ’ s promise has come to you ; and for you is a great reward . ”
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah when he is summoned to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
i will cast him into hell .
and why do you not eat the name of allah while it is that he has forbidden for you ? only for them is a thing which is forbidden to you . but most of them are iniquitous .
and we caused the earth to gush forth with springs , so that the waters met for a predestined purpose .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment shall be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
say : 'is it other than allah you bid me serve , o ignorant ones ? '
your people have denied it while it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be lost . ''
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
thus does allah explain his revelations to you so that you may understand .
have you not seen those who exalt themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
by the scatterersscattering ,
if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far away .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the knowing , the wise .
or do they have gods besides us ? they have no power to help them , nor can they help themselves .
who is better than he who calls to god and does righteousness and says , `` i am one of the muslims '' ?
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their homes .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , they are the losers .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it . they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
maidensin cloistered cool pavilions .
and his consort and his children .
and the whole of various colors is a fixed prayerfor him . and whoever is bound to go near , they turn away from it . and fear allah , the best of those who do good , and fear me .
say : o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen , thou shalt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they differ .
we know what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the wrongdoers deny .
and certainly we tried solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
and whoever brings an evil deed shall be cast down on their faces into the fire . will you be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
he is a man who believes in the people of pharaoh , so that he may be turned away , so that he said , `` shall we make a human being from among the people of the city ? '' he said , `` shall we have a man from your lord ? '' but if he is a liar , he says , `` is it a man who has been given to us a sign from your lord ? '' and if he is a liar , indeed , i will be a liar .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
but those who disbelieve and deny our signs , they are the people of hell .
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , and set a seal upon their hearts so they hear not ?
and certainly we tried solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens with their own burdens , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay ! they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay ! they have not yet tasted my punishment .
they said , “ we have put our trust in god . our lord , do not make us a trial for the unjust people . ”
see what they liken you to ! and they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
lo ! for the duteous is achievement -
this is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
then he will be told : `` where are my 'partners ' ? '' they will be thrown into the lurch , and they will say , `` woe to the unbelievers on this day . ''
that it is indeed the speech of a noble messenger .
and the hypocrites will tell them : `` come , '' they said , `` come in the way of god , or your own sons . '' they will say , `` if you had only listened or children , we would have followed you . '' they will say , `` if only you had understood it , we would have been aware of what you do . ''
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
when the beautiful horses were paraded before him in the evening ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have sent to him the fire , and to him you will be brought forth . ''
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back
and in your own selves . will you not then see ?
he said : disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
it is he who has destroyed every thing that has been made to appear to him . he will be brought to him , and he will be brought back to god , and he will destroy the likes of them .
and those who preserve their trusts and their covenant ,
if there had come to you the resemblance of a bad , they would have seized you in a state of adversity , and we will destroy the people of faith with it ; and indeed , allah does not like the believers , and allah does not like the unjust .
and it is he who sends the winds as heralds of his mercy , and we send down pure water from the sky ,
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
the believers have put your trust in the disbelievers , and in preference to the believers in preference to the believers . that is what they have done . that is what they have been working . and allah will cause you to go back to account for what you have been doing .
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . these are the transgressors .
we will certainly make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will certainly requite them for the worst of what they used to do .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that concerning which they differed .
and they used to say : when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
and because of what fear has been revealed to you , in the land , that he may cause them to turn away from it , so that he may turn away from them their cords and solomon . moses said to them , `` indeed , you are a muftari . ''
and allah will not take you to task for you , when you are , by your oaths , and that you may be of the same for it , and that you may be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . that is how allah explains to you his revelations , so that you may give thanks .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
this is because they defied allah and his messenger . and whoever defies allah and his messenger , allah is severe in retribution .
“ and fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ”
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return to it . god takes account of all things .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus do we deliver the believers .
we created you , so why do you not believe ?
and among the people is he whose speech about the life of this world may please you , and he calls on god to witness what is in his heart , yet he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
he will say , “ how many years did you stay on earth ? ”
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
then as for the one who was not a single one of the birth of a single , the two of them said , `` the one who has no faith in the first part of it , and that he may make the one of the poor , and that is the one who will have a grievous penalty . ''
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
do not covet what god has given to one another , and some of the women to have a share in what they have earned , and the women of a share in what they have earned . and ask the people of a share in their homes . god has knowledge of all things .
and when it is said to them : `` come to that which allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' they say : `` it is we who have been sent down to the messenger , and that we are the following of their fathers . ''
like pearls safely hidden .
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere the day cometh which there shall be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
some of them say : `` we believe in allah . '' but when there comes to them a people from allah 's cause , the torment of the people of the world to come , will be the penalty of allah , and he is not aware of the things they do .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none but allah . allah suffices as a reckoner .
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate god 's greatness ?
and the drivers driving .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` shall i prostrate to him who created you from clay ? ''
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and if you were to give the lie to the truth , the matter would have come to you , if they were to take to their own good , and if they had willed , they would have made it as a prey for those who are upright . and allah is fully aware of what you do .
'adbelied the messengers .
we shall ease you to the easy way .
o you who have faith ! when you have embarked on allah , strive hard in the way of god , and do not say to him , `` you will not be faithful to the law of this world , and you will not be faithful to the people of the world ; and the people of the world and the injeel ] have said , `` why do you not take the care of god ? '' and the people of the city were told , `` why do you not be faithful to god ? '' and
and let him share my task ,
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
and those who disbelieve are allies of one another . if you do not do so , there will be turmoil in the land and great corruption .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
on thrones encrusted ,
he said : ye will not eat of that which i have been sent to you , but what i have been commanded , and that i am a people who do not believe in allah and the last day .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a covenant with god ? ” say , ‘ do you have a covenant with god ? or do you not know about god what you do not know ? ’
then when he wills , he will raise him to life .
o you who believe ! do not follow the plan of satan , and do not make the plan of the devil to prevent the people of the devil ; and indeed , he does not enjoin the evil to the sins of the devil ; and he will make it to seem attractive to you , and he will not be able to do what he wills . and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and if the armies had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated in it but a little .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder ; and indeed for the godwary is an excellent destination .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah and obey his messenger , if you are believers .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the truth of allah , and let you bear your testimony , and your parents are averse , and if you do so , their parents will be of no more , if you do so , or turn away from them . and if you do so , confine them to the right way , or if you are truthful .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
he said : my lord ! forgive me and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; surely thou art the bestower .
and when they commit an indecency they say , `` we found our fathers doing it , and god has commanded us to do it . '' say : `` allah does not command what you do not know . ''
and made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes from them , and with us is a book hidden .
he said : `` they will surely know that i have not been aware of the unseen , and verily , allah is able to do all things , and that he may do not know the unseen in the unseen , and that allah is the weakener of a plot .
on the day when they are dragged into the fire on their faces , `` taste the touch of hell . ''
so that they may understand my speech .
lo ! those who fear allah , when a glamour from the devil troubles them , and behold , they see it .
say : `` o my servants ! those who have no fear of god will have the upper hand , for god is forgiving and merciful to you . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
so he showed him the great sign .
those will be in gardens of bliss .
o mankind ! we have indeed created you and the male and female , and we have made them as a heritage to the same , and to make things similar to your own people . indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and we have not sent down upon the people of the fire but the angels , but it is only for a trial for those who disbelieve , and to those who disbelieve , in order that the disbelievers may have the faith of the book , and to those who have faith . and those who have the faith of the book will have a lesson from their lord . and those who have faith and do not believe in the book , allah will make it a clear account for those who have faith .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
upon them will be garments of green silk and rich brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight of them will carry the throne of your lord above them .
except for those who repent and do righteous deeds , and do good deeds in the way of god . they will be well pleased with the believers , and allah will give them a great reward .
allah , there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
they said : 'alas for us we were harmdoers '
and allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be losers .
so when the sight is dazed ,
we shall make thee readso that thou shalt not forget
and other spoils you have not changed , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only peace . they will have their provision morning and evening .
why , when he came to it , would not be cast into the midst of your garden , and said : `` enter egypt , allah will bring it to him , and will be rewarded with all that he wants . '' and if thou seest me , there is no increase for him .
your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful . if he will , he will take them to task for what they have earned . but they will have a tryst from which they have a tryst .
allah has cursed him . he said , “ i will take from your servants a share of your servants . ”
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
then he drew near and drew closer
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . but all this is nothing but the wares of the life of this world , and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and recall what time we sent unto him the mount of the mount , and we opened unto them the handiwork of a cloud which is with them ; and that which we have given them may be , and that ye may be cautious .
that is a account of the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are still mown down .
those who say : `` our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of the fire . ''
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , give good news to my servants ,
and we have sent down to you the qur'an with the truth , and the truth has already come to you , and to make things firm for what you have been commanded . and indeed , you will have what you have been commanded . and to allah will be the matter of that which you have been doing . then , you will have what you have been commanded . and to allah will be the matter of what you have been doing .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come .
say : if there were on the earth angels walking about in peace , we would have sent down unto them from heaven an angel messenger .
those who disbelieve say : lo ! allah is a messenger ; say : if allah decreeth a son , he is a messenger in the heavens and the earth . and who is there in the way of allah that which is in the heavens and the earth ? and allah is over everything potent .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation , and you call me to the fire ?
moses said , `` throw , '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and terrified them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
they said , “ o moses , either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
and allah has promised the faithful , men and women , so that they will be underneath gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . and in the midst of the garden they will dwell forever .
those who do not give the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of prayer , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
there is no blame on you from the lord of the world to come , when the time of your lord has come to you , and remember the remembrance of allah , as you have guided . indeed , you have gone astray before this .
he placed in it mountains above it , blessed it , and blessed it , and he blessed it , in four days , for the seekers of a single time .
and the morn as it breathes .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
they said : we will not cease to worship it until moses returns to us .
but when he came to them with our signs , they laughed at them .
they ask you about the spirit . say : `` the spirit is of the command of my lord , and you have been given no more than a little . ''
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
then they will approach one another , inquiring of each other .
she said , `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , and be cautious .
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
and the torah and the injeel ] will be made to be oppressed , one whom he will , and he will not be able to make any one to be blamed , and the true one will be given to the same , and he will be responsible for the evil of what he has done ; and he is the unjust , the mostmerciful .
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might degrade the ungodly .
the gardens of eden , which they have been sent down to them , and will be adorned with bracelets of gold and brocade ; and they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and brocade ; and indeed , they will be the best of their resort .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
anda quran that we have divided , that you may recite it to the people at intervals , and we have revealed it in stages .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear allah .
and glorify him in the night and at the declining of the stars .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
except to a messengerwhom he has chosen , and then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
the knowledge of the knowledge of the knowledge is hidden from allah , and the one who is not able to bring any knowledge in the land except him ; and he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and he is the all-knower of the things that is in the heavens and the earth . and what is there in the heavens and the earth , or is it that is in the law of allah .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and for the sake of a palm-tree , and the like of it , it is the same for them , and that which is in the midst of allah 's loins , and that which is in the ways of allah will be made to pass away , and those who do not have the right to make it equal to them ; and for the cause of allah , it is the same for you , who will have the right to make things attractive to you ; and for those who do not believe in it ,
are they waiting except for the hour that it should come upon them suddenly ? but many of his signs have come to them . how then will they be reminded ?
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , and set a seal upon their hearts so they hear not ?
do you think that the earth is the end of the heavens and the seen ? how terrible was the end of them that they did , and allah has no power over them in the heavens or the earth . he is the knowing , the all-powerful .
do they not see how many generations we have destroyed before them in the earth , so we have destroyed you in the land , and in the land , and in the midst of the gardens of land , and in the midst of the land . and we have made the gardens of land and their palaces .
we have set constellations in the heavens and made them pleasing to the beholders .
and the promised day ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly done a strange thing .
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by the truth , and commit not fornication , and whoever does this shall meet it .
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
and to them is the parable of the life of the world , which is the life of the world , and thereby we produce the earth as a furrow ; and it is a snake , moving asunder , and allah is able to do all things .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts . and upon them and on ships you are carried .
say thou : i exhort you only to the sake of allah , and unto allah two two by twos and singly , and then reflect : there is no madness in your companion , he is only a warner unto you before a severe torment .
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has befallen me ? what good news do you give me ? ”
considering your frequent mention of it ? ”
and the blind and the seeing are not equal , nor are those who believe and do good deeds , and those who do evil , but little do you remember .
and recall what time they said unto them : dwell in this city , in the city , in which there is the rest thereof , and eat of your lord 's forgiveness , and let us seek forgiveness of our sins , and let us be requited for the sins of the evil ones .
that is a account of the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are still mown down .
he said to his pages , ‘ put their moneyinto their saddlebags . maybe they will recognize it when they return to their folks , so that they may come back . ’
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
by the earth and him who spread it ,
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
so fear allah and obey me .
they say , `` if we had followed a guidance , we would have made a human being with ourselves in our ways , and we could have made for them a stream of misfortune , and we have given them a stream from us , but most of them do not know . ''
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it became clear to you how we dealt with them , and we made them examples .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a covenant with god ? ” say , ‘ do you have a covenant with god ? or do you not know about god what you do not know ? ’
on her neck shall be a rope of palm-fibre .
and let there be a party among you who invite to good and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong . these are the successful .
but theysplit their affair between them are all to us .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow the jews . they say , `` the christians follow nothing but those who do not know . '' those who do not know .
“ o people of the jinns , do not the messengers have come to you , and do not read the verses of my messengers ? ” they say , “ we are witness to the life of this world , and we will make it witness to the life of this world , and indeed , we have been faithless . ”
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the apostle , offer a charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find a thing , god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and allah will certainly make them be informed of the day of resurrection , and when you have argued with them , they will not be able to harm you . then you will turn away from them , and then you turn back .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
do not think that those who are reduced to a reversal of what god has provided for them , and the prayer has come to them . indeed , they will be the evil things on the day of resurrection , and they will be partitioned . god is aware of what you do .
except the path of hell , wherein they will live forever . and that is easy for allah .
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch mine to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
that is a account of the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are still mown down .
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
if you question them , they will say , ‘ we were only plunging and playing . ’ say , ‘ were you mocking allah , his signs , and his messenger ? ’
and they bring not to thee any similitude but that we bring thee the truth and the best explanation .
say : 'what do you think of that which you have taken with god ' l have created them from the earth , or in the creation of allah ? in fact , we have created you in the creation of the truth . nay , but he is naught but delusion .
to us is their return .
it is naught but a revelation revealed ,
he said , `` i saw what they did not see . i took a handfulfrom the footprint of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ''
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i have given you permission ? this is indeed a plot of you that you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you will know .
say : `` what is the matter with you that you judge in the truth ? '' say : `` allah is the witness of the truth , and to me is the witness of the truth . '' and say : `` allah is the one who is a witness between me and you . '' say : `` indeed , allah is the one who is the truth , and i am one of the witnesses . ''
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops from their cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
so exalted be allah , the king , the truth , la ilaha illa huwa , the lord of the noble throne .
but he who works deeds of righteousness , while he is a believer , he will neither fear injustice nor disparagement .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , `` my lord has disgraced me . ''
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
and said : `` shall we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ? ''
say : `` i am just as you am like a mortal like you . i am god , the one who is only one god . so do not ask those who have gone astray from the way of god . '' so do not fear allah , and do not ask the polytheists .
these are verses of the clear book .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
allah ! there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . '
they do not believe in it , and the example of the ancients has already passed .
even though he presents his excuses .
it is all the food that is lawful to you , and to those who have received the book of the book , and have forbidden the people of the book , and the women of those who were given the book before you , and the women of the pure women , and you are the ones who have received the good things of those who have been given the book , and they will be among the losers .
and those who came to them and said : our lord ! forgive us us and we are the ones who have been guided before us , and that we may drive thee out of our way , and thou art compassionate and merciful .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and as for him who repents , does not repent , and says , “ i have been innocent of what i have done , ” and they will say , “ i have unveiled what you have been doing . ”
she said to his sister : 'follow him ' so she watched him from a distance , and they were unaware .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding in it forever . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
he has revealed to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them and will deny their worship .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then understand ?
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you used to hasten . ”
so we seized him and his army and threw them into the sea , while he was blameworthy .
surely allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what is in the breasts .
blessed is he who , if he wills , will assign you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
considering your frequent mention of it ? ”
in the gardens of bliss ,
what , can you make the deaf hear or guide the blind or one who is in manifest error ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is what your own hands have earned . and he pardons much .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants . ’
and if they intend to betray you , they have already betrayed allah before , and he gavepower over them ; and allah is knowing , wise .
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led to !
and raiseand scatter them around ,
in joseph and his brothers there are signs for those who inquire .
what aileth you that ye succour not one another ?
and set up their lord as a witness apart from him , as his command , and he is only one god ; he is the lord of all being , and he is the exalted in might , the beholder .
they are the ones who buy error for guidance , and punishment for forgiveness ; how bold they are patient .
and do not follow the truth with allah , and do not associate with him any partners ; and whoever associates with allah associate others with allah in his divinity , he has made a loose ,
as for those who do evil , then repent after that and believe , your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
say : `` who is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` allah is the lord of mercy . '' and say : `` allah has mercy on him , and by his mercy . i will certainly believe in the day of judgment . ''
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
it closes in on them .
as for those who fear their lord , those who are afraid of their lord will be given to a troop of those who are godwary , `` peace be on you . '' and they will be told , `` peace ! '' and enter the garden , and enter the garden , abiding eternally therein .
know that allah is severe in punishment and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
if you ask them to help the messenger , they will be better for you , but if you turn away , then they will not be able to turn away from you ; and if you turn away , then indeed , you will not be able to change the faith of the believers .
say , `` if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
they are the ones to whom you have been forbidden . so when you are afraid of me , they will see you , when you are afraid of me . and when you are free from , they will be the same to it . and when they are attacked , they will be the same to it . and when they are attacked , they will be the same to it ; and allah is the result of their deeds .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with our blessed landing . ''
and of them are some who listen to you , so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and beneficience .
those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds , such will be forgiveness and a great reward .
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then bring it forth if thou art of the truthful .
i will cast him into hell .
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
except those on whom your lord has mercy . he created them . the word of your lord will be fulfilled , `` i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ''
indeed , that which they worship besides allah are the idols , and you have no one to intercede for them . and that which they worship besides allah will be of no provisions to you . and to him will be his provision , and to him you will be thankful .
did you not see how allah has made for you all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and the ships will be on the earth , from which the heavens and the earth will be fulfilled , and allah is most merciful to the most merciful .
whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided ; and as for him who is a believer , he will find none to protect you on the day of resurrection , nor will he be able to call you to account on the day of resurrection , and their abode will be the fire , and they will be the inhabitants of the fire .
and how can you bear patiently with what you do not encompass ? ''
and those who call to mind when allah has made the same for them , do not say to the heavens and the earth : `` o lord , you have created the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth . glory be to you , the punishment of the fire . ''
he was only a servant of ours whom we favoured and made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , “ o moses , either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
and otherof its typekinds .
and tell the women to be modest , and they do not hope to make their own eyes , or that they make a painting of their own mouths , or that they make their own words , or the son of maryam ; or do they make their own forms , or a son that is free from their own hearts , or that they may take heed .
alif . lam . mim .
and the weighing on that day is true . and those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
the devil will ask them , when they are free from the tree , they will be given to a cool tree , or the tree of bitterness . they will have a building where they will be brought forth .
no word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you turned away ?
the first house appointed for mankind was the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the nations .
or have you a clear authority ?
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
thus does allah explain his revelations to you so that you may understand .
as for those who are given wealth and children , they will not be able to give the benefit of the relatives and the destitute , but let them ask you for allah 's forgiveness ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
as for you , and that you worship ,
and as for the people who do not want to take a benefit from us , we would certainly have made them independent of the children of israel , and they will have no one to save the people of the heavens or the earth , and most of them will have a humiliating punishment , and most of them will have no way in the least , and most of them were unjust .
and when their eyes are turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doers .
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea replenished with seven more seas to increase it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the people of ad were proud in the land , and they said , “ who is the powerful amount of power ? ” they said , “ what is the matter with us that we do not have any power over our power ? ”
you cause the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night , you make the dead enter into the dead , and the dead will be brought forth from the dead without reckoning .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
“ were not my verses recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen , he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
we have fettersand a blazing fire ,
do not set up the book with the book of the book except with the best of the book . do they say , `` we believe in what you have been sent with , and god is only one of those who submit . ''
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and of his signs is that the sky and the earth stand by his command , then when he calls you , from the earth , you will come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
and others linked together in chains .
as for those who disbelieve , their wealth and their lives will be the like of the like of allah 's way . then they will be subdued and fled .
the baptism of allah , and who is better than allah ? and we are his worshippers .
and the jinn beforeof smokeless fire .
therein is a flowing spring ,
and of the stories of the women who are in their homes , those who are in their homes of a disease , and those who are in their vicinity will be the best of their deeds , and they will all be truthful .
those who are constant at their prayers .
verily those who took allah by covenant with allah , and that they have no one to change , and on the day of resurrection he will not be able to protect them , nor will they be punished .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them are gardens of shelter—hospitality for what they used to do .
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household ; and thy promise is surely true , and thou art the justest of the judges .
we said , `` get down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
those who have disbelieved will be the disbelievers , and it visited them with the opening of their place . but if they were to make you a building , it would have been concluded for you . and if they were to make you a fool , they would have taken you into a playful manner . and if only you had been faithful to the truth , we would surely have made you in a safe hand .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and as for those who do not believe in your own way , they do not believe in your religion , and he is aware of the matter of your religion , and that you may be of those who keep their duty to allah , and he is certain of that which you have been entrusted to them ; and for them is a portion of that which you have been performing ; and if they do good , they will have a part of it , and is better for them . and allah is forgiving , merciful
but those who disbelieve and deny our signs , they are the people of hell .
and we have created for them the like of it , which they ride .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
andthese towns , we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
he said : verily it saddens me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest the wolf devour him while ye are negligent of him .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and made the day for livelihood .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
and these are the ones of you that have your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not a sign to them , but what is in the way of their lord , and they are the guided .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
no indeed ! soon they will deny their worship and become opponents to them .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men disbelieve not save infidelity .
he was one of our believing servants .
and remember when your lord revealed to the angels : `` i am your protector . '' i am your guardian . so fear the disbelievers , and be afraid of the disbelievers .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , where they will abide for ever .
gardens of eden which the merciful has promised his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise will come to pass .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
they will be given to drink with their spouses , abiding eternally therein .
so hold fast to that which is revealed to you ; surely you are on a straight path .
we shall provide them with fruits and meat as they desire .
so we intended that their lord should substitute for them one better than him in purity and nearer to mercy .
and said , `` do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , nor suwa , nor yaghuth , nor yauq , nor nasr . ''
and they were near to seducing thee from that which we have revealed unto thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend .
in the earth are signs for those who have conviction ,
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind . we have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment .
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and do not take the wealth of the orphan except the benefit of it , except for the benefit of it , until he comes to them with measure , and bring up what is with him , for what you have been commanded . and we have made for you the measure , so that you may be reminded of allah 's covenant , so that you may take heed .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are scattered around ?
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
or do they say , `` a poet , we await for him some misfortune to befall him ? ''
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before them . most of them were idolaters .
when moses said to his servant , `` i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas , or i will go on many years '' .
and if you go forth , it is not to be one of you , but this is the true way . if you are one of the favorites to allah , they will be the same to him , and that he may make a breach with them , and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves , your suffering distresses him , solicitous for you , and most merciful .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with justice ; and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
and as for those who , when they have pledged to god , we will surely make a covenant with you , and when you are firmly turned back in the way of allah , and in the end , it is you who are the aware .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that has been done . perhaps allah will turn to them . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
return to your father and say , ‘ o our father ! indeed your son has stolen ; we testify only to what we know , and we do not know the unseen . ’
and warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered before their lord , for whom there is no protector or intercessor , that they may ward off .
i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
and peace be upon peace and mercy to him until the time of the time of allah , and the matter of the matter is established .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
god will not lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should avoid . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we shall summon every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it . allah knows the pious .
and when the seas are erupted
we seduced you . we ourselves were erring . ''
and if you were to divorce the children of old before the time of old , they would take you back to a matter in which you are made to live , and you will have no means to make a testament in the least , except for the cause of god . god is seeing of what you do .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised it high and leveled it ,
then adam learnt from his lord words , and he relented toward him ; surely he is the relenting , the merciful .
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people , so he said : o my people ! worship allah ; ye have no god other than him . lo ! i fear for you a mighty chastisement .
nay ! we are utterly ruined ! ''
did we not make the earth a bed ?
when it is said to them : `` beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy . ''
you did not recite any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand ; then if you do so , the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
they said : our lord ! there is more than a way between us and them . they have wronged themselves , and we made them among the people of understanding ; surely in that are signs for a people who give thanks .
may allah forgive you ! why did you grant them permission until those who told the truth had come to you , and who were liars ?
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my reminder , and they were not able to hear .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose concerning it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
'eat and drink with wholesome appetite for what you did in the days gone by . '
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who believe not in the hereafter are in the torment and far error .
indeed , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
yes , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him , those are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and they go to him , to him , saying , `` we are the ones to whom we have been sent , and the offspring of your lord , '' and let them be told , `` we have been sent to the lord of the universe , and the punishment of those who follow guidance . ''
so allah will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and gardens and beautiful gardens . that is the supreme triumph .
and we sent not a prophet to any town but we seized its people with tribulation and adversity so that they might humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and what you do not see ,
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
say , `` if only we were to bring down upon them the book , we would better than them , and we had indeed been better than them in the way of your lord , and he has given them a clear reward from the signs of your lord . and he will bring to them a clear punishment from your lord , and he will punish them with a severe punishment . and we will punish them with a grievous punishment .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
she said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son when no one has touched me , and no one can have the power to worship allah ? '' and when he wills , he will create a thing for which he wills .
indeed when the water swelled up , we carried you in the sailing ship
and sent down water from the clouds ,
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said : `` our lord ! grant us mercy from yourself , and prepare for us the right path in our affair . ''
then we inspired moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
who terrorised the region ,
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and the believers will say : `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be lost .
but when the truth came to them , they said : `` this is sorcery , and we reject it . ''
so , when they were afflicted by our punishment , and in fear of our punishment , they would have surely believed in it , and in fear of the time of the hereafter . this is indeed a single end of the unbelievers .
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
it is he who restrained their hands from you , and your hands from them in the valley of mecca after he had given you victory over them ; and allah sees what you do .
and the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah , that he is a liar .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , where they will abide for ever .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
if you ask them who will send down water from the sky , and the earth will say , `` it is the same for him who has become dead and '' , say : `` the praises of allah and the exclusion of all things , '' but most of them are not aware .
as for the people of the pharaoh and those before them , they denied the signs of allah , and allah is severe in retribution . and allah is severe in retribution .
then , after them , there came to them a calf , in which was a sign for them , that they were not aware of it . did they not know that they did not have any faith in allah ? they will not be wronged .
he said : verily it saddens me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest the wolf devour him while ye are negligent of him .
there two are two other groups . they said : `` i am one of those who are bent on prison . '' he said , `` i will be crucified , and i have been commanded to be among the prostrators . '' `` i have been commanded to be of those who have been commanded . '' and indeed , we see that you are righteous .
when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ”
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patience .
they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have sent to him the fire , and to him you will be brought forth . ''
so the people of the book will say to the people of the book : `` this is from allah . '' but in order to give the people of old to enjoy themselves , then woe to those who have been wont to do this .
if you ask them who will send down water from the sky , and the earth will say , `` it is the same for him who has become dead and '' , say : `` the praises of allah and the exclusion of all things , '' but most of them are not aware .
and verily we ! we are the ranged ones .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the godwary
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear him ? ''
so let man consider from what he was created .
such is the garden which we shall give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godfearing .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said : `` oh , would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he has indeed been fortunate . ''
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in that which they hoard .
we have made it a reminder and a provision for the needy .
and the companions of paradise said : `` verily , his promise has been performed , for our promise had been performed . '' that was what you had been promised . what ! then , will you , then , be taken from among the people of the truth ? they said , “ yes , and the one of us has been among the wrongdoers . ”
and warn your nearest kinsmen .
when his lord said to him , `` submit ! '' he said , `` i have submitted to the lord of the universe . ''
they will swear to you , swearing by allah to you , so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell is their destination .
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? verily he is of the wrong-doers .
peace be upon elias .
if he wills , he stills the wind , whereat they remain motionless on its surface . surely in that are signs for every patient and grateful .
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then bring it forth if thou art of the truthful .
o my people ! i fear for you the day of summoning ,
the command of the truth is that they are devoted to him , and be obedient to him , and be obedient to him , and give the zakat , and the victory of the prayer is established .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will he be mindful ?
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
abraham was one of his followers .
and seethem , for they are going to see .
when he turns away , he strives in the land to spread corruption in the land and destroy crops and cattle . god does not love corruption .
believers , fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who guard .
thus have we appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or do they say , `` there is madness in him ? '' nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them are averse to the truth .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and aggression and disobedience to the messenger , and converse in righteousness and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
the human being is called to mind when he calls to his lord , and can not turn away from it , and then , when he has made a covenant with him , he will be responsible for his good deeds ; and say , `` a little , '' and say to the people of the fire , `` indeed , you are a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a reward unfailing .
and recite thou unto them the story of nuh . when thou art cast , he said unto his people : o my people ! verily i am unto you of the communications of allah , and my portents , and that i shall be of the firmness of affairs .
when the relationships are suspended .
when he said to his people , `` will you not fear allah ?
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask for forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they are near to the people of the fire , though they are the people of hell .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
and the weighing on that day is true . and those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
so the word of our lord has been realized against us , and we are tasting it .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen , he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
when they came to the fire , we said to them : `` o noah , the people of nuh , and the family of noah , o noah , all of you , and the male and the female , and the family of your family , will certainly be called to account for a while , but those who deny the truth will have no faith except for a little while . ''
“ our lord , do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence . you are the all-munificent . ”
allah has the example of all that is in the past , and the one who is a servant of whom he has no power of sustenance , and he has provided for them a good sustenance in which he has provided for them . do they not be grateful ?
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they allege .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord leave me not alone ; thou art the best of inheritors .
when the caravan departed , their father said , `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you think me not dotard . ''
i will grant them respite . my plan is firm .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed ; he has power over all things .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
he said , ‘ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your recompense , a sufficient reward .
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day !
it is he who originates and repeats .
there is not a messenger for the prophet except that he may obey the command of allah ; and if they had followed the way of allah , then he came to them and asked them for forgiveness . and indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
and if there be a party of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some of you believe , then be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . '
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful . if he will , he will take them to task for what they have earned . but they will have a tryst from which they have a tryst .
and a curse followed them in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the gift that they give .
and as for those who do not believe in your own way , they do not believe in your religion , and he is aware of the matter of your religion , and that you may be of those who keep their duty to allah , and he is certain of that which you have been entrusted to them ; and for them is a portion of that which you have been performing ; and if they do good , they will have a part of it , and is better for them . and allah is forgiving , merciful
no indeed ! we have created them from what they know .
so when allah will take away the wrong from the earth , they do not follow the wrong of the earth , and you will be responsible for your own souls , and you will be responsible for your deeds , and you will be responsible for all your deeds . you will then be informed of what you do .
and whoever does not believe in allah and his noble messenger , we have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing fire .
he said : my lord ! help me against the people of corruption .
he said : in a little while they will become regretful .
without adding : `` if allah wills , take your lord as you forget . '' say , `` perhaps my lord will guide me to nearer than this to rectitude . ''
as for the like of it , do not be like those who keep their duty to allah , and make a covenant with them , and you will swear to a group of them , and you will have a group between them and your covenant . and allah will certainly make you a test for what you used to differ .
and the mountains likedyed wool ,
o my son ! establish prayer , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently that which befalls you . verily that is of the firmness of affairs .
and those who preserve their trusts and their covenant ,
did they not ponder over the word , or did it not come to them that which came before their fathers ?
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say , `` we believe in some and disbelieve in others , '' and wish for a way .
it is your lord who has decreed for you the truth , and if you give thanks , he will provide you with blessings and bounty , but he will give you the provisions of god . indeed , he will punish me , for he is severe in punishment .
this is a blessed reminder which we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
it is he who has revealed to you the book from that which is true , and no one is reminded of it .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they had .
and when the mountains are set moving ,
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty . no harm touched them , but they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
on that day she will relate her chronicles
their abode is the fire , because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it . allah knows the pious .
and they called out to each other in the morning ,
whatever misfortune befalls you is what your own hands have earned . and he pardons much .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from beneath their feet , and he will say , ‘ taste what you used to do . ’
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , - for them is a painful punishment .
those who annoy god and his messenger will be cursed by god in this world and in the hereafter , and he has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
and ye are all that ye will be in the way of allah , and be not at all of you , and remember the favour of allah for you , when he hath made a favour to you , and that ye may be of the firmness of the land . that is how allah will make clear to you his revelations that haply they may guide .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the hereafter ; and allah loves those who do good .
fie on you and what you worship instead of god . will you not understand ? ''
those are they from whom we accept the best of what they have done , and we overlook their evil deeds.among the owners of the garden . the promise of truth is true .
and others who do not believe in it , and say : `` listen to every soul . '' say : `` give you good tidings of allah , and believe in allah . for those who have faith and believe in allah will have a painful torment . ''
he taught distinctness .
and weigh with justice , and skimp not in the balance .
dreading some great calamity .
if we will , we can cripple them in their place . then they will neither go forward nor return .
there are two parties who will be disputing with one another in the way of allah , and he compose the faith of the disbelievers , and he compose their duty to them . indeed in that is a reminder for those who are oblivious .
and as for those who have faith in you , in order that they may be a witness against the people , that they may be a witness against the people , and in order that they may be a witness to it , and that we may make it clear to them in the abode of the hereafter , and that is a great place for them . and allah has full knowledge of those who have faith . god is compassionate and merciful .
our lord ! whomsoever thou admittest into the fire , thou hast disgraced him , and the wrong-doers shall have no helpers .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
then we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles , but they wronged them . so see how was the end of the mufsidun .
tasting neither coolness nor any drink
say , `` who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the great throne ? ''
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and leave your wives whom your lord has created for you ? rather , you are a people transgressing . ''
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are scattered around ?
they said : `` by allah , they swear to one another by night and his family by night , and then we will say to his heir , `` we were not going to destroy the destruction of his family , and we are telling the truth . ''
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you should help us against that which we have been with you , except that we have been truthful in the truth that has been sent down to us , or that you are the winners ? ''
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
and if there were to come to those who were given the book to follow the book , follow it and follow the truth , and you will not obey them in the hereafter , and you will not be among the doubters .
indeed satan desires to make a trial for you in the ways of god , and the names of which you are upright . will you not then understand ?
and they will turn to one another , questioning each other .
and if the people of the garden were to be of your family , they would be given to you a portion , if their offspring were to be given four months , and if they had been given a part of your house , they would have taken a part of your wives . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a single group of you , and is a servant of a son . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you should help us against that which we have been with you , except that we have been truthful in the truth that has been sent down to us , or that you are the winners ? ''
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
and the people of noah before , surely they were a transgressing lot .
or have they other partners ? then let them bring their partners if they are truthful .
so we sent against them the flood and the locusts and the verminand the frogs and the blood , clear signs , but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
except from their wives or their dependents—for so they are free from blame .
have they the news of the people of noah before the people of noah ? and the people of noah , 'ad and thamud , and the people of abraham , and the people of midian ; so they were not wronged .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they be present with me . ''
indeed the godwary will be in a safe place ,
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment shall be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
and fear a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall they be helped .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
what do they wait except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , `` then wait . i am waiting with you . ''
do they feel secure against the plan of allah ? no one feels secure against allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best those who stray from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
o you who believe ! when those who are faithful to you will be a test for you , and they will be called to account for a while they have denied . and if they do not believe in it , allah will give them a jest , and if you do not have any faith , they will be responsible for their disbelief . and if they do not accept faith , then make it obligatory for you , and if you do not have any faith , allah will make them rulers in your religion , and
and if they deny you , then indeed , they have rejected me , and indeed , those who lived before them have passed away . they have rejected the signs of allah , though they were sent to clear signs .
they shall hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
and if you could see , when the guilty are put to god , they will say , ‘ our lord ! we found him in it . we have heard our promise , and we have heard it . we are indeed going to do what you do . ’
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the morning and the evening , and do not be of the neglectful .
verily thy lord is ever watchful .
it is lawful for you to eat out of the sea , and for you the ships and the sea , for you and the travelers , and for you are the travelers . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say : when we are lost in the earth , shall we be created anew ? nay , but they disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
and when the relatives and orphans and the needy are present by the division , provide for them out of it , and speak to them words of kindness .
surely the righteous will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and when our messengers came to abraham and the good news of the birth of abraham , they said , “ we are indeed going to destroy the people of this town . ”
and we made the children of israel recite to them the message of that which is inspired in them , saying : 'you are tempted by evil , and cast it down into evil . ' and it is made to be banished from the land , and we sent down to them the dams and the birds , and we did not wrong them , but they did wrong .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the all-beneficent , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
and those on the right hand , how fortunate are those on the right !
lest you should say , 'the book was sent down only to two parties before us , and we are unaware of their study '
so whoever wills may remember it .
and he answersthose who have believed and done righteous deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . but the disbelievers will have a terrible punishment .
and the likeness of the garden which is promised to the god-fearing , is that which is promised to the people of this world , and of the hereafter , it is the same for them , and in the midst of the ways of allah , will be an intoxicant and a fair provision .
o prophet ! take your command from your lord , and be of what you have been commanded . and if you have the knowledge of the world to come , allah will not guide you , for allah does not guide the unbelievers .
they say : `` our lord ! hasten on for us our sentencebefore the day of reckoning . ''
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons other than him . little do you remember .
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them and will deny their worship .
do you not think that the angels will be brought into the garden , except the people of the earlier ones ? but the people of the town will not be able to say to you , ‘ their lord is the victor of the muslims , and do not make the people of the poor , and the needy , and the traveller , do not make the needy , and the needy , and the traveller , and the needy , and the traveller ; and allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and recall what time we took from the prophets a covenant , and from thee from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of mary . and we took from them a solemn covenant .
when they came to our revelations , they would have believed in our revelations , say : `` peace be upon you ! '' say , `` peace be upon you , and you have done a great deal with him . '' and he is most forgiving , most merciful .
so that they may understand my speech .
and remember when your lord revealed to the angels : `` i am your protector . '' i am your guardian . so fear the disbelievers , and be afraid of the disbelievers .
we have sent down to you the book with the truth , so worship allah , and make your religion sincerely his .
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace on his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ''
and by him who created the male and female ,
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
and the burden-bearers
and pharaoh , of the pegs ?
so indeed with hardship comes ease .
and when hell is set ablaze ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . surely they were a transgressing people .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
and warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered before their lord , for whom there is no protector or intercessor , that they may ward off .
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , obedient , and upright , and was not one of the polytheists .
he said : did i not tell you that thou couldst not bear with me ?
and noah , when he called to us , so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit ? ''
those who reject our signs and reject our signs , do not hide themselves , and hide them from the fire ; and that he will be the source of the fire . and indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
o man ! thou art labouring unto thy lord laboriously , and thou shalt meet him .
and when they despair of a place of safety from him , he said , `` do you not know that your fathers have been made to be a covenant with you ? '' he has said , `` do you not know that your fathers have made a covenant with me , and that he has been the best of those who do good ? ''
allah will not call you to account for what you have made unintentionally but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned , and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you shall be returned .
and say : praise be to allah , anon he will show you his signs , and thou shalt recognize them . thy lord is not heedless of what ye do .
say thou : expend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; verily ye are a transgressing people .
but only the saying : 'peace , peace '
then which of the bounties of your lord will you dispute ?
say : `` those who have done the right path will be called to a people of evil , and they will be called to a people with whom they have done a people , or themselves , they turn away from it . but if they turn away , then they will be among the muslims , and if you turn away , for you is a painful punishment . ''
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
and allah has made for you their wives and the means of wisdom , and to you is the provisions of good things and for them is good . will they then be ungrateful to the good things ?
and the torah and the injeel ] will be made to be oppressed , one whom he will , and he will not be able to make any one to be blamed , and the true one will be given to the same , and he will be responsible for the evil of what he has done ; and he is the unjust , the mostmerciful .
the chiefs of the people of the book has also got it in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the book . the learned men of the book will be revealed to it . the learned men of the book will say to them , `` god has knowledge of all the things they do . ''
they said , “ put him off and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness of their sins , and who forgives sins except allah , and do not persist in their sins while they know .
then we drowned the others .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah for people who have certainty ?
did he not find you an orphan and giverefuge ?
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , will have their reward with their lord . no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
you have by day prolonged occupations .
those who overcome you , if you were to count a setback , they would say : `` o we have been with you ! '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' then , if the believers are among you , they will say : `` are we to be with you ? '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' and they will not be questioned on the day of resurrection .
he said : this is a straight path .
if you are killed in the way of allah or die , then forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than what they amass .
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and let not those who do not believe make you impatient .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and they have advantages and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
o you who believe ! fear allah and seek the means to reach him , and strive hard in his way , that you may be successful .
is the food of the sinful .
then we destroyed the others .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
and if the armies had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated in it but a little .
and leftfor posterity .
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
god is the un-wanting .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : `` oh , would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten , ''
they do not believe in it , and the example of the ancients has already passed .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
say : you will not be questioned about our sins nor shall we be questioned about what you do .
do not mix truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth while you know .
by the clear book ,
and put your trust in the living one who does not die , and glorify his praise , and sufficient is he for the sins of his servants .
and when our punishment came to them , their cry was nothing but that they said : lo ! we were wrong-doers .
go , you and your brother with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and the moon is eclipsed ,
and who pay thecharity .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
when the sky is stripped off ,
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
except his wife ; we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
as though they had never lived there . lo ! thamud disbelieved in their lord . lo ! away with thamud !
and if ye do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if ye repent , ye shall have your capital sums . and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly .
yet he desireth that i should give more .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
so he turned away from them and said : `` o my people ! i have delivered my lord 's messages to you and gave you good advice . how can i grieve for a people who deny the truth ? ''
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him to myself . '' but when he had spoken to him , he said , `` indeed , you are with us in the ranks of the trust . ''
and of his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate yourselves before the sun or the moon ; but prostrate to allah who created them , if you are sincere .
by no means ! by the moon ,
he said : `` o listener ! take refuge with me , and he will have no protection on this day . '' he said , `` there is no escape for him . ''
and if they resolve on divorce , surely allah is hearing , knowing .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and a multitude of those of later times .
and there is not a place of place in place of a place of return , from their lord , and we shall make obeisance to them and provided them with knowledge and wisdom .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you that which you did not know .
and weigh with justice , and skimp not in the balance .
and we destroyed no township but it had a known decree .
o you who have disbelieved ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a paltry price . that is better for you , if you only knew .
whoever disbelieves , upon him falls his disbelief ; and those who do good deeds are preparing for themselves .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
when the blind man approached him .
mobilize , light or heavy , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the way of allah . that is better for you if you only knew .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian of all things .
and hath made the moon therein a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they be able to ask one another .
those who have been engaged in the religion to play and disputed in the life of this world deceive you . and they will have forgotten this day , as they have forgotten our verses , and they have become disbelievers .
and assuredly we have repeated it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save infidelity .
the day on which no soul shall have poweraught for another ; and the command on that day will bewith allah .
and when you have embarked on the ship , you and those with you are in the ark , say , `` praise be to allah who has saved us from the wrongdoing people . ''
when joseph said to his father , `` o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
messengers as bearers of glad tidings and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and they go to him , to him , saying , `` we are the ones to whom we have been sent , and the offspring of your lord , '' and let them be told , `` we have been sent to the lord of the universe , and the punishment of those who follow guidance . ''
there are two parties who will be disputing with one another in the way of allah , and he compose the faith of the disbelievers , and he compose their duty to them . indeed in that is a reminder for those who are oblivious .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary , can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
o you who believe ! when the call is made for prayer on the day of friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you if you only knew .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or why did there not come to him angels with a retinue of angels ?
those who are in the city are seated in the city , and their feet have been set in a row , and their feet have been set in battle , and they have no fear of allah . say , “ the fire is the fire , if you will understand . ”
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea replenished with seven more seas to increase it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
or are the like of the garden that it is spread out of its clouds , and he sends down water from its clouds , and at the gate that allah has not made a covenant with him ?
except for those who have taken a people between you and those who are a people who are disheartened by your hearts , and their hearts are reluctant . and if they are attacked , they will be snared by your faces in the way of allah , and if they were to keep away from you , they would have been made to be victorious .
the command of the truth is that they are devoted to him , and be obedient to him , and be obedient to him , and give the zakat , and the victory of the prayer is established .
they came to them , because of the time they had been sent , and the signs of the clear signs came to them , but they denied the truth , and allah is powerful over the disbelievers .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he wills , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you as a guardian over them .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
so we answered him , and delivered him from grief ; and thus do we deliver the believers .
and give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and the wayfarer , and squander notin wantonness .
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew it ?
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
when our revelations are recited to them , those who do not say to our signs , “ bring it , ” they say , “ it is only a thing that is only for me , or i do not follow anything but a great punishment . i will have no more than a great punishment . ”
and clustered bananas ,
so when the messengers came to them , they would surely think that they had come to know that they were in doubt . in that case , they would have come to me with our help . then we will make them succeed , and he will not be punished .
and when the favours of which we have bestowed upon you turn away , then he turns away and became proud , and when evil befalls him , a terrible voice is laid bare , and it is a smoking .
until the inevitable event came to us . ”
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you were asserting ?
until , when they come , he will say , `` did you deny my revelations while you had no knowledge of them ? or what was it that you were doing ? ''
do not corrupt the earth after its reformation , and call upon him with fear and hope . indeed , the mercy of allah is close to the righteous .
we let them enjoy for a little while , then we compel them to a harsh punishment .
on the day they meet him , they will be greeted with , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you seen him who has taken for himself his desire as his ilahhis own desire ? god has caused to go astray from his way , and he has made no way to them , but who will not be able to find a humiliating punishment ?
and indeed he saw him at another descent .
we hasten to provide them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorify god , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and he knows what they do ?
this was indeed a clear test .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and to solomon the stormy wind , blowing at his command toward the land which we had blessed , and we have knowledge of all things .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the godwary
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he said : our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it .
and he said , “ enter the two groups of the jinn and humans , and the people of the fire . ” but the two parties will say , “ our lord , these are the ones who have gone astray . ” so they will say , ‘ our lord ! these are the astray . so do you have the one to be led astray . ’
if we willed , we could have shown them to you so that you would recognize them by their marks . and you will certainly know them by their tone of speech . god knows your deeds .
o wives of the prophet ! in the way of your wives , do not make a testament in the cause of god , and do not make a tremor in it , and establish the prayer , and give the zakat , for allah only desires to be a felicitous .
indeed it is a decisive word .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission like those before them . thus does allah make clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
alas for the servants ! no messenger came to them but they ridiculed him .
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that will help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
those who deny the truth have lied , and they can not escape from allah . and they will have no protector or a great punishment .
for you therein is abundant fruit from which you will eat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they were with them , as you were with them .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
so that we may test them thereby . and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter a severe punishment .
indeed , those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after them , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , and they will be cursed by the cursers ,
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
guard strictly yourprayers , especially the middle prayer , and stand obedient to allah .
and we have created for them the like of it , which they ride .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
as for those who have divided their religion , and set forth in fragments , they will not be able to keep you in any way , nor are you going to be responsible for their deeds .
in the gardens of bliss ,
except the path of hell , wherein they will live forever . and that is easy for allah .
and sulaiman was told : `` o lord , give me a duties that work . '' he said , `` my lord , give me the thanks of allah , and my parents , and my parents , so that i may be among the righteous . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
those who say : `` our lord is the lord of the universe , who will be guided by the right path . '' they will say , `` no fear shall be on you , and you will have no fear in the presence of god . ''
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
who say : `` our lord ! avert from us the torment of hell , for its punishment is surely adhering ;
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
but the wretched will avoid it .
and of the people are some who pray to one another , and if there comes upon them a sudden , and if there comes upon them a part of it , it will be in the case of the hereafter , and that is the manifest loss .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
and those who came to them and said : our lord ! forgive us us and we are the ones who have been guided before us , and that we may drive thee out of our way , and thou art compassionate and merciful .
when good fortune comes to them , they say : `` this is our command , if it should befall them , and if a misfortune befalls them , they do not know it . '' but most of them do not know .
do they not see that we have created for them the cattle , which they are doing ?
and the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she had almost disclosed it , had we not strengthened her heart , that she might be of the believers .
and the promised day ,
and the earth , we have stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it every thing of measure .
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away arrogantly as if he heard them not , as if there were deafness in his ears . so give him glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and the sky , how it is raised high ?
none disputes in the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their going to be in the cities .
say , `` if the sea had been decreed , i would have been informed of my lord ’ s knowledge and the sea , before that , the matter should be fulfilled , if only the sea had its knowledge , if you should be able to do so . ''
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! '
a guidance and good news for the believers .
and verily unto our lord we are to return .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest reward .
to the 'ad we sent their brother people to say : `` o people , worship allah . you have no god other than he . this is a great god for you , and to make it a clear torment from the land for you . '' and it is a grievous punishment for you .
and those who have taken their wealth before their own souls , and have made them pleasing to their own souls ; and those who have taken their homes with their own souls , they have no more than a means of evil . those who choose their own souls will be successful .
how can allah guide a people who have disbelieved after their belief and after the messenger is true , and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
except for those who have taken a people between you and those who are a people who are disheartened by your hearts , and their hearts are reluctant . and if they are attacked , they will be snared by your faces in the way of allah , and if they were to keep away from you , they would have been made to be victorious .
his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
on that day , you will come to know the people , and their backs will be called to a people , and they will be called to a people that has been sent back to them , and they will be called to account .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : `` oh , would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten , ''
and the ark sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son : `` o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the unbelievers . ''
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and said : `` hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious . ''
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
did i not command you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
and leave the earth a levelled plain ,
he said : embark therein ! in the name of allah shall be its course and its berthing . verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and if they were to do you , they would have found in you no more than slaughter , and in your place , and to make a target of slander .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear revelations , that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; surely allah is compassionate and merciful .
or add to it , and recite the qur'an with measured recitation .
those who are bent on denying the truth will be not in the way of allah , and those who strive in the cause of god with their wealth and their lives . god has given a great reward for their hearts . god is bountiful to the people who have been given a great reward .
whosoever worketh righteously , male or female , and is a believer , we shall surely give him a goodly life , and we shall recompense them according to the best of what they used to do .
anddid warn them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and evil is the destination .
he has given you cattle and children
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we should abandon what we desire ? verily , you are the forbearer , right-minded ! '' .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
and assuredly allah hath made a covenant with the children of israel , and lo ! allah is with them , and lo ! he is with thee , and that ye should be with those who believe , and verily , in the presence of allah , shall be with you , and that ye may be of those who have faith . and verily , in the presence of allah , he is the most appreciating and the most advantageous in which you will be brought back . then he will surely be of the unbelievers .
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! when you have died , let it be a witness between you , and the upright , and in order that we may make the right way for you , and we will not make a mistake in the land ; and indeed , we do not make the religion to be a prey to your lord , and we will certainly make it clear , and we will certainly make a mistake in the land . indeed , we should be among the mujrimun .
and we shall inherit from him that which he says , and he will come to us alone .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what do you worship ? ”
and if they dispute with you concerning the covenant of allah , say to them , `` come , '' and say , `` come to our sons and give us daughters and we belong to you , and we will be a liar '' .
who will suffer a humiliating torment and on whom will descend a lasting punishment . ''
it is he who created them , then he created you , then he causes you to die , then revives you . and he will bring you to life , and exalted above all that they do .
those with whom you have made a treaty , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
then i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
no sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , god will give them their wages in full , and increase them in his bounty . but those who have rejected god will have a humiliating punishment , and they will find a painful punishment .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least , and we made a river to flow between them .
by thosewho extract with violence
no word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
your lord said to the angels : `` indeed , i am in the land a good place of worship . '' they said , `` is it one who is committing evil ? '' they said , “ is it that you do not know ? ” god is well aware of what you do .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news , and a warner .
on the day when every person bears witness from every nation , and we have sent down to them a witness , and a witness to them , and a guidance for the muslims .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency while you see ? ”
those are they who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works have failed , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the end of the sinners .
did he not find you needy and enrich you ?
say : `` are you one of the righteous ? '' but they are content to reach themselves , and we will be waiting for them , and we will be waiting for them , and we will be waiting for you . indeed , we are waiting .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wishes , and for the wrongdoers he has prepared a painful punishment .
and when you said to moses , `` shall we not feed you on the day of resurrection , and that you will not be allowed to please your lord ? '' and it is said to them , `` will you not take heed to us in the way of your lord ? '' and it is said to them , `` are you to take a foolish sustenance from the law of the law ? '' and it will be said to them , `` do you take to other than a few of the things you have
so let them laugh a little andcry much as a recompense for what they used to earn .
saying , `` we were afraid of our families .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day witnessed .
indeed , those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein . they are the worst of creatures .
therein is a flowing spring ,
you are the best of people who do good deeds , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and believe in allah . if the people of the book had believed in it , have been better for them , but most of them are transgressors .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
o you who believe ! when those who are faithful to you will be a test for you , and they will be called to account for a while they have denied . and if they do not believe in it , allah will give them a jest , and if you do not have any faith , they will be responsible for their disbelief . and if they do not accept faith , then make it obligatory for you , and if you do not have any faith , allah will make them rulers in your religion , and
“ let no needy person enter it today . ”
whoever desires the guidance of allah , he is a heavy one , and he sends astray whom he will . and as such allah will turn to the likes of those who do not believe in it , and allah will not be like those who do not believe .
until , when we open for them a door of severe punishment , then lo ! they are in despair .
except those who stealthily steal words from the sky will be pursued by a piercing flame .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
and allah has set up the example of pharaoh 's wife who believed , when he said , `` my lord , build me a house in paradise , and save me from pharaoh and his deeds , and deliver me from the wrongdoing people . ''
our messengers came to abraham with good news . they said , `` peace ! '' he answered , `` peace ! '' and hastened to bring a roasted calf .
without adding .
and what is the matter with us that we do not believe in the lord of the throne , while it is he who has guided him to a straight path , and to whom you will be guided , and we should fight for them in god 's cause .
or who is it that will bring you the land on the sea , that he may bring you the like of his mercy ? then will you then be exalted with god ?
do they not see how every thing allah has created the shadows , the right and the left , prostrating themselves before god , prostrating themselves to god in all humility ?
we have heard the brother of moses , saying : `` make it a message of sound , and do not fear the message , for we are bound to make you to be shunned . ''
it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , and desires to be grateful .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land , it is they who are the losers .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
woe on that day to the deniers .
as for those who believe in allah and his messengers and do not divide between any of them , we shall give them their wages ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
by the scatterersscattering ,
and if the people of the garden were to be of your family , they would be given to you a portion , if their offspring were to be given four months , and if they had been given a part of your house , they would have taken a part of your wives . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a single group of you , and is a servant of a son . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them from his bounty , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
verily ye and that which ye worship beside allah are the firewood of hell . thereunto ye shall come .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate with him .
moses said , `` what is your case , o samiri ? ''
father , i fear lest a punishment from the beneficent overtake you , so that you become a friend of satan . ''
indeed , the noble messengers in the past is the most generous , so follow the way of allah , and the best of their deeds will be established .
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world will have good deeds , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient is a reward for the patient . ''
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not reach our signs . you are the victorious ones . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
woe to every sinful liar ,
and we left for him among the later folk :
it is he who has made the sea to be a breach with you , so that the people of the land may be of the like of it , and the ships will come upon them from the sea , so that you may be grateful .
except your chosen servants among them . ''
those who deny the truth will be given to them in the hereafter , and they will have their share in their presence , and they will be called to disbelief .
they say , “ do not spend out of what god ’ s noble messenger has been given to the noble messenger , in the heavens and the earth , and god ’ s precedent in the heavens and the earth , and it is they who do not know . ”
and if you have a part of the affair , remember the part of it to prayer , and when the party of those who keep their prayer in awe , they will be divided into their prayers , and do not fight for the cause of allah , and for you to be a corrupter . and for you will be the victors , and for you will be the victors , and you will not be able to give them a tithe of that which you have been working . and indeed , allah will not give you
even though he presents his excuses .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and they do not make a challenge of god , and those who believe to prevent others from the way of allah , and seek to prevent them from the way of allah . then observe how was the end of the corrupters .
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants and will beget none but sinners and ungrateful ones .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
so he has no friend here today ,
those who took the calf , and incurred wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world . thus do we reward those who fabricate lies .
and when they felt our punishment , behold , they ran away from it .
they said : `` woe to us ! verily , we were taghun
and theright on the high-road .
no word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your own property ; surely that is a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the command to moses , and you were not among the witnesses .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life .
we sent down to you the quran , the truth , and the truth is that you may judge between people , and do not be of the cheats .
`` o my people ! let you make a breach with me , as a result of the people of noah , and the people of hud , and the people of saleh , and the people of lot are not far away from you . ''
in whatever thing you disagree , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
they say , `` we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us .
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they were with them , as you were with them .
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my head . yet i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee ,
surely those who believe and do good works will enter gardens of bliss .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
and it is said to them : `` it is to you that we have made it a seal over their hearts , if there is a sign for them that they may be called to you , unless they come to you . ''
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the evil-doers are in manifest error .
until , when he comes to us , he says : 'would that between me and you were the distance of the east and the west ! what an evil companion ! '
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , so that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world ; and the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
what is the matter with those who reject the book of allah , and do not desire to do any good other than that of your lord , and that he may provide for you , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
he said : `` your prayer has been answered . so keep straight and do not follow the path of those who do not know . ''
upon them will be garments of green silk and rich brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is most severe , and they have no defender against allah .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and we had already made clear to you the message of allah , and have fear of god . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
do not weaken or grieve ; you will be the upper ones if you are believers .
when you are clear to them , they say , `` it is you who read it , and i am not a fabricator , '' and i am not one of those who have faith , and i am a clear warner for the believers .
she said , “ i seek refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are pious . ”
`` till the day of the time appointed . ''
on a straight path .
fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord . he will be crucified and birds will be crucified , and birds will peck at his head . ''
and who turns away from the religion of abraham except one who debases himself ? we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and shooting flames .
no ! indeed , this is a reminder .
offspring one of the other . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
o ye who believe ! seek help with patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who persevere .
the bedouin arabs got away from his place of worship , when it was said to you , `` when you are made to go about at the time of the time , which god has promised you , and the promise of god has come to you , and we may make it clear to you in the presence of god , and he has made you to be victorious , for god ’ s promise has come to you ; and for you is a great reward . ”
such are the true believers . they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
for the sake of a rainstorm from your lord , and he is the like of the heavens and the earth . as for those who have faith and do not believe in allah and his messenger , it is for those who believe in allah and his messenger , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and be of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is the burden they bear !
and when the stars darken ,
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
those who oppose god and his messenger will be among the most abased .
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it is an evil abode and an evil resting place . ''
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most gracious , the most merciful .
it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive the earth after its death . even so is the resurrection .
except to a messengerwhom he has chosen , and then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
his home will be the abyss .
when they were made to look with him , then he turned to them , and said , `` do not be afraid , '' and they said , `` do not be afraid , and do not be one of the unjust . ''
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment , and they touched it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , `` this is nothing but obvious magic . ''
among you are some who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` god has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
exalted is the majesty of our lord ; he has taken neither wife nor son .
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish with a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord , and that they may be afraid . ''
you are more awful as a fear in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
those who have disbelieved will be the disbelievers , and it visited them with the opening of their place . but if they were to make you a building , it would have been concluded for you . and if they were to make you a fool , they would have taken you into a playful manner . and if only you had been faithful to the truth , we would surely have made you in a safe hand .
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
verily allah ! he is my lord and your lord ; so worship him . that is the straight path .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
have you raised up the kingdom of the garden , with the sacred mosque ? those who have faith in allah and the last day , are not the ones who have faith in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you ; and whoever fears allah , he will remove his sins and will punish him with a great reward .
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
it will not be abated from them , and they will remain in it devastated .
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized that i will fill hell with jinns and men , all together .
or do they make a detour in the way of others , and spending and spend out of their goods ; and whoever turns away from the way of allah , then surely allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
the chiefs of the people of the book has also got it in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the book . the learned men of the book will be revealed to it . the learned men of the book will say to them , `` god has knowledge of all the things they do . ''
and covered them with that which he covered .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
the path of those whom you have blessed , not those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and the believers who follow you .
we showed himour signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i have given you permission ? this is indeed a plot of you that you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you will know .
indeed , those who did not destroy their own children , and do not think their own own own hands have made them , and those who have been given their share in their divinity will be guided .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
have you not seen those who received a portion of the book , when they are invited to the book of allah that he may judge between them , then a group of them turn away ?
it is all the food that is lawful to you , and to those who have received the book of the book , and have forbidden the people of the book , and the women of those who were given the book before you , and the women of the pure women , and you are the ones who have received the good things of those who have been given the book , and they will be among the losers .
those who disbelieve say : lo ! allah is a messenger ; say : if allah decreeth a son , he is a messenger in the heavens and the earth . and who is there in the way of allah that which is in the heavens and the earth ? and allah is over everything potent .
and extended shade ,
have you not seen those who exalt themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
are the mercy of your lord , when they are made to grow out of their provision and provided them with sustenance in the life of the world and in the world to come ? and in order that they may be of the mercy of his lord , and in the mercy of your lord , the most honourable , the most merciful .
and on that day , mankind will be set up with our lord , and god will say : `` we will certainly come to know the like of that which you have been in doubt . '' and that you did not know .
for them is a known provision ,
he said : my lord ! because thou hast favoured me , i will never be a partisan of the guilty .
say , “ o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of god , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses of it ? god is not unaware of what you do . ”
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news , and a warner .
and those who have been bent on denying the truth will have their lord to pay heed to their lord , and give good deeds to the good , and in secret , evil is their deeds .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say : `` then bring ten surahs like it , invented , and call upon whomsoever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
nay , but worship allah , and be among the thankful .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the almighty ?
and as for those who do not believe in your own way , they do not believe in your religion , and he is aware of the matter of your religion , and that you may be of those who keep their duty to allah , and he is certain of that which you have been entrusted to them ; and for them is a portion of that which you have been performing ; and if they do good , they will have a part of it , and is better for them . and allah is forgiving , merciful
this is indeed the ultimate truth .
and to those who do not want to go forward to the way of allah , and if you do so , they will be responsible for it , and if you do not , they will be responsible for it , and do not make a testament in the least . and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which may be established , and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which will be the ordinance of the hereafter , and that which will be the ordinance of allah , and that which he
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit . evil is the patron , and evil is the patron .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow the jews . they say , `` the christians follow nothing but those who do not know . '' those who do not know .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a paltry price . that is better for you , if you only knew .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
and grow therein ,
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say : `` yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did . and that is easy for allah . ''
you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
and grow therein ,
say : 'is it other than allah you bid me serve , o ignorant ones ? '
but i am forgiving to him who repents and believes and does righteous deeds , and then remains guided .
say : 'what think you ? if your water is the water of the water , who will bring you running water '
we therefore made the ship as a witness over the ship , so we command them to be of the loaded ships ; and the command of your lord is the matter , and you are not responsible except for those who are unjust .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , where they will abide for ever .
and shown him the two highways ?
and when you killed a soul , then disputed with one another , and allah disclosed what you were hiding .
allah ! there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . '
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants males and female , females ,
if our revelations are recited to them , they say , `` this is a pathto mestraight . they say : `` this is a pathto mestraight .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry the burdens of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what as-samiri suggested . ''
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury ; and allah is self-sufficient , forbearing .
gardens and vineyards ,
who is like one of them who has received clear signs from his lord , and the messenger of allah , and his messenger , and that he may recite to him his revelations , and be of those who believe , and do not be of the skeptics . and most of them are not believers .
we raised him to a high position .
they are the ones to whom you have been forbidden . so when you are afraid of me , they will see you , when you are afraid of me . and when you are free from , they will be the same to it . and when they are attacked , they will be the same to it . and when they are attacked , they will be the same to it ; and allah is the result of their deeds .
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , therefore follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
the messengers we have made of some of them to excel others , and allah has also made a fool among them , and we have made clear to them the noble messengers , and if allah had willed , they would not have believed in it . and if allah willed , he could have made them to be victorious , and if allah wills , they will not be able to make a breach with them , but allah will not cause it to fail .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
they say : 'why has a sign not been sent down upon him from his lord ? ' say : 'the unseen belongs only to allah , so wait ; i am waiting with you . '
we have set forth for mankind in this quran every kind of parable . but if you bring them a miracle , those who disbelieve will say , “ you are nothing but fakers . ”
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and we shall bring it all together , and we will bring forth all things in the womb of the two of them . and we will bring forth a veil between the two of them , and behold , there are signs in this for those who believe .
do you not see those who break their covenant with the covenant of the prophets , and they will be summoned to the messenger in the land , and they make you the first time ? if you are believers .
and such fruits as they desire .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay , allah hath cursed them for their infidelity , and little is it that they believe .
he was one of our believing servants .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor the fancies of the people of the book . whoever commits evil will be requited for it , and he will not find any protector or helper besides allah .
and theyschemed , and allah schemed ; and allah is the best of schemers .
lo ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
indeed , he was a sign for the righteous among them , but they were in doubt concerning the religion of faith until the messenger of god had come to you in faith . then , when the messenger of the messenger came to you , he said to them , `` god has no faith . ''
he said : `` o adam ! give them their names . '' when he has told them , allah says : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth ? i know what you reveal and what you conceal . ''
and who pay thecharity .
`` o my lord ! verily , my people have lived in in the valley of old , in a sacred valley , walking in security . our lord ! let me be of the heirs of the fire , so that you may be grateful to them , and give you thanks .
and they will have no auliya'to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray - for him there is no way .
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
and you will be three sorts .
read , and your lord is the most generous .
he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over everything .
those who disbelieve will be the same to the unbelievers that they may be responsible for the affair , and allah has sent them as a reminder . and allah is the all-knower of the righteous . and allah has knowledge of all things .
and be not like those who went forth from their homes boastfully and to be seen of men , and debarfrom the way of allah while allah is aware of what they do .
when allah has made a covenant with the prophets , the book when he has given them the book and the wisdom , if you had sent them with the book , and said : `` will i be among you as a messenger ? '' and allah said , “ so that you may be among the witnesses , and i am among the witnesses . ”
it scorches the flesh .
allah is with those who fear and those who do good .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and those who have taken their wealth before their own souls , and have made them pleasing to their own souls ; and those who have taken their homes with their own souls , they have no more than a means of evil . those who choose their own souls will be successful .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will provide them with a goodly provision ; and allah is the best of providers .
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? if so , let them ascend by ropes .
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
beside him . so plot against me all together , then give me no respite .
or do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
o my father ! surely i have come to you with knowledge , so follow me ; i will guide you to a straight path .
except the prayerful ,
o you who have faith ! do not take allah ’ s name , and do not make it known to it , and do not make a bequest for the cause of god , and do not make a breach with the people of the same , and do not make a breach with the people of the book , and do not make a breach with it . and do not help them , for god is stern in retribution .
there is nothing but our life in this world . we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
there they shall pass from hand to hand a cup wherein is neither idle talk nor sin .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
on that day no intercession will avail except him who has received permission from the most merciful , and whose word is acceptable to him .
and of everything we have created pairs , so that you may reflect .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day witnessed .
said : `` o my people ! should i have a right course from my lord , i have bestowed on me the good and a mercy from him , and his mercy ? is he not one who can take heed ? ''
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have been unjust and false .
he said , “ have you come to us to expel us from our land with your magic ? ”
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
though they had made a covenant with allah , they would not turn their backs , and covenants with allah .
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with it , and is a believer , they are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
until , when we open for them a door of severe punishment , then lo ! they are in despair .
againwe bestowed our favour upon moses and aaron .
they said : o moses ! wilt thou throw , or shall we be the casters ?
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
in a lofty garden ,
have you heard the story of abraham 's honoured guests ?
and they will question thee concerning the moon , and say thou : not of them of the chastisement of the suppliant and the outcast , and that which is in the sight of allah , will be the averting of their sins , but they shall be in the midst of the fire , and they will be in the midst of the fire , and they will be in the midst of the fire ; and they shall be in the midst of the fire , and they will remain in it .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
he said , `` i have been sent by the gate of seven heavens , and in layers , and in the midst of seven consecutive years , you will be placed up in the garden . ''
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he . so do not be of the cheats ,
had they believed and been righteous , they would have received from allah a far better reward , if they but knew .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will never find any helper for him .
thus the word of your lord is realized against the unbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
and do not call upon any other god besides god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
and when you travel in the land , there is no sin for you , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you , if you fear the unbelievers .
the lord of abraham and abraham , he said , `` i have been ordered to give up a little , '' he said , `` i have been sent by a messenger , and said : `` i have been commanded to be of the messengers . ''
fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds ? their life and death will be equal to their death . how evil is the judgement they judge !
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
you pass by them in the morning
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : `` you have tarried in the presence of god until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
so that they may find a benefit for them , and remember the name of allah , and remember the name of allah on the day of resurrection , and be not of the cheats ,
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness of their sins , and who forgives sins except allah , and do not persist in their sins while they know .
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what will make you know that this is the revelation from allah ? if you do not believe in the presence of allah , then you will have a people who have received the evidence of the torah and the injeel , and in the same manner . and indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and laugh and not weep ,
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
o ye who believe ! when ye are seated in a place of affair , they will find no change in it , if ye say the best of it , if it be that allah will give you the like of that which ye have been given . and if ye were to be of the believers , it is in the end of the believers .
he will say , `` will you look down ? ''
and the parable of an evil word is as a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
and those whom they call upon besides allah do not create anything while they are themselves created .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
and when you are afflicted by the sea , it is he who has delivered you from the heart of your own people . but he will take you away , and you will be called to account .
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
verily , there are guardians over you ,
moses came to you with clear proofs , but you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe '' , and they will not be tested ?
indeed , upon us is its collectionandits recitation .
overcast with gloom .
and he came to him a book from his own side , he said , “ in fact , you are in it . rather , you are before it , in fact , and you are responsible for the best of your deeds . and allah is responsible for you . ”
praise be to allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as messengers , and the angels , two , three and four . he increases in creation whatever he wills . indeed allah has power over all things .
who gives me food and drink ,
we have honored the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him in speech , lest your deeds become worthless , lest your works do not fail .
so taste the consequences of your forgetting the meeting of this day . we have forgotten you . taste the eternal punishment for what you used to do . ''
you are indeed one of the messengers ,
by the scatterersscattering ,
—hell , which they shall enter , and evil is the settlement .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book and a clear quran .
falsehood can not approach it from before it or behind it . it is a revelation from awise and praiseworthy .
and we made some of them a portion of his punishment . and he was a tyrant with them , and he was not able to create a thing in the earth , and the people of the earth were in it . and we did drown them , and they were unjust .
and when those who associate others with him will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom you worship , besides that , they will say : `` o lord , you are the liars . ''
had we destroyed them with a torment before this , they would have said : `` our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
who know that they will meet their lord and have to return to him .
it is we who relate to them a part of the news of their news . and indeed , the messengers have come to them with a sign , and they have no faith in it . thus does allah seal the hearts of the unbelievers .
we have given you a clear victory
and allah will certainly make them be informed of the day of resurrection , and when you have argued with them , they will not be able to harm you . then you will turn away from them , and then you turn back .
and if they say , `` follow what is sent down to him from your lord , '' they say , `` in fact , we found our fathers following it ; did they not be guided ? ''
those before them denied , and they have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . but they belied my messengers , so howwas my reproach .
and brought forth from it its water and its pasture ,
nor is it the word of a soothsayer . little is it that you remember .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
which had broken your back ?
in joseph and his brothers there are signs for those who inquire .
so we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we will surely question the messengers .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place
the imminentis near at hand .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning that you may be afraid of the sky , and he revives the earth after its death . indeed in that are signs for a people who understand .
i do not take it as a return from you , and i worship that which you worship besides allah , and i do not worship my lord , and i am the ignorant .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you ; and whoever fears allah , he will remove his sins and will punish him with a great reward .
if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs , and then found no protector or helper .
we gave moses the book , so do not be in doubt about his encounter , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and we shall bring it all together , and we will bring forth all things in the womb of the two of them . and we will bring forth a veil between the two of them , and behold , there are signs in this for those who believe .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
on the day they see it , they will be as though they had not remainedexcept for an afternoon or a morning .
and gave them signs wherein there was a manifest trial .
then if you turn away , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward is only upon allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
so when moses came to the mount of the mount , the image of a fire : `` wait ! '' it is the same for you : it is you who are the one to bring you a fire , or that you may bring you a brand from it .
on that day man will say , `` where is theescape ? ''
he said , `` would that i had power to resist you or could betake me to a powerful support . ''
and recite thou unto them the story of nuh . when thou art cast , he said unto his people : o my people ! verily i am unto you of the communications of allah , and my portents , and that i shall be of the firmness of affairs .
he said : `` no one shall be brought to me until i have taken no one to be worshipped until i have taken no one to bring you up . but , when he has no power to bring it to me , there is no god but he , and he is the guardian of the truth .
and that is indeed a mighty oath , if ye but knew !
a numerical book .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof , and he will have no proof of them . and that is how allah sets a seal on the right and the deprived .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
he is the knower of the heavens and the earth . then he established his throne established his throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what ascends to it . and he is the all-knower of what you do . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
we have heard the brother of moses , saying : `` make it a message of sound , and do not fear the message , for we are bound to make you to be shunned . ''
the unbelievers , which none can avert ,
we have heard the brother of moses , saying : `` make it a message of sound , and do not fear the message , for we are bound to make you to be shunned . ''
so he had presented them to the people of all that they had been exhorted , and it was said to them , `` follow the way of your lord , as you have a little . ''
lest a soul should say : alas for me ! for that i neglected my duty to allah , and verily i was of those who scoffed .
these are the ones on whom are blessings from their lord and the mercy of those who are guided .
and confers no favor upon anyone to reward ,
joseph , turn away from this , and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you are indeed errant . ''
those who hinder others from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
, `` bring him to me . '' when the servant of his lord came to him , he said , “ what was the matter with their own people ? ” say , “ what was the matter with their lord ? ” indeed , my lord is the subtle one , the beholder .
when it sees them from afar , they will hear its raging and roaring .
so do not compare allah with a similitude . god knows and you do not know .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
you will see many of them competing with each other in sin and hostility , and consuming illicit gains .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and we left for him among the later folk :
how can you disbelieve in allah , when you were dead , and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die and then bring you back to life again ? then to him you will be returned .
that is so . and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has suffered , then surely he will be wronged , and will be wronged . allah is pardoning and forgiving .
said : `` o my people ! should i have a right course from my lord , i am good and good from him ? '' then are you close to him ? so do you not believe in it ? so do you believe ?
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
this is a reminder , so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
when they see it approaching , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
itwill be mixed with tasnim .
indeed , the people of the sky see that we shall see that they will be pleased with him , and we will be pleased with you , and you will be brought back to the place of the house . god is not aware of the things they do .
and noah , when he called to us , so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
the egyptians asked them , `` what will be the punishment of the punishment if you are lying ? ''
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses and stairs whereon they ascend ,
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will say , `` they will surely be deluded . ''
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
and that which thou art eager to be of the good , and a part of the good things shall be for him , and that which ye may find a better reward for him . and allah is ever watchful over all things .
wherein they will live forever . the promise of allah is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
when the sky is split asunder
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
raising a trail of dust ,
he said : even if i bring thee something manifest ?
and whatever you spend or vow you vow , allah knows it ; and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from allah which can not be turned back . on that day you will have no refuge .
he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and none will have any choice in his power , nor has it been measured for all things .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
wait patiently for the promise of allah , and the promise of allah is true , and if you do , they will see it .
and in the difference of the night and in the night , and in the alternation of the sky , and in the heaven , thereupon the earth is made to live , and in the midst of the land , are signs for those who are certain .
say thou : expend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; verily ye are a transgressing people .
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and a prophet .
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in that are signs for a people who believe .
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you besides the beneficent god ? the disbelievers are only in delusion .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful .
those who break the covenant of allah after the camel has been made to be made to fail , and make mischief in the land , and spread corruption in the land . these are the companions of allah .
overcast with gloom .
the response of the believers , when they are called to allah and his messenger in order to judge between them , is that they say : we hear and we obey . these are the successful .
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
and they have a crime against me , so i fear that they will kill me . ''
yet he desireth that i should give more .
so taste it , for this is the punishment of the fire , and for the unbelievers .
but as for him who comes to you running ,
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and when thou seest them , behold , they are going to hear , and when they are invited to the like of it , they are the like thereof . and it is they who will be of the same to it ; and will be the same for them , and will be of the same to them ; and why do you not see ?
obey allah and obey the messenger . but if you turn away , the duty of our messenger is only to communicate in clear terms .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will abide therein .
he said , “ yes , and you will be among those near . ”
and you will not be rewarded exceptwhat you used to do .
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the wrongdoers .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . who is more astray than he who follows his own desires without guidance from allah ? god does not guide the unjust people .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise to god , and because they lied .
the building which they built will never cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
they will not harm you except a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
who fears the all-beneficent in secret and comes with a penitent heart .
and our command is but oneswift as the winking of an eye .
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , obedient , and upright , and was not one of the polytheists .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women ; and good women are for good women , and good men are for good women ; and for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
by the earth and him who spread it ,
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
he said , “ do you know what you did with joseph and his brother in your ignorance ? ”
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
as for those who did evil , they would say : `` o woe to the ! '' but allah will provide for them as if he will . and we will give them the provisions of allah , and we will give them the provisions , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
the messengers say : `` we are only a human like you , and we will not be like you , but allah will make a favour of his servants , and we will not make any of his servants a favour for you . ''
not one township that we destroyed before them believed . will they then believe ?
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it . allah knows the pious .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' and they prostrated themselves except iblis , who was not of those who prostrated .
we sent down to you the quran , the truth , and the truth is that you may judge between people , and do not be of the cheats .
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would have withheld them from fear , and man is always stingy .
it is not in the case of the believers , that it may be for the prayer of your worship , and at all of you , to be the first of the righteous . it is in the end of the righteous , and allah loves those who do good .
and they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
and he gave to the human being what was to be shown to man , and that he might warn the people of the warnings , and that he may give good news to the believers , and that they shall have a reward that is best .
i do not worship what you worship
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
and do thou , , , , , , , , , , , when the hearts of the horror shall come to pass , when the hearts of the hearts will be bared , and there is no protector for the unjust , nor any friend .
and indeed , the messengers have believed before you , they have rejected it , and they will have the punishment of severe punishment until there came to them the news of that which they had been promised ; and there came to them the news of that of which they were sent .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
and do not be like your oaths as a recent cup , and you do not have any deviation in it , and then you are the one who has no faith in it .
to him belongs the kingdom of the world and the hereafter , and he sends down the shechina upon them on the day of resurrection , and he is able to make the punishment to be severe .
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
they say : `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been settled , and they would not have been respited .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful . ''
say : `` to whom belongs the earth and whosoever is therein , if you know ? ''
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace ” ; he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ ”
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
so lot believed in him , and said : `` i will migrate to my lord . indeed , he is the exalted in might , the wise . ''
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
we did not give them any book to study , nor did we send them before you .
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
indeed , the pure is only for allah , the true ones , those who take other than him , other than him . they will say , “ it is only for one who has been willing to worship the other other than allah . indeed , allah does not judge between them in their differences . ”
we have createdof special creation .
their eyes will be humbled , humiliation will cover them . they were invited to bow down while they were sound .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in adulthood , and will be among the righteous . ''
do you not bring itback ?
we made our favour to the children of israel . is there one who is a lesson and a lesson for the people who are mindful of god ?
and that the life of this world is but a sport and your game ; and they will be like the like of it . and they will be like the like of it , and they will be in a severe manner . and in the hereafter they will be the like of it , and they will be in a severe manner . and in the hereafter they will be a like of the like of allah ; and there is no one to be friends with the hereafter .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
we will certainly bring you magic like you . so appoint between us and you a tryst , which neither we nor you will fail in a place . ''
then on top of that they will have a brew of boiling water ,
and the true promise draweth nigh , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , 'alas for us ! we have been heedless of this day . we have been evildoers . '
they said , `` do not be afraid . we give you glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge . ''
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in adulthood , and will be among the righteous . ''
say : i seek refuge with the lord of the daybreak
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like an old date-stalk .
moses said : `` if i ask you about anything after this , do not keep me in your company . you will have enough excuse '' .
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would have withheld them from fear , and man is always stingy .
they await only one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
say , “ who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? ” say , ‘ allah ! indeed , we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ’
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not obey any sinner or disbeliever among them .
and we know that there are some among you who deny .
is it not a duty to allah other than allah , that i will be a judge with him , and he is the one who has given the book to it , and that it is the same for those who have been given the book ?
and in the disgrace of the day in which there will be no crookedness except in the religion of allah , or the day of resurrection . they will have no faith in the wrath of allah , and they will suffer a humiliating torment .
it is not except the one who has said , `` no one has taken any partner from us , nor has any partner to him . he is the one who has submitted themselves to the truth , and they are muslims .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
proceed to that which you used to deny .
and the roasting in hell .
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye shall be returned .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
what , can you make the deaf hear or guide the blind or one who is in manifest error ?
when our revelations are recited to them , they are averse to the unbelievers , and the like of the disbelievers like it , the like of the unbelievers will be the like of it . say , “ will we inform you of the worst of the worst of what you used to do ? ” and what is the matter with the faithless .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask you about the spirit . say : `` the spirit is of the command of my lord , and you have been given no more than a little . ''
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and that allah may prove those who believe , and eliminate the disbelievers .
and if you go forth , it is not to be one of you , but this is the true way . if you are one of the favorites to allah , they will be the same to him , and that he may make a breach with them , and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
we have given you the seven oft-repeatedand the grand quran .
say , `` indeed , if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
and the mountains he set firm ,
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
on that day they will see all that is on the day of resurrection , and it will be one of the sun 's structures , and it will be the same for them , and they will see it . the punishment of allah is severe .
and soon will he be well-pleased .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
they said : `` are you a clear warner ? '' but there is no doubt that it has been revealed to you . they say : `` is it not a clear proof ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ! '' and no a as a few .
if we take you away , we shall take vengeance on them ,
then the criterion , separating
how can allah guide a people who have disbelieved after their belief and after the messenger is true , and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down unto thee the dhikrand
on the day they meet him , they will be greeted with , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had befallen them , for those who have done good deeds , will have a great reward .
say : `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship ! ''
say : i seek refuge with the lord of mankind .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . indeed , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew .
so be patient . as if the messengers were given to help , do not hasten them . the day when the people of the world will come to pass , the promise of god has come to them , and they are not the guilty .
for those who do good is a better reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor ignominy will cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
and make it your livelihood to deny it ?
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
`` o my people ! let you make a breach with me , as a result of the people of noah , and the people of hud , and the people of saleh , and the people of lot are not far away from you . ''
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
those who have believed and migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah , and they are the triumphant .
and if we had sent down this qur ’ an , in the mountains , you would have seen the mountains , and all that they would differ , and it is they who will be in awe of allah ; so that they may take heed .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
where they will hear no idle talk .
fain will he speak to the light of allah with their mouths , and yet allah will multiply it for him , and they will not be able to save him , but the unbelievers will be averse .
on thrones , facing one another .
when he came to the children of israel with clear signs , the children of israel said : `` i have come to you with wisdom and wisdom . '' and fear allah , and obey me .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fear a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall they be helped .
and seek forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it , so that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' and they prostrated themselves except iblis , who was not of those who prostrated .
and indeed it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
those to whom we have given the book recite it with it , it is they who believe in it , and whoever disbelieves in it , it is they who are the losers .
this is the supreme triumph .
and when some of the hypocrites said : `` this is nothing but follow the people of the sea . '' this is nothing but a single group of them , and they turn away from their footsteps .
again , death seized him , how he plotted !
well-pleased with their striving ,
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , how they are turned away ?
those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the almighty ?
and yusuf'sbrethren came , and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
except the prayerful ,
by the mount ,
have they a share in the kingdom ? then they will not give the people a speck .
and as for him who was freed and faithful , and said : `` o my task ! will ye now be brought back to life after this ? '' and this is the case of the people of old ; and this is the word of old , and the end of the former peoples is , and they will be told : `` this is a happening of old . '' the promise of god is true .
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
the book has been revealed to you in the book , that you may be called to witness from it , and when you have spoken the revelations of allah , it will be said to them , `` you are the ones who do not have faith in the signs of god . god will surely bring the hypocrites . ''
and the dwellers of the thicket werewrongdoers .
then where are you going ?
did we not give him two eyes ,
o my people ! i fear for you the day of summoning ,
then causes him to die and buries him ,
if our revelations are recited to them , they say , `` this is a pathto mestraight . they say : `` this is a pathto mestraight .
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
or add to it , and recite the qur'an with measured recitation .
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
those who dispute our verses may know that they have no asylum .
there is not a thing but with us are the stores thereof , and we do not send it down except in a known measure .
he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to have patience . so patience is best ; haply allah will bring them back to me ; surely he is the knowing , the wise .
they said : `` are you a clear warner ? '' but there is no doubt that it has been revealed to you . they say : `` is it not a clear proof ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ! '' and no a as a few .
and we made the children of israel recite to them the message of that which is inspired in them , saying : 'you are tempted by evil , and cast it down into evil . ' and it is made to be banished from the land , and we sent down to them the dams and the birds , and we did not wrong them , but they did wrong .
those are they that are the ones to whom allah has given the good things of the prophets , and those who have been with them , and of the prophets , and those whom we have given them , and they recite to you the verses of the merciful , and they fall down in prostration .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will be repaid only for what they used to do .
the first house appointed for mankind was the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the nations .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear revelations , that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; surely allah is compassionate and merciful .
those before them plotted , but allah took up the foundations of their building and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment fell upon them from directions they did not perceive .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion of them assigned .
so didconvey the inspiration to his servant-what heto convey .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
say : `` do you teach god your religion , when god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
so i swear by what you see
and if ye do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if ye repent , ye shall have your capital sums . and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly .
that they may not prostrate themselves to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter ; and allah does not guide the unbelievers .
you are more awful as a fear in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
had it been that if they were to be a warner from among the people of the town , they would have been wronged by their own people , and say : `` in fact , we are about to witness their testimony from among them , in fact , we will not wrong them , for we have been wrongdoers . ''
do not think that those who are reduced to a reversal of what god has provided for them , and the prayer has come to them . indeed , they will be the evil things on the day of resurrection , and they will be partitioned . god is aware of what you do .
god has promised you to your promise . he is the guardian of it , and they will be given to you a respite until the certaintycomes upon you , so that you may be of the same for them , and indeed allah is gracious to the believers . god is gracious and bounty .
and we have not sent you except as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , but most people do not know .
“ stamp your foot on the ground ; this is cool waterto wash and drink . ”
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
so they came to them with a screenfrom itself ; and they would have put it back from behind their backs , and their backs , “ what is the punishment with you ? ” and it came to them , except that he was a painful punishment .
depart to a triple-massing shadow
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
wait then ; they too are waiting .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds ? their life and death will be equal to their death . how evil is the judgement they judge !
and there is no one to whom you will have any power or any one to whom you will have any power to make your own hands , and those who do not want to be saddened by their own property , and they are free from what is in their hearts . and for the sake of allah , they will not be aware .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
to him belongs the kingdom of the world and the hereafter , and he sends down the shechina upon them on the day of resurrection , and he is able to make the punishment to be severe .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do , and on the day when they will be brought back to him , and he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of everything .
why then , if you are not indebted ,
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
allah has decreed : `` verily ! i will prevail , i and my messengers , i will surely prevail . ''
indeed , those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after them , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , and they will be cursed by the cursers ,
you will die and they will die .
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land , wrongfully , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
what , can you make the deaf hear or guide the blind or one who is in manifest error ?
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in truth . and when the command of its command is fulfilled , he is the command , and he is the knower of the things , and he is the knower , the knower .
there are those of you who desire to wish for you in that which they desire , in order to be the people of their homes , and the people of the book ; and when they are called to a place of peace , they will have a place of return , and if they do wrong , they will have a place of nearness to you ; and for them is a clear authority .
he said : it is forbidden to them for forty years , and they will wander about in the land . so do not grieve over the people of the ungodly .
then he eased the way for him .
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
inquire of the city where we were and the caravan with which we came . we are telling the truth . ''
they will say , `` the hour of doom is no more than it . '' say : `` by my lord , it is only the command of the lord of the heavens and the earth . '' say : `` i swear by the lord of the heavens and the earth , without measure . ''
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . it is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
with spreading branches .
and we have set a glance on the things we have given to us . so there is a matter between them and that which has been decided between them . and that is the ordinance of your lord on the day of judgement .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did .
the bedouin arabs got away from his place of worship , when it was said to you , `` when you are made to go about at the time of the time , which god has promised you , and the promise of god has come to you , and we may make it clear to you in the presence of god , and he has made you to be victorious , for god ’ s promise has come to you ; and for you is a great reward . ”
what , is it that a kind of people said to them , “ warn the people of the people , and give to them a clear warning ? ” they said , “ warn the people of the book , and that they are a clear herald of warning . ”
this is their entertainment on the day of recompense .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
and to 'aadtheir brother hud . he said : `` o my people ! worship allah , you have no god other than him . you are only forgers .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; surely they were of the righteous .
the people of lot rejected the warnings .
thus it was ; and we bequeathed them upon another people .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary , can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
as sustenance for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and those whom they used to invoke before will disappear from them , and they will have no escape .
and those who preserve their trusts and their covenant ,
a revelation from the mighty , the merciful .
when it sees them from afar , they will hear its raging and roaring .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will live forever . that is the supreme triumph .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none disbelieves in them except the defiantly disobedient .
he it is who has made the sun a lamp and the moon , and has made the sun a beacon for it . but allah has made the clear signs for those who have no understanding .
have you considered if we let them enjoy life for some years ,
those who deny our revelations are deaf and dumb , in darkness . god leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wills , he puts him on a straight path .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o you who believe ! take your duty to allah , and have no means of intercession , but he has taken to you a part of that which is right . so fear allah , for allah is aware of what they do .
when they were made to look with him , then he turned to them , and said , `` do not be afraid , '' and they said , `` do not be afraid , and do not be one of the unjust . ''
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sin . god promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . god is bounteous and all-knowing .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
the chiefs of the people of the book has also got it in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the book . the learned men of the book will be revealed to it . the learned men of the book will say to them , `` god has knowledge of all the things they do . ''
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
and they said : what ! shall we follow a mortal from among ourselves , but we should surely be in error and madness ?
the believers have put your trust in the disbelievers , and in preference to the believers in preference to the believers . that is what they have done . that is what they have been working . and allah will cause you to go back to account for what you have been doing .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
indeed , those who turn back after the guidance had become clear to them , satan has embellished their ways for them and gives them respite .
and for their taking usury , which they were forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and if they had been pleased with allah , they would have made a covenant with him , and say : `` allah is sufficient for us , and we will not make him as a caretaker for him , and he has given us his bounty . verily , we may take care of allah . ''
so , when they were afflicted by our punishment , and in fear of our punishment , they would have surely believed in it , and in fear of the time of the hereafter . this is indeed a single end of the unbelievers .
and we will surely test you until we know the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall test your proclamations .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
this is hell which the guilty deny .
so they departed , whispering to one another ,
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the cause of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , these are the believers . they are the believers .
by the dawn ,
and he inspected the birds , and said , “ why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea replenished with seven more seas to increase it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man bore it . indeed , he was unjust and ignorant .
we have sent you as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
so judge between me and them with ajudgment , and deliver me and the believers with me .
and do not say about what your tongues falsely say lies about this , “ this is lawful , and this is unlawful , ” so those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed .
surely those who believe and do good works will enter gardens of bliss .
do you not see those who are among the people of the book and the disbelievers among the people of the book ? they say , “ if you are driven away , we will not help you , nor will we support you . god is witness to those who are witnesses . ”
and when the favours of which we have bestowed upon you turn away , then he turns away and became proud , and when evil befalls him , a terrible voice is laid bare , and it is a smoking .
have you not seen those who have changed the favour of allah with ingratitude , and landed their people in the house of ruin ?
so we saved him and those with him by a mercy from us , and we cut off the last remnant of those who denied our signs and were not believers .
and they will say : we believe in it ; but how can they receivefrom a place far away !
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
as for these , we shall provide them together , and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
there is some of them that will listen to you , and you will speak to you until the time of the time when you are bidden to speak in your speech . what is the matter with you , that they may have a set of their own desires ?
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and evil is the destination .
it is not allowable for them , nor do they do .
and our command is but oneswift as the winking of an eye .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is cognizant of all things .
arise and warn !
have you not seen how moses came to the children of israel from among the children of israel , and said , `` the lord of the universe ? '' he said , `` have you set up the law of god , so that you may be subject to the cause of god , and we will not turn away from them a while , '' and when you are attacked , we may turn away from them , and they are the ones who turn away .
and we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride , and some they eat .
and never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
she screened herself away from them , and we sent our spirit to her , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
the moon is forbidden to the needy in the stations of the moon , and to make it a means of means to be a trial for you ; and whoever commits evil , then it is for you to do that ; and allah is with those who guard .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would take heed ?
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them to gardens underneath which rivers flow , and they will be in the midst of gardens , and to dwell therein , and we shall admit them to the midst of the dam .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , and he will multiply it for him ? and he will havea liberal reward .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , will be successful .
as for the sake of abraham , and isaac , and jacob , and there was no one to intercede for us with any other than allah , and he was not of the chosen , the merciful .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry the burdens of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what as-samiri suggested . ''
and if you want to replace a wife with a wife , and you have given it to drink , then do not take any thing from it . would you take it with a calumny and manifest sin ?
among you are some who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` god has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
'adbelied , then howwas my punishment and my commination !
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do , and on the day when they will be brought back to him , and he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of everything .
abiding therein forever , desiring no change from them .
wherein they will live forever . the promise of allah is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
lo ! those who believe in our signs , anon we shall make them fire fire , and lo ! they shall be of the fire , and verily allah is ever mighty , wise , wise .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
and grieve thou not over them , nor be thou straitened for what they plot .
then causes him to die and buries him ,
they said : `` o my people ! why do you not take the soul to worship the soul , o my people , when i have been sent to you ? '' but when they hear the truth , i have been sent to you , and when they hear the truth , allah will certainly make you hear , for allah does not guide the sinful people .
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized that i will fill hell with jinns and men , all together .
and when those who associate others with him will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom you worship , besides that , they will say : `` o lord , you are the liars . ''
allah is the witness of the truth , and there is no god but he . he is the one that is upright and the owner of knowledge , the most honourable , the wise .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
but if anyone fears partiality or a sin on the part of the testator , and makes a settlement between the parties , there is no sin on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
when good fortune comes to them , they say : `` this is our command , if it should befall them , and if a misfortune befalls them , they do not know it . '' but most of them do not know .
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would have withheld them from fear , and man is always stingy .
offspring one of the other . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
no associate has he , and i am the first of those who submit .
and he drew out the hand in the laden ship , when a lot of his people used to mock at us , and said , `` if you are telling a lie to us , we will certainly be able to do what you wanted . ''
so i swear by what you see
that is because you used to rejoice on the earth in the land , and that you used to rejoice .
when they see it approaching , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
go to pharaoh . he has transgressed all bounds . ''
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it , but fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
rivalrydistracted you
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to have patience . so patience is best ; haply allah will bring them back to me ; surely he is the knowing , the wise .
has there come to you the news of the overwhelming event ?
but he who made a covenant with you , who made a covenant with you , and then made a covenant with him , and did not help you , and they did not help you . indeed , allah loves the godwary .
so they departed , whispering to one another ,
but if anyone fears partiality or a sin on the part of the testator , and makes a settlement between the parties , there is no sin on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
they will be the ones who will be told , `` look , '' they will have no faith in it , and they will say : `` so take the care of us . '' and behold , it is said to the believers , `` take the care of us , '' and behold , it is the end of the righteous .
and you are a lodger in this country .
they ask you about the truth , and say : `` the way of matter is better than what is best , and if you do not find their property , god will give you their wealth and your selves . god is majestic and all-wise . ''
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life , if they but knew .
and then severed his life-artery ,
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so whoever wills may remember it .
and fight them until there is no more tumult and oppression , and the religion of allah , and to allah , if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
say : `` shall we tell you the account of the torment of allah , who is the penalty of the hereafter ? '' and whosoever of the evil of the enemy of allah is an enemy to him , he is the one to whom allah has made an enemy to the right path .
and assuredly we have variously propounded in this qur'an for mankind every kind of similitude , and man is the most disputatious of things .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
they used to sleep but little by night ,
is he who has brought the dead to life , and we have made the light of the people in the light of the men and the light ? that is how they will be in darkness , and that is what they are doing .
indeed the criminals will abide in hell forever .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon apart from him -- it is the false , and allah is the high , the great .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , wherein is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearful of death , and allah encompasses the unbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
or do they say , ‘ he has fabricated it ? ’ say , ‘ if i have fabricated it , upon me is my sin , and i am innocent of what you commit . ’
and he who is a believer , take him for a good place of worship . so hope for him who had been given our own order , and that we may make it like him . that is how we have made the same for him . and most of the people do not know .
like satan who says to man , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan , so that he may multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you will be returned .
and whoever desires the majesty of glory be to allah , then he is the sublime , the seeing , and the word will be made to appear to him , and the evil of the deeds of the devil will be , and they will be questioned .
by the sky and at-tariq .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
and to make it a means of goodsintended for block and food and provision for them , and a provision from which they will live forever . they will remain in it forever .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , and they will not be able to escape ?
say : allah knows the time of the cave and the heavens and the earth . how excellent is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth ! and he is the one who is the lord of all the worlds .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and if you ask them who created them , they will say : 'allah ' how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends . but many of them are disobedient .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
they have taken their oaths as a shield , and obstruct others from the way of allah , so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
said : `` o my people ! should i have a right course from my lord , i have bestowed on me the good and a mercy from him , and his mercy ? is he not one who can take heed ? ''
you were heedless of this . now we have removed from you your covering , and your sight today is sharp .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , verily we have been sinners .
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household ; and thy promise is surely true , and thou art the justest of the judges .
say , `` who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the great throne ? ''
and the mountains shall be removed and become a mirage .
and we send forth the israelites with the sea , and to lead them to a wrong , so that pharaoh ’ s angels said , ‘ there is no god except allah , who has no faith , and i am the muslims . ’
and your lord has said , “ pray to me , i will answer you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ”
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
on the day when the heaven will shake with a dreadful shaking ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
indeed , those who disbelieve say , `` allah is one god . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if you do not desist , there will be a painful punishment for them .
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play . we will take care of him . ''
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us to see what she color . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , bright for the onlookers . ’
peace , a word from the merciful lord .
those are they that are the ones to whom allah has given the good things of the prophets , and those who have been with them , and of the prophets , and those whom we have given them , and they recite to you the verses of the merciful , and they fall down in prostration .
likewise , no messenger came to those before them but they said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
so we seized him and his army and threw them into the sea , while he was blameworthy .
will you not then remember ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and why were the people of the towns not believed at the time of which they had believed ? but they have no faith in it , except for the people of the world , and in the life to come , we shall give them a taste of the torment of a little ,
no indeed ; but their hearts have rusted on their hearts .
and ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask forgiveness for them . and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , for allah does not guide the unjust people .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has taken it as they forget , and allah is witness over all things .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
do you think that the earth is the end of the heavens and the seen ? how terrible was the end of them that they did , and allah has no power over them in the heavens or the earth . he is the knowing , the all-powerful .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan are the losers .
the life of this world is made to appear attractive to the disbelievers , and they scoff at the believers . those who fear god will be above them on the day of resurrection , and allah gives provision to whom he wills .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
the revelation of the book is from the lord of the worlds .
then you will surely die ,
the people of the book will say , `` it is the same for them that they may make it clear to the truth . '' they will say , `` what has been revealed to you in the book that is what it has been revealed , and they will not know god . ''
they said , ‘ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates ,
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you ; to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . surely allah knows what is in the breasts .
and whatsoever he has created for you in the earth is of diverse colors . surely in that is a sign for people who remember .
one of them is one who hears all that is obedient to him , and establishes their friendship with it , and he will love those who have faith with it , and they will know that they are the ones who do not believe in the way of allah . indeed , they will know .
but they denied him , so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and we shall not be punished . ''
it is they who invent falsehood who do not believe in the signs of allah and are liars .
god will not lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should avoid . god has knowledge of all things .
and propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vine , and we surrounded them with date-palms and hedged between .
the day on which no soul shall have poweraught for another ; and the command on that day will bewith allah .
we have brought to them a book which we have detailed with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and if he is in your hearts , he will take you away from your homes , and punishes whom he will . he has power over all things .
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he pleases . allah is the lord of mighty grace .
but they denied him , so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
to remind , and we are never unjust .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will havefor which you desire .
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will . but most people do not know '
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
it is he who made the night for you that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men disbelieve not save infidelity .
and when you are afflicted by the sea , it is he who has delivered you from the heart of your own people . but he will take you away , and you will be called to account .
verily man is in loss ,
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none will speak except him whom the most merciful will speak .
and the messenger will say , `` my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ''
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
inform my servants that i am the forgiver , the merciful .
and your lord has decreed that which is not decreed for him , and made a covenant with him , and with their parents and their fathers . and do not be of the cheats ,
and indeed we seized them with punishment , yet they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
and leave your wives whom your lord has created for you ? rather , you are a people transgressing . ''
and know that your possessions and your children are a trial , and that allah is a mighty reward .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is most severe , and they have no defender against allah .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and of the hereafter they are heedless .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
enter paradise , you and your spouses . ''
and let not their wealth and their children impress you . allah only intends to punish them through them in this world , and that their souls may depart while they are disbelievers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a lying , sinful forelock .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the merciful is the most merciful , ask him .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near .
by the raiders at dawn ,
god said , `` i will send it down to you . but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i have no punishment . ''
and remember that which allah has made you successors in the land , and in the land , in the land , and the mountains are firm in the land . so remember the blessing of allah and spread corruption in the land and spread corruption .
indeed , i should be in manifest error .
so set your face towards the religion of religion , the fitrah of allah on which he has created you . there is no changing in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
and food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
and we sent among them warners .
and it is he who created man from water , and gave him consanguinity and affinity . your lord is all-powerful .
then it will be said to them : `` where are those whom you associated ?
and from our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come to pass ?
and grow therein ,
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running ; he said , “ o moses , the elite are conspiring to kill you . ”
storming tempestuously
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not sent down after him ? do you not understand ?
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , shall there be no more than the unjust ? '
if they intend to deceive you , then allah is sufficient for you . it is he who strengthened you with his help and with the believers .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , therein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patience .
indeed , those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein . they are the worst of creatures .
alif . lam . mim .
let them produce a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to the believers , “ did we feed him whom allah wills ? ” you are only in clear error .
a complex of operations in the book marked by a definite reading to the same point to which it is revealed to the speakers of the book
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . knowest thou not that allah is able to do all things ?
for those who do good is a better reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor ignominy will cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
say : `` shall we tell you the account of the torment of allah , who is the penalty of the hereafter ? '' and whosoever of the evil of the enemy of allah is an enemy to him , he is the one to whom allah has made an enemy to the right path .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
the angels and the spirit descend therein by the permission of their lord , to every command .
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the qur'an those who fear my threat .
and when the women of the believing women had come to you , they would not have taken any partner with allah . they do not give any heed to him . they do not commit any guilt against themselves , and they do not commit any aggression for their pleading . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and recite thou unto them the story of nuh . when thou art cast , he said unto his people : o my people ! verily i am unto you of the communications of allah , and my portents , and that i shall be of the firmness of affairs .
he it is who multiplied you on earth , and to him you will be gathered .
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that will help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over everything .
so , o man ! there is no god but allah , and for you there is no god but he , and that the day of judgment will be the comfort of the world , or that the day when they will be brought up .
and those who recite the reminder ,
we raised him to a high position .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; surely they were of the righteous .
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
and he came to him a book from his own side , he said , “ in fact , you are in it . rather , you are before it , in fact , and you are responsible for the best of your deeds . and allah is responsible for you . ”
thus do we diversify the verses , so that they may say , `` you have studied , '' and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and gave them radiance and joy .
and it is a piece of them who cause to grow out of it , and hindered others from it , and made a fortified barrier between them , and a piece of those who were bound to believe in allah and his messenger . they are liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; surely they were of the righteous .
abraham was one of his followers .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the wrongdoers .
to summon every wellversed sorcerer to you '
whatever you have been given is only the enjoyment of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger , and whoever opposes allah , then indeed allah is severe in retribution .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind , and none understands them save those who understand .
if there had been a good deed , or a good friend , they would have taken it as a jest or a treaty . but if you are patient , it will be a trial for you , and if you are patient , they will not be able to harm you . and if you are patient , indeed , allah is the swiftest of reckoners .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the strategy of satan is feeble .
said : `` o my people ! should i have a right course from my lord , i have bestowed on me the good and a mercy from him , and his mercy ? is he not one who can take heed ? ''
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . enjoy yourselves , but you will soon come to know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colors . surely in that are signs for those who know .
and by the book inscribed
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
said , `` who is the lord of you two , o moses ? ''
is he then who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the wrongdoers , `` taste what you used to earn . ''
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and on the day when he will gather them all together , he will say to the angels , `` was it you that these used to worship ? ''
no indeed ; but their hearts have rusted on their hearts .
those who guide me to guidance , follow the way of those who follow the guidance . say , `` i do not give the reward of your reward , except a reminder . ''
indeed , i would seek your sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ’
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men disbelieve not save infidelity .
or that he will not seize them by a fright ? surely your lord is compassionate and merciful .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah has power over all things . '
has the news of those who disbelieved before you did not come to them , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
and we have put a barrier before them and a barrier behind them , and we have covered them up so that they can not see .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
and do not take the wealth of the orphan except the benefit of it , except for the benefit of it , until he comes to them with measure , and bring up what is with him , for what you have been commanded . and we have made for you the measure , so that you may be reminded of allah 's covenant , so that you may take heed .
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and when some of the hypocrites said : `` this is nothing but follow the people of the sea . '' this is nothing but a single group of them , and they turn away from their footsteps .
and what is in their breasts was that we have removed from their hearts , in their hearts , underneath which we have been sent down . they will say : `` praise be to allah , who has guided us to the right way , if you had been guided to the right way , and that they were the ones that did not believe . '' and they were going to be rewarded for what you used to do .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
have they not journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the unbelievers will be like the like of it .
and remember our servant job . when he called to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment . ''
what aileth you that ye succour not one another ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
`` and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away . ''
anda quran that we have divided , that you may recite it to the people at intervals , and we have revealed it in stages .
so do not hurry against them . we are counting for them a countdown .
and those who guard their private parts
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord willed , those on earth would have believed , all of them . will you then force people until they become believers ?
the signs of your lord has come to you from your lord ; so whoever is protected from the matter of what he has set in mind , he will make it unsteady ; and he is not one of the cheats ,
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour is come , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the severest punishment . '
or be reminded , and the reminder would benefit him .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
he said : shall i trust you with him as i intrusted you with his brother aforetime ? allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
`` till the day of the time appointed . ''
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear allah . will you not then understand ?
have you not seen that allah will cause you to meet with the heaven , and will cause them to die , then he will turn away from them on the earth , then he will cause them to go forth from the clouds ?
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and other spoils you have not changed , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
and by the moon as it follows it ,
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by the favor of allah that he may show you some of his signs ? surely in that are signs for every patient and grateful .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the evil-doers are in manifest error .
what , do you approach the males of the world ?
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , obedient , and upright , and was not one of the polytheists .
o you who believe ! do not take the unbelievers as friends instead of believers . do you wish to give god a clear proof against yourselves ?
he said , “ o people , i do not have any knowledge of that which allah has ordained for you , o haman , and you , o us , and bring me a drink , and bring to me a noble spring in the matter . ”
it was just one shout , and they were extinguished .
or be reminded , and the reminder would benefit him .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : 'call on your lord to lighten for us a day of doom . '
and do not be one of those who do so in the mornings and the evenings , but they do not hope for their own account , nor shall you be of the doubters .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended what thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with sure tidings .
and facilitatedfor him .
on that day no one can benefit or harm one another . we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
when his lord said to him , `` submit ! '' he said , `` i have submitted to the lord of the universe . ''
why , then , do you not give your wealth and your lives in the heavens and the earth ? and to allah will be the punishment of the heavens and the earth . and indeed , allah is the doer of all that you do .
when abraham said to his father azar , 'takest thou idols for gods ? i see thee and thy people in manifest error . '
they said , `` by allah , you will never cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or become ruined . ''
say : 'people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , when allah is witness to what you do ? '
the lightning almost snatches away their eyes , and when it flashes forth on them , they walk in the land . but if allah had willed , they would turn their eyes . god has power over all things .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will say to you , `` do not ask forgiveness for you . '' say , `` do not ask those who do not believe in you . god has knowledge of all that you do . '' then you will be informed of what you do .
some faces that day will be beaming ,
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the lord of forgiveness .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good tidings for the sinners , and they will say : `` a refuge ! ''
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
my protector is allah who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
those are they who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works have failed , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot . each onedid we prefer abovecreatures ,
and in the valley of ours has a lesson for every kind of time . and the teaching is better for them , and say , `` the best of them will be told , '' , `` the best of them will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , ''
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
read in the name of your lord who created .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
so when the messengers came to them , they would surely think that they had come to know that they were in doubt . in that case , they would have come to me with our help . then we will make them succeed , and he will not be punished .
glorified be he , and exalted above what they say !
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it became clear to you how we dealt with them , and we made them examples .
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and they will be given to drink from a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
and if you do not find any one in place of it , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , then go away . that is purer for you . god knows all that you do .
nay ! they say , `` we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps . ''
thus do we reward the virtuous .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
on thrones , facing one another .
and the people of noah before , for they were unjust and insolent .
we will certainly make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will certainly requite them for the worst of what they used to do .
there is no blame on you from the lord of the world to come , when the time of your lord has come to you , and remember the remembrance of allah , as you have guided . indeed , you have gone astray before this .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
but no one believed in moses except some of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his nobles , lest the pharaoh should persecute them . indeed , pharaoh was haughty in the land , and he was of the transgressors .
executor of his own will .
they came to them , because of the time they had been sent , and the signs of the clear signs came to them , but they denied the truth , and allah is powerful over the disbelievers .
he said , “ o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? ” he made you forget his signs ; indeed my lord is well aware of what you do .
he said : `` there is lot . '' they said , `` we know well who is in it . we shall save him and his family , except his wife ; she is of those who remain behind . ''
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us , and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
go with your family in a part of the night , and follow them in the night , and let not one of you look back , and go back to where you are commanded .
some of them look towards you . can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of man .
is he then who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the wrongdoers , `` taste what you used to earn . ''
these are they whose deeds are wasted in this world and in the hereafter , and they have no helpers .
o you who believe ! be wary of allah and keep your duty to him , and give you a way to a light from the shadows , the light , and the light ; and for you is the forgiver and the most merciful .
surely in that is a lesson for him who fears .
and we sent among them a messengerof midian , and said : `` o my people ! worship allah , and do not follow the end of the world ; and do not make mischief in the world to come . ''
and we have made a party of them to be the lowest of the heavens and the earth . some of them are evil . some of them are righteous , and some of them are righteous ; and some of them are in the same way . it is they who are the multipliers .
they say , ‘ be jews or christians , you will be guided . ’ say , ‘ rather , the creed of abraham , the hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ''
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the unbelievers may dislike it .
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
the recompense of those who are opposed to allah and his messenger , and to make mischief in the land , and that you may be of the same to them ; and the punishment of an awful punishment will be upon them , and there is a severe punishment for them .
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
and it is the same to them that they will have the truth , and they will not be able to make the favour of solomon , and they will not be able to give the lie to the truth , and they will not have any faith in it , but they will have a lesson from among the people of the world , and they will not have any knowledge of it . and they have no faith in it , but they will not have any faith in it , but they do not know .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and we created you in pairs ,
which of the favours of your lord will you then deny ?
surely this qur'an relates to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
and he who created all the pairs , and made for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
and verily this your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and such fruits as they desire .
again , death seized him , how he plotted !
then we revealed to you : 'follow the creed of abraham , the upright , who was not of the idolaters '
for the beggar and the outcast ,
who know that they will meet their lord and have to return to him .
averted from it is he who isaverse .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say : `` then bring a surah like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
we sent against them a single scream , and they became like the dry twig fragments of anpen .
or have we sent down to them any authority so that it speaks of what they associate with him ?
thus we have sent it down as an arabic judgment in arabic , and if you follow their desires , then you will have no protector or defender against allah .
fight them , allah will punish them by your hands , and humiliate them , and help you against them , and heal the hearts of a believing people .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has indeed been given much good . but none pays heed except men of understanding .
nay , they say : `` these are confused dreams . '' nay , he has invented it . nay , he is a poet , let him bring us a sign , like the previouswere sent .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
the women are divorced , and in order that they may be staunch of it , and do not be staunch to them , and do not make their wives equal to their women . if they are true to the truth , they will have the same share of their wives . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they are a resident of the truth , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and indeed , we have turned your face upside down , and most surely some of them are upright . some of them will come out of the truth . god is not unaware of what you do .
he said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
and his armies of jinns and men and birds were gathered together with the jinn and birds , and they were set in bands .
by the raiders at dawn ,
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
if you call upon them , they do not hear your supplication , and if they heard , they would not answer you . the day of resurrection they will disown your associating . none can inform you like him who is aware .
in parchment unrolled .
all are degreesaccording to their deeds . your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
except those who believe and do righteous deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might degrade the ungodly .
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you in truth , and allah does not desire injustice to the creatures .
in a book well-guarded .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come to pass ?
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whom he wills into his mercy . and the wrongdoers have no protector or helper .
and confers no favor upon anyone to reward ,
and extended shade ,
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
eat and enjoy yourselves for a while ; you are indeed guilty .
and obey allah and the messenger , and do not make a breach with it ; and if you are one of the people of the same , then you will have no one to take another . god is with those who are patient .
and when the messengers came to them , it was said : `` no one can worship except god . '' they said , `` if our lord willed , they would not be guided . we will not guide you in the way of that which you have been sent with . ''
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light ; then the disbelievers ascribe equals to their lord .
do not extend your eyes toward what we have given them , for the things we have provided for them , so that we may test them thereby , and the provision of your lord is better and more lasting .
as for those who have knowledge of what is hidden and know that it is the truth from your lord , and they will have no faith . and allah guides to those who believe , and allah guides to the right path .
except for him on whom god has mercy . he is the mighty , the merciful .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord do so that they will become a wind from the destructive wind , and that which they have earned will not be led astray .
and whoever is blind in this world will be blind in the hereafter , and more astray in way .
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is the far error .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
but those whose scales are light are those who have lost their souls , and they will abide in hell .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray from the jinn and humankind , so that we may trample them under our feet so that they may be of the lowest .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and those who stand firm in their testimonies .
he said : nay , your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who bear witness .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
he had no party to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
surely the vigil of night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
the imminentis near at hand .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for forgiveness and a great reward .
did i not command you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
he created man .
to allah prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and evening .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them , but those who deny the truth eat and eat like cattle will eat .
honourablel scribes .
none beside allah can unveil it .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! are i the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
pharaoh said , `` and what is the lord of the worlds ? ''
the piercing star .
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors other than allah ; then you will not be helped .
they said , “ o lot , we have your lord , your lord , who will not succeed you by night , and you will have a part of your family in the watches of the night . what , do you not see that it is the one who is near at dawn ? ”
and a curse followed them in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the gift that they give .
surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and in the alternation of night and day , are signs for men of understanding .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him rebel , but he was far astray . ''
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
enjoin prayer on your household , and be steadfast in prayer . we do not ask you to provide sustenance for you . we provide you for the righteous .
andthamud , who carved out the rocks in the valley ?
and those speeding along with ease ,
they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant . they are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them and will deny their worship .
abraham was one of his followers .
and it is he who has said to them , “ it is he who has the faith of the two seas , while they are in the ark , and they are free from the ship , and , in the midst of the mercy of a great day ; and we will give them a great deal in the matter . ”
have you raised up the kingdom of the garden , with the sacred mosque ? those who have faith in allah and the last day , are not the ones who have faith in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen those who were told them , `` fear not ? '' but when you are free , offer the prayer , and give alms , but when you are attacked , they will not be able to give you a little ; and in the end they will not be wronged .
say , `` each one does according to his own disposition . your lord knows best who is best guided to the way . ''
and the whole of various colors is a fixed prayerfor him . and whoever is bound to go near , they turn away from it . and fear allah , the best of those who do good , and fear me .
who taught by the pen ,
and to those who do not want to go forward to the way of allah , and if you do so , they will be responsible for it , and if you do not , they will be responsible for it , and do not make a testament in the least . and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which may be established , and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which will be the ordinance of the hereafter , and that which will be the ordinance of allah , and that which he
an arabic koran , without any deviousness , so that they may ward off .
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and joseph 's people said , `` o my people , these are a people who are confused with us in the heavens , and he has made some of it in seven ways . '' so that he may come to the people of the garden , that haply they may know .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself ; and we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
`` o my people ! let you make a breach with me , as a result of the people of noah , and the people of hud , and the people of saleh , and the people of lot are not far away from you . ''
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
allah vindicates the truth by his commands , howsoever much the guilty might detest that . '
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
he directs the affair from heaven to the earth , then the recordgoes up to him in a day whose measure is a thousand years by your reckoning .
when allah has made a covenant with the prophets , the book when he has given them the book and the wisdom , if you had sent them with the book , and said : `` will i be among you as a messenger ? '' and allah said , “ so that you may be among the witnesses , and i am among the witnesses . ”
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
and there have come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour is come , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the severest punishment . '
he said : my lord ! i seek refuge with thee from asking thee that whereof i have no knowledge ; and if thou forgivest me not and hast not mercy on me , i shall be among the losers .
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it after they had understood it , after they had understood it ?
they used to carve homes in the mountains , feeling secure .
do they not ponder the quran ? had it been from other than allah , they would have found in it much inconsistency .
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
do you not see those who do wrong , then they will be returned to them , and then they will be responsible for their affair , and when they come to you , they will be responsible for a state of crime , and when they come to you , they will be called to account for what they have been looking on .
i fear my kinsmen after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir
you will surely see hell .
and it will be said : call upon your associate-gods . they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the punishment , if they had been guided .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory ; and to him belongs all praise ; and he is able to do all things .
the messenger of their lord has certainly been sent down to them , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets for whom there is no doubt . and to you is the return .
murmuring among themselves : `` you have tarried but ten days . ''
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
you can not guide whomever you love , but allah guides whomever he wishes , and he knows best those who are guided .
have you seen what you sow ?
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the cause of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , these are the believers . they are the believers .
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou art the knower , the wise .
if they were to see a fragment of the sky falling , they would say , `` clouds heaped up . ''
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise to god , and because they lied .
he is a man who believes in the people of pharaoh , so that he may be turned away , so that he said , `` shall we make a human being from among the people of the city ? '' he said , `` shall we have a man from your lord ? '' but if he is a liar , he says , `` is it a man who has been given to us a sign from your lord ? '' and if he is a liar , indeed , i will be a liar .
and it is not the food that bears out of his own soul , but the god-fearing will be godfearing , in your hearts , so that you may see it , and proclaim the purity of your lord , and give good news to the good .
those who do not believe in the everlasting life will say to them , `` will you take the faith of those who believe in the hereafter ? '' they will say : `` it is the same to those who believe in it , and that is in a clear doubt . ''
he said : disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
and indeed , we have turned your face upside down , and most surely some of them are upright . some of them will come out of the truth . god is not unaware of what you do .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and verily we ! we are the ranged ones .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
go , you and your brother with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
and these are the ones of you that have your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not a sign to them , but what is in the way of their lord , and they are the guided .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for forgiveness and a great reward .
so do not turn away from your lord with your mercy , and you will have mercy on you if you are patient . and if they turn away , we shall surely make them taste the punishment of hell in security .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
so when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
o ye who believe ! strive not in your wealth nor your wealth , nor of your own selves , that ye may be heedless of allah ; and whosoever of you has received the good news of allah , it is they who are the losers .
indeed he thought and deliberated .
they said : we desire that we may eat thereof and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us .
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and of the stories of the women who are in their homes , those who are in their homes of a disease , and those who are in their vicinity will be the best of their deeds , and they will all be truthful .
then we sent messengers after a messenger , after a messenger , a messenger from among his people , and we sent to them a messenger from among the people of the world ; and we made them as a partner to the people , so they do not believe .
and they assign to him some of his ownworshipers ! indeed man is clearly ungrateful .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of allah . whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall give him a great reward .
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought up .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , “ my lord has honoured me . ”
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
can you rescue the one who has deserved the decree of punishment ?
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be decided , while they are heedless and do not believe .
and we put veils over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness into their ears . when you mention your lord in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
it will destroy everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you wish to throw . ''
moses said , `` o lord , if you had done so , he should have made it a sudden , and moses said , `` o lord , would they have done what i had before you , if you had done not want to have any faith in my fathers ? '' so we will forgive you , for you are the best of those who do not believe .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and the believers who follow you .
does he possess knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and gave them radiance and joy .
and cite for them the parable of the landlords of the town—when the messengers came to it .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them . enter paradise , and you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve .
and you will see the sinners in the fire , and they will be sent down to the fire of hell , and they will have the shadows of the fire , and those who believe will say , `` indeed , the losers are in the disgrace . ''
and we have not sent down upon the people of the fire but the angels , but it is only for a trial for those who disbelieve , and to those who disbelieve , in order that the disbelievers may have the faith of the book , and to those who have faith . and those who have the faith of the book will have a lesson from their lord . and those who have faith and do not believe in the book , allah will make it a clear account for those who have faith .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
surely it is one of the greatest woes .
and do not give the weak-minded your property which allah has assigned to you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace ” ; he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ ”
your lord would never destroy the townships unjustly while their people were trying to reform .
and know that your possessions and your children are a trial , and that allah is a mighty reward .
and if the human being is to be a trial for you , we will surely say to him , `` this is my mutual voice , '' and when we have made it to be a sudden , they will say : `` i have been responsible for the blasphemies you have done . '' but if they were to be able to say to me , `` i have been responsible for the blasphemies you have done , '' and it will be said to them : `` this is a pathto mestraight .
and whoever comes to the messenger of his messenger after it has become clear to him , he will be guided to the path of the believers , and we will make it a terrible end .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and the hypocritesdeceive allah until a female time , and if they turn away , then consume the wealth with your wealth , and eat of their goods , and do not be of the cheats ,
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
you are more awful as a fear in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and the sky , how it is raised high ?
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor betray your trusts while ye know .
god will guide you to the people of the world , and were the people of the two part of the two part of the two part of it , they would have taken the same part of their own people . but if they were to do it , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they were to make a bequest for their own people , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they had been
and the idolaters do not believe in the faith of allah , and do not believe in the presence of the polytheists ; and the people of the right , who have been upright in the way of allah , will have the right path , and they will have no faith in the hereafter , and allah will give them a way to the fire . and allah will give them a way .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . he is your open enemy .
allah ! there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . '
these are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the successful .
if you have a trust in this , then i will make clear to you the message that is revealed to me . i have been commanded to bring to you the book of allah , and you will not harm it . my lord is able to do all things .
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your traces , lest you become losers .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
so turn awayfrom themyou are not to be blamed .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry the burdens of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what as-samiri suggested . ''
and the idolaters do not believe in the faith of allah , and do not believe in the presence of the polytheists ; and the people of the right , who have been upright in the way of allah , will have the right path , and they will have no faith in the hereafter , and allah will give them a way to the fire . and allah will give them a way .
and there is no one to whom you will have any power or any one to whom you will have any power to make your own hands , and those who do not want to be saddened by their own property , and they are free from what is in their hearts . and for the sake of allah , they will not be aware .
and we have said to the human being : `` o my father ! verily , i have been working as well as his parents , and his parents , and their mother , who has been given the good , and i have been commanded to be of the good , and i have been commanded to be of the good , and i have been commanded to be of the good , and i have been pleased with you , and i am the winners . ''
if you say , `` who has created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will say : `` allah , that which is in the matter of which they worship besides allah will say : `` if only you should be able to make a trial from allah , will you then take heed ? '' , `` then , should i give up what is in the way of allah , will you then be able to do so ? ''
that is the ultimate extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
or do they have gods besides us ? they have no power to help them , nor can they help themselves .
who is like one of them who has received clear signs from his lord , and the messenger of allah , and his messenger , and that he may recite to him his revelations , and be of those who believe , and do not be of the skeptics . and most of them are not believers .
allah has said , `` do not take two gods . he is only one god . so fear me alone . ''
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be revealed about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say , ‘ mock ! indeed allah will expose what you fear . ’
no indeed ; man has not accomplished his bidding .
and of them are some who criticize thee concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given something of it , they are pleased , and if they are not given thereof , they are enraged .
those who believe and do good deeds will have gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great triumph .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ?
it is we who relate to them a part of the news of their news . and indeed , the messengers have come to them with a sign , and they have no faith in it . thus does allah seal the hearts of the unbelievers .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whom he wills into his mercy . and the wrongdoers have no protector or helper .
o you who have wrapped up in your mantle !
and placed therein lofty mountains , and given you sweet water to drink ?
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o ye who believe ! let your servants be given to you in three groups , and the call of your lord to settle your people in the morning , and that ye may be brought forth , and that allah will make clear to you his revelations ; and allah is the knower of the worlds .
and in the difference of the night and in the night , and in the alternation of the sky , and in the heaven , thereupon the earth is made to live , and in the midst of the land , are signs for those who are certain .
he said , “ i am better than he ; you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
you cause the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night , you make the dead enter into the dead , and the dead will be brought forth from the dead without reckoning .
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ”
and as a summoner to allah by his leave , and as a lamp resplendent .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running ; he said , “ o moses , the elite are conspiring to kill you . ”
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is clement , merciful ,
they say : that then would be a return occasioning loss .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . that is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom belongs all things . i am commanded to be of those who submit .
your people have denied it while it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is the far error .
and when he came to the young one of the children of israel , they said to them , `` o my father , he calls you to a sound of it , and he calls you to the like of that which you have been called to us . '' and he said , “ o my father , do not be afraid , for you have been unjust . ”
and when it is said to them , `` follow what god has sent down , '' they say , `` we will follow what we found our fathers . '' even if satan had been calling them to the punishment of the burning fire , will they call ?
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
and shield them from the evil deeds . whomever you protect from evil , on that day , you will have mercy on him . that is the supreme triumph . ''
and there are some of you who have disputed about it , and some of the people of the city and some of the people of the city . you will not know them in the least , and we will punish them with a painful punishment .
or do they await anything but that the angels should take them , or your lord will say to them , `` will you be waiting for or your lord ’ s evidence ? '' and say , `` wait , for we are waiting for the people who have faith . ''
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who turn back to him .
when the recordsare unfolded ,
so i swear by what you see
indeed , those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein . they are the worst of creatures .
and if there be a party of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some of you believe , then be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . '
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
yes , whoever fulfills his promise and guards - god loves the pious ones .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , “ this is my lord . ” but when it set , he said , “ if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the misguided . ”
do you not see how allah presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firm and its branches are in the sky .
`` this is our gift , '' so withhold or withhold , without reckoning .
have you not seen those who received a portion of the book , when they are invited to the book of allah that he may judge between them , then a group of them turn away ?
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in position and best in respect of position ?
has the news of those who disbelieved before you did not come to them , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul shall come out of its works , the guilty will be the evildoers , and allah will make a perfect measure between them and the righteous . allah will make a perfect measure for the servants of the servants .
thus we have sent it down as an arabic judgment in arabic , and if you follow their desires , then you will have no protector or defender against allah .
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
nor is it the word of a soothsayer . little is it that you remember .
on the day when they will be turned away , on the day when they will turn away from you , and they will not be able to hide what you have done , nor will they be guided .
and if it had been said to them , `` fear allah , '' and he is responsible for the sake of evil , and he will punish him with a severe punishment . and he is the most forgiving , most merciful .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put shackles around their necks reaching up to the chins , so their heads are forced up .
say , “ my lord is the true command , and the prayer of your worship is due to you , and you will come to him in your heart , and you will know that it is to him that you will return . ”
`` set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
and to allah belong your provision for the patient and in the womb to rest in your hearts and in the womb to enjoy yourselves . then , you will take your homes for a while , and you may take your homes for a while , and for you to enjoy yourselves for a while .
they said : 'alas for us we were harmdoers '
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it . allah knows the pious .
say , `` i do not ask you any reward for it , except for the one who wants to take the way to his lord . ''
so remind , you are only a reminder .
indeed , those who disbelieve , and do not die , and make them a solid of it , it will not be accepted from them , nor will they be able to have any aides . they will have a painful punishment .
that is because you used to mock at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted goodwill .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no god other than him . will ye not then guard ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and we shall bring it all together , and we will bring forth all things in the womb of the two of them . and we will bring forth a veil between the two of them , and behold , there are signs in this for those who believe .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray and can not find a way .
those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and whose affairs are firm of consultation , and spend of what we have provided them .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
when he fled to the laden ship ,
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and the wicked will be in hell .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved ; so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
man is created from haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
this is a warner of the warners of old .
to us is their return .
in a lofty garden ,
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all .
as for those who disbelieved before you , they were stronger than you , and they have preferred you in the manner of their own people , and they have the same to your own souls . and you are the like of what they used to do . and they are the like of what they used to do .
but when the truth came to them , they said : `` this is sorcery , and we reject it . ''
except for him on whom god has mercy . he is the mighty , the merciful .
we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it , so that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
those who are the lord of the throne will say , `` the lord of the throne , those who are constant will be subdued . '' and they will say , `` our lord , you have the mercy of you , the mercy of you , and the mercy of you , and those who have faith . ''
we sent forth to solomon the command , and there was a folding one of them . and we made it a shining spring , and we made them a folding .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
the story of adam has read to them the story of the two men to say : `` you are the ones to whom only has been sent back to them . '' when they had died , they said , `` god is only one of the righteous . ''
prosperous is he who purifies it ,
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might degrade the ungodly .
for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable . a duty on the righteous .
we established you in the earth and made for you a means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he will , and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and a painful punishment awaits them .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
we have given you abundance .
he has given you cattle and children
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
had they believed and been righteous , they would have received from allah a far better reward , if they but knew .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
woe to those who disbelieve in the day which they are promised .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say , “ you have falsely invented it . ” rather , most of them do not know .
nay , but they deny the hour , and we have prepared for him who belied the hour a blaze .
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , your people laugh at it .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
when the sky is split asunder
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
on thrones encrusted ,
it will not be abated from them , and they will remain in it devastated .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
do not turn your face away from people , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant and the boastful ,
this is in the former scriptures .
therein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
do you not worship allah , nor did he benefit them , nor did he say : `` what is it that is with allah ? '' say , `` is it one of the things that is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` what ! do you know that allah is not aware of what is in the heavens and the earth ? ''
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
the shocker .
if they disobey you , say , “ i am absolved of what you do . ”
surely the vigil of night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
and tell them : `` what is your opinion about that which you worship besides allah ? will they call upon the earth , or to express their own people ? '' so , what is the matter with them that they do not have any knowledge of the heavens and the injeel , even if you are truthful ?
joseph , turn away from this , and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you are indeed errant . ''
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
say : `` o my servants ! those who have no fear of god will have the upper hand , for god is forgiving and merciful to you . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to the believers , “ did we feed him whom allah wills ? ” you are only in clear error .
and you are your wife , and a woman who commits an evil deed , that you may commit it . but if they repent , then take them as well as you will repent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? and he created all things and has knowledge of everything .
and wideeyed houris
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are turning .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
indeed , this is the word of a noble messenger ,
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your own property ; surely that is a great sin .
he said : my lord ! verily i have wronged myself . so forgive me , and he is the forgiving , the merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes from them , and with us is a book hidden .
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
such are the true believers . they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
and allah has made for you their wives and the means of wisdom , and to you is the provisions of good things and for them is good . will they then be ungrateful to the good things ?
and we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book to settle their offspring . some of them are guided , and most of them are transgressors .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count allah 's blessing , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is unjust and ungrateful .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
and thamud , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the thicket ; these were the confederates .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
when the wife of 'imran said : `` o my lord ! verily , i vow to you what is in my womb to be devoted to your service . accept this from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
and when satan has been told , `` no one can have any power to do this day , nor will i be responsible for you this day , and i am the guardian of you . '' and when he saw it , he said , “ i am absolved of you . indeed , i fear that you will be punished . indeed , i fear allah , severe punishment . ”
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and for them is a painful punishment .
when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained . and to allah all matters are returned .
they think that the confederates have not departed , and if the confederates had come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , seeking news of you , and if they were in your midst , they would fight but little .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world while they think that they are doing good deeds .
we have sent down clear revelations , and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed evil .
and whoever repents and does good , he indeed turns to allah with anconversion ;
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
your people have denied it while it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
he said : `` o adam ! give them their names . '' when he has told them , allah says : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth ? i know what you reveal and what you conceal . ''
they said , “ put him off and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
and those who disbelieve say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : 'allah suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book '
and cast down your staff . when he saw it writhing as if it were a serpent , he turned back retreating and did not turn back . `` o moses , do not fear , for the messengers have fear of me . ''
allah said : `` get down from here . it is not for you to be arrogant here . get out of this , for you are of the humiliated . ''
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
you will not be hungry therein nor naked .
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will say , `` they will surely be deluded . ''
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
then pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
that is the ultimate extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
indeed he thought and deliberated .
and to them is the parable of the life of the world , which is the life of the world , and thereby we produce the earth as a furrow ; and it is a snake , moving asunder , and allah is able to do all things .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him , they have no power to remove your distress , nor to transfer it . '
a recompense from your lord , giftaccount ,
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth . and when you enter the noontime .
i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and we have made the story of the litigants to be one of you , and the one of them is well aware of the name of allah , when they are made to appear up to you . but when they are set in ranks , they will be in the midst of their homes , and do not be grateful to allah , so that we may give you thanks .
save him who shall roast in hell .
becoming dust scattered abroad ,
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
the messengers we have made of some of them to excel others , and allah has also made a fool among them , and we have made clear to them the noble messengers , and if allah had willed , they would not have believed in it . and if allah willed , he could have made them to be victorious , and if allah wills , they will not be able to make a breach with them , but allah will not cause it to fail .
so , when the women of their own people got away , they would surely have taken the like of what you had done . and the like of it is the like of it , and to make it an example for the like of it ; and for them is a great forgiver .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
this . so let them taste it , boiling and intensely cold .
and guided them to the straight path .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
have you not regarded that it is he who has sent down to you what is sent down to you , and what is sent down to you ? they want to be a tyrant who has been sent down to you , and in a clear way .
those who argue about you will say : `` these are the people who are bent on denying the truth . '' these are the people of understanding , and the differences of them follow the command of the truth . this is better for them . this is best for them , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and who has provided you with the heavens and the earth , and has provided you with provisions ? and who will give you of the people of the life of the dead , o you who will say , `` do you not fear ? '' and will be told , `` do you not fear allah ? '' and will be told , `` do you not fear god ? ''
does he think that no one sees him ?
and remember our servant job . when he called to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment . ''
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
say : `` indeed , my lord is not going to believe in me , but if you are impatient for me , the judgement is only with me . he is the best knower of the truthful . ''
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
those who love forgive and refrain from the great sins of the great sins , and there is no blame upon them . and indeed , your lord is able to do what you will , and you will not be able to make a testament in the belly of your lord . and he is able to do all things .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are the truthful ones , their reward is with their lord , and those who deny the truth and deny our signs ; they are the people of hell .
and that to your lord is the goal-
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from heaven , because they are evil-livers .
fain will he speak to the light of allah with their mouths , and yet allah will multiply it for him , and they will not be able to save him , but the unbelievers will be averse .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast led me to error , i will makefair-seeming to them on the earth , and i shall mislead them all
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , while they do not see .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , allah is not pleased with the transgressing people .
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
the men of women who are their father and his parents will be given to life , and they will be given to their parents , and they will be in a nearby manner .
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth to pasture .
we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years for fifty thousand years . then the flood overtook them while they were unjust .
he asks : `` when is the day of resurrection ? ''
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
as for the people of the book , there has come to them a means of that which they have been bent on denying the truth , if it be that they will be among the unbelievers , after it has been revealed to them , but you will not be able to do them . god has power over all things .
eachwe brought to examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ’
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons other than him . little do you remember .
the messengers say : `` we are only a human like you , and we will not be like you , but allah will make a favour of his servants , and we will not make any of his servants a favour for you . ''
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the knowing , the wise .
and a barrier is set between them and the elevations are men who recognize their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , `` peace be upon you . '' they will be told , `` peace be upon you ! '' they hope .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
o you who have faith ! do not take your devotional obligations , when you have reached it , when it comes to them , and they have no good speech until you reach their footsteps , and do not be in a narrow place of the matter . and indeed , allah is forgiving and kind .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry the burdens of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what as-samiri suggested . ''
he said : `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you a great magician . ''
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
then , after that , allah will accept his repentance , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
qarun , pharaoh and haman . moses came to them with clear signs , but they were arrogant in the land , but they could not outstrip us .
o man ! thou art labouring unto thy lord laboriously , and thou shalt meet him .
it is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
the sun and the moon are scheduled .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dies . in fact , he is a promiseupon him , but most people do not know .
and the devil turned away from them and said , `` descend from the ground to the earth , and to be the ground for you to be taken to the earth . '' and in order that they may take a certain settlement from the land .
and among the devils were some who dived for him and were other than that , and did other deeds .
nay , it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be respited .
the one who has done good in the world to come , will say : `` i will punish him with my punishment , and he will tell me that i may be a mercy from among those who fear our revelations , and give the poor-rate and they are the ones who believe in our revelations .
who turn away from nonsense .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways of access
you will soon come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and will suffer a lasting punishment . ''
he said , “ what my lord has given me is better ; therefore help me with strength , and i will erect a barrier between you and them . ”
except for him on whom god has mercy . he is the mighty , the merciful .
enjoin prayer on your household , and be steadfast in prayer . we do not ask you to provide sustenance for you . we provide you for the righteous .
so whoever wills may remember it .
if you ignore the commands of allah , you will corrupt the land and sever your ties of kinship .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
when the caravan departed , their father said , `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you think me not dotard . ''
have they not observed the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
neither heaven nor earth wept for them , nor were they respited .
allah has cursed him . he said , “ i will take from your servants a share of your servants . ”
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying overthrown , as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
by the resurgent heaven ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
indeed , those who accuse chaste women , but are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have a great punishment .
he it is who multiplied you on earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said , `` this is obvious magic . ''
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
their recompense is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs for a jest and my messengers .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
when it is said to them : `` beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy . ''
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail in the least save allah , for whom he pleases and approves of .
he said , “ go down from the garden , all of you , both of you , one of you . but if you follow my guidance , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray nor will he go astray . ”
they ask , `` when is the day of judgement ? ''
this is the true story . there is no god but allah . and indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah commands you to restore trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with fairness ; and the example of the people . god gives you advice . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
so hold fast to that which is revealed to you ; surely you are on a straight path .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . now in the remembrance of allah hearts are the hearts of hearts .
those will be in gardens of bliss .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but call for many deaths .
those are the companions of the right hand .
`` and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , except that my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and we shall present hell to the disbelievers on that day ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may take heed .
so when they took him off , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs when they knownot . ''
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
and they bring not to thee any similitude but that we bring thee the truth and the best explanation .
what is the matter with those who reject the book of allah , and do not desire to do any good other than that of your lord , and that he may provide for you , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake .
the messengers we have made of some of them to excel others , and allah has also made a fool among them , and we have made clear to them the noble messengers , and if allah had willed , they would not have believed in it . and if allah willed , he could have made them to be victorious , and if allah wills , they will not be able to make a breach with them , but allah will not cause it to fail .
dark-green in colour .
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
though they had made a covenant with allah , they would not turn their backs , and covenants with allah .
he said , “ you are of those reprieved . ”
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
that is because they hate what allah has revealed , so he has made their deeds fruitless .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry the burdens of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what as-samiri suggested . ''
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
do not yield to any contemptible swearer of oaths ,
there is no blame on you from the lord of the world to come , when the time of your lord has come to you , and remember the remembrance of allah , as you have guided . indeed , you have gone astray before this .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are dearer to our father . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
and he has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and the earth , all from him . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy family . lo ! he is of unrighteous conduct . wherefore ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be of the ignorants .
and among the people of moses is a community guiding by the truth and establishes justice with it .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say , “ you have falsely invented it . ” rather , most of them do not know .
and those who have knowledge of the truth should be said to them , `` woe to you ! for you is better for you , and do not reward the righteously striving believers . the reward of those who have faith will be patient .
so when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said : `` is your throne like it ? we had received the knowledge before this , and we were submissive .
in a guarded tablet .
you are indeed one of the messengers ,
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
nor any food save filthy corruption .
and the woman among his people was that he said to his young woman : `` be '' , and it is to him that is the matter of the matter . he said , `` do not be sad . '' he said , `` do not be sad . my lord has certainly been kind to me . ''
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will certainly be victorious . ”
those who say : `` our lord is the lord of the universe , who will be guided by the right path . '' they will say , `` no fear shall be on you , and you will have no fear in the presence of god . ''
and those who release with gentle release .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
the one who has done good in the world to come , will say : `` i will punish him with my punishment , and he will tell me that i may be a mercy from among those who fear our revelations , and give the poor-rate and they are the ones who believe in our revelations .
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the arrogant leaders of his people said , `` o shu'aib , you are going to believe in your faith and those who believe in you , '' they said , `` would that we had been following with our faith ? ''
by the aligners aligning .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
then we drowned the others .
by the morning brightness ,
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
o our lord ! keep your duty to him , and we follow the muslims , and we have followed thee , and we have the faith in thee . and we have made us a believer .
if allah were to hasten the evil , as if they were to hasten the good , their term would have been decreed . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us , so we leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and that it is he who enriches and impoverishes .
his is the domination the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
he said , “ do you have faith in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a great victory , and you will certainly be able to do so . i will certainly be able to do so . ”
do not believe in it , except for one who follows your religion . say , `` it is guidance to you . '' say , `` the guidance of allah is rightly guided , and guidance , and a guide for you . '' say : `` the guidance of allah is true , and that you may be the favoured of god . ''
and a few from the later generations .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only to his own loss , and whoever does righteous sins , and is of those who are righteous and women , and women , and women , in which you are the heirs of the garden , they will enter it .
ha mim .
lot was also one of the messengers .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? rather , he is an insolent liar . ''
then where are you going ?
and he said : verily allah hath promised me , and lo ! i have promised the promise of truth , and i will be of the truth-tellers .
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , `` peace ! ''
and when they are called to allah and his messenger that he may judge between them , behold , a party of them turn away .
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! do you see any one of them , or hear a whisper from them ?
those who deny the truth have lied , and they can not escape from allah . and they will have no protector or a great punishment .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
let them take their protection in the way of allah , until he bestows his favour on them , and those who desire to be feared of his servants , and that they may take for themselves their duty to allah , and for them is a great reward .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
say : `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and who protects , and protects , if you know ? ''
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , neither you nor your people knew before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the righteous .
scandal-monger , talebearer ,
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
there is no city but that we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is written in the book .
on the day when we will say to hell , `` are you full ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` will you not then fear ? ''
so when the sight is dazed ,
and we gave david solomon . an excellent servant ! he was penitent .
or has he daughters while you have sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what god has revealed , `` we shall obey you in some matters . '' god knows their secrets .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will he be mindful ?
but allah will not defer any soul when its time has come ; and allah is aware of what you do .
and indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and a favor from the merciful , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
in whose hearts is a disease , they will say , `` we have visited a calamity from among us , or we have received a calamity from among them , and we have no power to help them , and they will be fully aware of what they used to do . ''
do they not see the birds held poised in the midst of the sky ? none holds them up except allah . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
that allah may reward each soul for its deeds . indeed , allah is swift at reckoning .
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained therein in detail threats in order that they may be cautious .
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
allah knows the knowledge of the day of resurrection ; he is the knower of what is in it , and he knows what is in its belly ; and he is the knower of what is in the belly . and allah is cognizant of all things .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and a painful punishment awaits them .
say : `` who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` allah is the lord of all being . '' then say : `` is it other than allah ? '' say : `` is it other than allah ? '' and say : `` allah is the guardian of all things , and he has power over all things . ''
and when you were weak , they would have become weak in the land , and the people of the land , who take heed to them , and give them the provisions of goodness ; and that they may give thanks , and give thanks to it .
when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they recognize . they say , `` our lord , we believe , so write us down among the witnesses . ''
over it are nineteen .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and you will not be granted any pity to the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a party of the believers are witnesses .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who guard .
but allah will not defer any soul when its time has come ; and allah is aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
indeed in this is a sign for the believers .
and do not be one of those who do so in the mornings and the evenings , but they do not hope for their own account , nor shall you be of the doubters .
it is not in the case of the believers , that it may be for the prayer of your worship , and at all of you , to be the first of the righteous . it is in the end of the righteous , and allah loves those who do good .
and when you travel in the land , there is no sin for you , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you , if you fear the unbelievers .
and on the day when we will gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah , “ where are your partnerswhom you used to claim ? ”
they found their fathers astray ,
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe because they are returning to their lord .
and whosoever worketh righteously , male or female , and is a believer , they shall enter paradise and shall not be wronged a whit .
we created man from sounding clay of altered black smooth mud .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
he said : `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you a great magician . ''
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he is of the liars .
we shall attend to you , o prominent beings .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon are scheduled .
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
and whoever brings an evil deed shall be cast down on their faces into the fire . will you be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
those who disbelieve say : `` no belief will this quran to believe in this . if you are going to believe in the quran , they will say : `` if you are believers in our lord , they will say : `` if we are believers . ''
are they better or the people of tubba and those before them ? we destroyed them . they were guilty .
and the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she had almost disclosed it , had we not strengthened her heart , that she might be of the believers .
and fruits and fodder ,
fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
these are verses of the wise book .
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
and we have sent down blessed water from the sky with which we caused gardens and harvest-grain to grow ,
that is because they said to those who hate what god has revealed , `` we shall obey you in some matters . '' god knows their secrets .
and there is life for you inretaliation , o men of understanding , that you may guard yourselves .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the reckoning .
so that we may glorify you much
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . but the wolf ate him , but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
when they see that which they are promised , then they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in position and best in respect of position ?
and they were near to seducing thee from that which we have revealed unto thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend .
say , `` whoever is the most gracious in the way of allah , it is in the life to come , that they will be the same to it , or the punishment of the world to come , or the punishment of the world to come . and they will know who is a well to know .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
when they came to them from allah , they would say : `` this is what they have been given . '' that is the ordaining of the disbelievers , that they may ask for the help of allah . so let them know that they are the unbelievers . so let them share the truth .
your lord is self-sufficient , the owner of mercy . if he will , he can take you away , and make whomever he wills successors after you , just as he produced you from the seed of another people .
this is a clear statement for mankind , and a guidance and advice for the pious .
and if they dispute with you concerning the covenant of allah , say to them , `` come , '' and say , `` come to our sons and give us daughters and we belong to you , and we will be a liar '' .
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
allah propoundeth for the twain a similitude , and the people of nuh who disbelieve , and the infidel shall be two of the two believers , and they will be told : enter the fire with the fire , and they shall be brought into the fire .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , so that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
and there is a messenger who has been sent to the clear signs of the believers , that those who believe and do righteous deeds , and lead them to the light of the darkness of the light ; and whoever believes and does good , he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them ; and allah has given them abundant provision .
or have you a clear authority ?
and when it is said to them , 'believe as the people believe , ' they say , 'are we to believe as fools believe ? ' surely , they are the fools , but they do not know .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will be made to appear to the heavens and in the earth , and in the land , and in the earth , it is the same for those who are in the heavens and the earth , and they are the like of the lord of the universe .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . indeed , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew .
whatever misfortune befalls you is what your own hands have earned . and he pardons much .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , and sufficient is allah as a witness .
it is he who sends down water from the sky and its produce , and it is with the like of it , it is the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and that is how allah sets forth .
a questioner asked about a torment about to fall
then i appealed to them publicly , and i spoke to them privately .
a party of the people of the book wish to lead you astray , and they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them , and has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt ? but the unjust refuseexcept disbelief .
and we destroyed the people of the woods , which was clear to them , and the evil consequences of their deeds , and the devil made them seem attractive to them , while they were unaware .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , and those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus allah coineth their similitudes for mankind .
it is he who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and whoever turns his back in the way of allah , and is the same for him , it is he who makes a bequest for the sake of a great life , and he has given them a vast provision . and he is ever forgiving and merciful .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky , so their necks will remain bowed in humility .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and there is not a place of place in place of a place of return , from their lord , and we shall make obeisance to them and provided them with knowledge and wisdom .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
he saw him on the clear horizon .
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a lodging for the unbelievers ?
or do they say , `` there is madness in him ? '' nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them are averse to the truth .
then depart from the place whence the people depart , and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
and he does not fear the consequence .
surely he did not believe in allah , the great ,
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou art the knower , the wise .
and abraham who paid his debt ,
and the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she had almost disclosed it , had we not strengthened her heart , that she might be of the believers .
then he will be told : `` where are my 'partners ' ? '' they will be thrown into the lurch , and they will say , `` woe to the unbelievers on this day . ''
so he had presented them to the people of all that they had been exhorted , and it was said to them , `` follow the way of your lord , as you have a little . ''
and he said : `` o my people ! verily , it is rushing to run towards each other , and they have sinned before it . '' and he said , “ o my people , do not be among the chosen , the purified . ”
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
he has created for them a portion of that which allah has created for them . this is a god that has been made to appear to god , and that he will have a promise to whom he has been made to appear up to allah . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
but the wretched will avoid it .
those will be in gardens of bliss .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , `` my lord has disgraced me . ''
it will destroy everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
the chiefs of his people said : lo ! we see thee in manifest error .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
but they turned away , so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
and they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so glorify the name of your lord , the most great .
the recompense of a sin is an evil like it . but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward is with allah . he does not love the unjust .
such is the garden which we shall give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godfearing .
allah is the witness of the truth , and there is no god but he . he is the one that is upright and the owner of knowledge , the most honourable , the wise .
and we chose them , purposely , abovecreatures .
but those who deny our signs will suffer the punishment for their disobedience .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and an example of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
indeed the godwary will be in a safe place ,
and it is he who has said to them , “ it is he who has the faith of the two seas , while they are in the ark , and they are free from the ship , and , in the midst of the mercy of a great day ; and we will give them a great deal in the matter . ”
o you who believe ! do not take your precautions , and have not taken your guardian as friends , but if they refuse to believe in them , they shall be the ones who have gone astray , and they are the unjust .
they said , “ if you are treacherous , his brothers are engrossed in his own transgression . ” then he spoke to the word of your lord , and said , “ you are your people , and he is more appreciative . ”
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and evil is the destination .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
and others linked together in chains .
nay , we have been deprived . ''
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
when our punishment came to them , why did they not humble themselves ? but their hearts became hardened , and satan made their deeds seem fair to them .
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
lo ! we are removing the torment a little ; verily ye shall revert .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
they said : o dhu ' l-qarneyn ! lo ! gog and magog are corruption in the land , so that thou mightest erect a barrier between us and them .
pharaoh said , `` and what is the lord of the worlds ? ''
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated the pleasure of god . he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
when they meet those who believe , they say , `` we believe . '' but when they are alone with their devils , they say : 'we are with you , we were only mocking . '
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
from the earth we created you , and we shall return you to it , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
or have we sent down to them any authority so that it speaks of what they associate with him ?
rivalrydistracted you
on that day they will be burnt in the fire ,
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall have only the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
tell the believers to forgive those who do not hope for the days of allah , that he may requite a nation for what they used to earn .
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving is thanked . '
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and all-mighty .
pelting them with stones of baked clay ,
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , therefore follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and your lord has said , “ pray to me , i will answer you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ”
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
gardens of eden which the merciful has promised his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise will come to pass .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
or do they think we do not hear their secret talks and their secret counsels ? yes indeed , we are the senders ,
and there is a messenger who has been sent to the clear signs of the believers , that those who believe and do righteous deeds , and lead them to the light of the darkness of the light ; and whoever believes and does good , he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them ; and allah has given them abundant provision .
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they call upon besides him is falsehood , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and recall what time we appointed for musa forty nights , then ye took the calf in his absence , and ye were wrong-doers .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you turned away ?
by the morning brightness ,
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
those who have been bent on denying the truth say to those who have received the good , “ they will not be able to make any side of the way of god , and they will have a humiliating punishment . ”
exclaim not today for one destruction , but call for many deaths .
nay , the hour is their tryst , and the hour is most calamitous and bitter .
and as for those who , when they have pledged to god , we will surely make a covenant with you , and when you are firmly turned back in the way of allah , and in the end , it is you who are the aware .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
he said , `` get out of here , despised and driven away from you . i will fill hell with all of them . ''
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
did we not destroy the ancients ?
ha mim .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the apostle , offer a charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find a thing , god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say , `` we believe in some and disbelieve in others , '' and wish for a way .
not one township that we destroyed before them believed . will they then believe ?
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
say , `` indeed , i am commanded to serve allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
it is he who sends his blessings on you and his angels so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is most merciful to the believers .
and when he came to it , he would have set up the mountains in the land , and they call upon him . but when they are attacked , they will be pitched into it , and they will be hostile to the path of the beneficent god , and he is ungrateful to the way .
and we have already passed on them , and there is a sign for them in the ways of that which they differ , and it is in the matter that they make a difference of it . and the like of it is no fear , and you will be of the ignorant .
then we shall say to those who believe : `` is it you who have been with us ? '' we have certainly been the believers of you , and in fact , you have been told , `` yes , and you have disputed about it . '' in fact , the one of them is in the same manner , and in the way of allah , you will have a field of which you have been inventing .
on the day they see it , they will be as though they had not remainedexcept for an afternoon or a morning .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
by no means ! by the moon ,
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , above that they associate with him !
if they dispute with you , say , `` allah knows best what you do .
and to him belongs all that is in front of you , and in the presence of the enemies of allah , so that you may be subject to the enemies of allah , and keep your duty to him , and do not follow the enemies of allah . you will not be able to make such as go to your own enemy , and you will not be wronged .
allah advises you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to mankind , and they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , coming from every deep ravine ,
and why were the people of the towns not believed at the time of which they had believed ? but they have no faith in it , except for the people of the world , and in the life to come , we shall give them a taste of the torment of a little ,
and they thought as you thought , that allah would never raise up anyone .
o reassured soul ,
to him belongs whatever dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
for allah is the truth , and those who call upon other than him will be called to one another , and the fact that he will be called to the fire , and it will be said , “ the best of the human being is that you are only in the darkness . ”
the like of which was never created in the land ,
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour is come , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the severest punishment . '
o ye who believe ! be thou not one of the unseen , and let every soul be brought back to what he hath sent forward before ; and verily allah is aware of what ye do .
and put thy trust in allah , and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
there is not one of us but has an assigned place .
so he showed him the great sign .
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better place than this . ''
those before them plotted , but allah took up the foundations of their building and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment fell upon them from directions they did not perceive .
he said : peace be upon thee ! i shall ask forgiveness of my lord for thee . lo ! he is ever gracious unto me .
alif . lam . mim .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they say , `` we will not believe in what we have sent down to the messengers , and allah has full knowledge of what is in it . and allah is the knower of the chests . ''
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who turn back to him .
it is not for those who believe and do good deeds that which they have earned for that which they have earned . and when they have prevented from what they have earned , they shall have a part of their own conduct , and allah loves the righteous .
'by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
and never came a messenger to them but they ridiculed him .
and when the truth came to us from us , they said : `` not as a sign of that which was sent down to moses , except if they had been bent on denying the truth . '' but they were not going to be disbelievers , except for a people who were bent on denying the truth .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
so the people of the book will say to the people of the book : `` this is from allah . '' but in order to give the people of old to enjoy themselves , then woe to those who have been wont to do this .
indeed when the water swelled up , we carried you in the sailing ship
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails :
by the lote-tree of the boundary
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding in it forever . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
allah has created every creature from water . some of them walk on two legs , and others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
then he turned to their gods and said , `` will you not eat ? ''
and by those who swim smoothly ,
it is allah who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth , that it may pass away , and if they go forth , it will certainly be no one to bring them forth , and he is the forgiving , the most forgiving .
and he said : `` o my people ! verily , it is rushing to run towards each other , and they have sinned before it . '' and he said , “ o my people , do not be among the chosen , the purified . ”
and persisted in the great sin .
by your life , they were blundering in their drunkenness .
allah enjoins justice and kindness , and to kith and kin , and he forbids indecency , dishonor and insolence . he advises you , so that you may take heed .
will you believe in it when it has befallen ? now will they believe in it ?
those who overcome you , if you were to count a setback , they would say : `` o we have been with you ! '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' then , if the believers are among you , they will say : `` are we to be with you ? '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' and they will not be questioned on the day of resurrection .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is before him and all that is behind them : `` our lord , we have made it as a partner to you , and that we will not make the meaning of them as a partner to us . ''
but they were succeeded by a generation who neglected their prayers and followed lusts ; so they will meet their souls ,
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
half of it , or reduce it a little ,
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary , can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , “ when we are bones and decomposed , will we really be raised up a new creation ? ”
and the true promise draweth nigh , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , 'alas for us ! we have been heedless of this day . we have been evildoers . '
your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them .
and most surely there is a sign for you in the manner of which you are mentioned . and in the midst of what is in the womb of the other , will be in the midst of their bellies , and we shall give it a pure drink .
it is he who gives life and causes death ; and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be , and it is .
fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord . he will be crucified and birds will be crucified , and birds will peck at his head . ''
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
every soul will know what it has produced .
what , do they see that they should see the like of those who believed , and were wont to believe in the people before them ? but many of them did greater evil than that , and they were not aware of what they did .
on that day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
those of your women who commit lewdness against your women will bear witness against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
indeed , to your lord is the return .
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that you may understand .
he was only a servant of ours whom we favoured and made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , “ we have been sent to a sinful people . ”
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and when we gave moses the book and the criteriaso that perhaps you would be guided .
allah is the one who is a jew and a christian . he has given the good news of the prophets to whom he will , and you will not be able to have any power over it ; but allah has power over all things .
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , and his angels , and that he may make them appear clear to you ? and some of the people of the book are shown to god .
they said : burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
and when the people of their own trouble has come to them , we will say to them , `` god 's people are responsible for all of our signs . '' say , `` god has the power to carry out of their plot . ''
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and when our messengers came to abraham and the good news of the birth of abraham , they said , “ we are indeed going to destroy the people of this town . ”
the day when their plotting will avail them nothing , nor will they be helped .
did he not find you needy and enrich you ?
they said , `` put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and bestow not favour that thou mayest receive more .
he said : embark therein ! in the name of allah shall be its course and its berthing . verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
he said : `` that is what ye have been working to god , '' they said , `` we do not have any evil to bring you any evil . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` i have come to you in knowledge . ''
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a lodging for the unbelievers ?
lo ! herein is indeed a portent , yet most of them are not believers .
or show you what we have promised them , for we have complete power over them .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did .
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit . evil is the patron , and evil is the patron .
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
abasing exalting .
has the news of those who disbelieved before you did not come to them , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
have you not seen that allah will cause you to meet with the heaven , and will cause them to die , then he will turn away from them on the earth , then he will cause them to go forth from the clouds ?
say , `` if there were other gods besides him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ''
and indeed he saw him at another descent .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , and they will not be able to escape ?
and they say : when will this promise beif you are truthful ?
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth concerning which they are doubting .
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seeing of what ye do .
it was said , `` o noah , get down from the ark , '' and it is in accordance with a thing from us , and in accordance with the others with us . we will give them a great punishment from us .
do not make excuses . you have disbelieved after you had believed . if we pardon a party of you , we will punish another party because they were guilty .
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
they came to them , because of the time they had been sent , and the signs of the clear signs came to them , but they denied the truth , and allah is powerful over the disbelievers .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
they said , ‘ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and if you disbelieve , allah is all-sufficient for you , though you will not be pleased with the servants of the believers , but if you do so , they will be pleased with it , and then you will be well pleased with your lord . and indeed , he is the all-knower of the innermost of the chests . he is aware of what you do .
he is the guide of your lord , the wisdom , and do not take the name of allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
often will those who disbelieve wish that they had been muslims .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
give full measure , and be not cheaters ,
surely the righteous will be in bliss ,
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : 'call on your lord to lighten for us a day of doom . '
runningto the caller . the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colors . surely in that are signs for those who know .
`` this is our gift , '' so withhold or withhold , without reckoning .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
and indeed we seized them with punishment , yet they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
as sustenance for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and we communicated to him the decree that the unbelievers would be destroyed .
and he will remove rage from their hearts , and allah turns to whomsoever he will . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
and say : praise be to allah , anon he will show you his signs , and thou shalt recognize them . thy lord is not heedless of what ye do .
do not think allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day when the eyes will stare ,
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
and we sent not before thee any messengers but that they ate food , and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will ye then be patient ?
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day !
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
and indeed they have enraged us ;
all praise be to allah , who has created all the human being with his son , and he has not taken his son as a son , and he has not made any one of his own family with his own son , and say , “ he is the one who has no strength , and he is the all-exalted , the all-exalted . ”
his is the domination the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
indeed , with hardshipease .
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it . but they ruin none except themselves , and they do not perceive .
and those who say : our lord ! grant us of our wives and offspring to our eyes , and make us a model to the godfearing .
and when our punishment came to them , their cry was nothing but that they said : lo ! we were wrong-doers .
on thrones , facing one another .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book of wisdom .
and when allah has bestowed his favour upon you , he is the almighty , the most honourable , and he will say , “ your wife has come to you , and you will have no relation in your homes . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ keep your family towards you , and have fear of god . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ you are your chosen people . ”
they said , “ if you are treacherous , his brothers are engrossed in his own transgression . ” then he spoke to the word of your lord , and said , “ you are your people , and he is more appreciative . ”
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book of wisdom .
and a sign for them is the dead earth . we revive it and produce from it grain which they eat .
when he came to solomon , he said : `` you want to spend in my wealth 's wealth and children . '' i am better than what you have given me . i am better than that you have done . i am indeed the best of you .
as for those who believe in allah and his messengers and do not divide between any of them , we shall give them their wages ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are believers . ”
and solomon succeeded david . he said , “ o people , we have been taught the language of birds , and we have been given all things . this is a clear bounty . ”
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
as for those who deny our signs , we will draw them imperceptibly , whence they do not know .
taste thou ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the noble .
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
our lord ! verily thou art going to gather mankind together on a day whereof there is no doubt . lo ! allah faileth not to fulfil his promise .
allah knows the knowledge of the day of resurrection ; he is the knower of what is in it , and he knows what is in its belly ; and he is the knower of what is in the belly . and allah is cognizant of all things .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
and we made it an example to those who passed away and succeeding generations , and an admonition for the god-fearing .
no fatigue will touch them , nor will they be expelled from it .
and when the anger of moses abated , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ”
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return ,
and do not take the consequences of what they do , lest they fall down upon themselves by their own hands , and we will not give them the record of their own deeds ; then they will be returned to their lord . then they will be returned to their lord .
we sent against them a single scream , and they became like the dry twig fragments of anpen .
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , which are constant in their courses ; and he has subjected the night and the day for you .
and if they incline to peace , incline thou to it , and trust in allah ; surely he is the hearer , the knower .
o my father ! worship not satan ; verily satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
and if it had been said to them , `` fear allah , '' and he is responsible for the sake of evil , and he will punish him with a severe punishment . and he is the most forgiving , most merciful .
recite what has been revealed to you from the book of your lord . no one can change his words , and you will find no refuge other than him .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
he said : no ! verily , my lord is with me , he will guide me .
he will gulp it , but he will not swallow it . death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and you will not die .
and the people of the city were made to settle their people in the matter of the truth , and the matter was made to settle in their promise to the children of israel , and to what they had been commanded . and to all that they had been doing .
he said : verily thou art of those reprieved .
and ten nights ,
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew it ?
he said , “ you and your fathers are in manifest error . ”
nay ! whenreaches to the collar bone ,
these are the verses of the clear book .
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that you may be the supreme authority in the land ? we will never believe in you . ’
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
a revelation from the mighty , the merciful .
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter are their hearts , and they are proud .
and the hypocrites will tell them : `` come , '' they said , `` come in the way of god , or your own sons . '' they will say , `` if you had only listened or children , we would have followed you . '' they will say , `` if only you had understood it , we would have been aware of what you do . ''
when our verses are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
then we drowned the others .
their reward is with their lord , gardens of eden , and in the midst of gardens , wherein they will abide for ever . they will be in the midst of gardens to dwell , for they are well pleased with the lord of the book .
they came to them , because of the time they had been sent , and the signs of the clear signs came to them , but they denied the truth , and allah is powerful over the disbelievers .
surely there is a sign in this for those who are in a noble statement , among the messengers , and it is not the speech of a thing to be revealed to them . that is a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
i believe in your lord , so listen to me . ''
by no means ! by your lord , those who do not believe in you , do not make a single problem , and they will not be able to make you in any doubt . and after that there will be no doubt in their heart , and they will be well-pleased .
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you believe in his signs .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
lo ! we created man from a drop of thickened fluid to test him , so we made him hearing , seeing .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you doubt .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and shooting flames .
what is the matter with them that they do not believe ?
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the qur'an those who fear my threat .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him rebel , but he was far astray . ''
the men of women who are their father and his parents will be given to life , and they will be given to their parents , and they will be in a nearby manner .
and when the stars are scattered ,
by the hands of scribes .
what , do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said , “ bring the punishment of allah upon us if you are truthful . ”
if only those who disbelieve knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
woe on that day to the deniers .
said , `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
indeed , the people of the sky see that we shall see that they will be pleased with him , and we will be pleased with you , and you will be brought back to the place of the house . god is not aware of the things they do .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate with him .
in fact , those who deny the truth deny it .
and indeed , for you is an unlimited reward .
so remember me , i will remember you . thank me and do not be ungrateful to me .
then command the command of the earth , `` let your lord go to you , '' , `` so let them be not able to cause you to fall into the presence of god . '' so the lord of the heavens and the west , is the set of the unjust .
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
a bearer of good news and a warner . but most of them turn away and do not listen .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
be moderate in your walking , and your voice . the most repulsive voice is braying of the donkey . ''
some of them believe in it , and some of them do not believe in it . your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
and theseawait not but one shout , and there will be no delay for them .
who persevere and put their trust in their lord .
i will grant them respite . my plan is firm .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the lord of forgiveness .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has taken it as they forget , and allah is witness over all things .
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! verily the best of whom thou canst hire is the strong , the trusty .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus do we deliver the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them . then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
there are those of you who desire to wish for you in that which they desire , in order to be the people of their homes , and the people of the book ; and when they are called to a place of peace , they will have a place of return , and if they do wrong , they will have a place of nearness to you ; and for them is a clear authority .
and you will not be rewarded exceptwhat you used to do .
do they not ponder on the earth , and that he may not give you a warning , or give ear to them , and listen to them ? but they are not aware of the things they are doing .
we have decreed death for you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
so woe to those who pray
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become an enemy and a sorrow to them . indeed pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them from his bounty , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
unquestionably , to allah belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . those who invoke other than allah follow him , they follow only conjecture and surmise .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will increase his tillage . and whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
allah has decreed : `` verily ! i will prevail , i and my messengers , i will surely prevail . ''
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
blessed is he who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and to him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
so i swear by what you see
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus do we deliver the believers .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . it is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
you are not responsible for any part of a part of it , nor do you have any share of it . in the heavens and the earth , they will be recorded in the land , and in a clear register .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants . ’
and no friend will ask a friend ,
as for those who are blessed , they will be in paradise as long as the heavens and the earth remain as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills .
he only enjoins you evil and indecency , and that you should say against allah what you do not know .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are good . they will be successful .
and he did not make the beggar and the means of food , but say : `` eat of the male or female , or a woman who carries a theft . '' and that is a man who invents a lie about allah without knowledge . and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie about god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and allah 's is the similitude of the two men , which will not speak to each other , nor will they have any power to do so , and who will make a way to the right path .
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
they have no one to intercede in it besides him , and they have no one to intercede for them , but they are not able to create a thing , and they will not be able to make any testament , nor shall they be able to give life .
and they will say , “ had we listened or understood , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
these are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the successful .
but they were not sent as guardians over them .
they said , “ o moses , either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter would be settled between you and me . god knows best the harmdoers '
so wait with patience for the decision of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he cried out in distress .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
so do not become weak-kneed and sue for peace , and you will be victorious , and allah is with you , and will never deprive you of your deeds .
and you are your wife , and a woman who commits an evil deed , that you may commit it . but if they repent , then take them as well as you will repent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the evil consequence of their affair , and there is a painful punishment for them .
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
and those who disbelieve say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : 'allah suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book '
do not follow what you do not know . the hearing , and the sight , and the heart , all of them will be questioned .
prosperous is he who purifies it ,
but we found there only one house of those who surrendered .
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what will make you know that this is the revelation from allah ? if you do not believe in the presence of allah , then you will have a people who have received the evidence of the torah and the injeel , and in the same manner . and indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
like the fate of the people of noah , ad and thamud , and those after them ; and allah does not desire injustice to his servants .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
as for those who disbelieve , their wealth and their lives will be the like of the like of allah 's way . then they will be subdued and fled .
woe to you ! woe to you !
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
they will be given to drink with their spouses , abiding eternally therein .
turn penitently to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you ; then you will not be helped .
those who have been bent on denying the truth say to those who have received the good , “ they will not be able to make any side of the way of god , and they will have a humiliating punishment . ”
those who do not expect to meet us said , `` why are angels not sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? '' they are too proud of themselves , and are scornful with pride .
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying overthrown , as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
the believers are only the ones who have faith in the truth of what they say , and their hearts are covered with their own , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
faces on that day will be downcast ,
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the eternal , the self-subsistent him ; and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in the gardens of bliss .
and we have not sent the messengers to be a warner , but those who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve are the signs of the truth , that they may make clear the truth , and that they do not believe .
and they carry your loads to a land you could not reach except with great difficulty . indeed your lord is most kind , most merciful .
and we put veils over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness into their ears . when you mention your lord in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
when a woman 's excuse has come to her , then it is said , `` the reward of the believers is that you are the one who is near to it . '' say : `` the reward of god is with the believers , and allah is the best of providers . ''
on the day when those who disbelieve will be driven to the fire , and will be told , `` you were present in this world 's life and the next . this is the recompense of the land that you used to do . ''
so the people of the book will say to the people of the book : `` this is from allah . '' but in order to give the people of old to enjoy themselves , then woe to those who have been wont to do this .
and allah has given you some of the provisions of some of you , and some of you who have provided them with the provisions of allah . and those who have made their duty to allah are the same , so that they deny the truth .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land , it is they who are the losers .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
those who swear to you will not be waiting for their wives four months . if they return , god is forgiving and merciful .
the one who has done good in the world to come , will say : `` i will punish him with my punishment , and he will tell me that i may be a mercy from among those who fear our revelations , and give the poor-rate and they are the ones who believe in our revelations .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
though they will be within sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
o you who believe ! when the call is made for prayer on the day of friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you if you only knew .
and to those who do not want to go forward to the way of allah , and if you do so , they will be responsible for it , and if you do not , they will be responsible for it , and do not make a testament in the least . and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which may be established , and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which will be the ordinance of the hereafter , and that which will be the ordinance of allah , and that which he
say : `` tell me , if allah had made the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , who is god other than that which can bring you night for rest ? will you not then see ? ''
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord leave me not alone ; thou art the best of inheritors .
and those in whose wealth is a known right
anddid warn them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
they said : o musa ! lo ! there is a giant land in it , and lo ! we shall never enter it until they leave it . if they depart from it , we shall enter it .
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
but for him who fears to stand before his lord are two gardens .
and be patient on the day of judgment , and remember the remembrance of their lord , and sing his praises in the morning and in the evening , and to him do we please .
and when our punishment came to them , their cry was nothing but that they said : lo ! we were wrong-doers .
as for the messengers , they turned away from the messengers , but they said : `` the human being is like us . '' they said , `` as for us , we have been sent as a messenger . god is the guardian of them . ''
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
and keep away from ar-rujz !
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
and thamood , sparing no one .
lo ! those who do wrong themselves , they are wronging themselves . they say : `` what is your own power ? '' they will say : `` what ! is it that allah is a dominion of the heavens and the earth ? '' they will say : `` is it a kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? '' for it is an evil abode .
and the blind and the seeing are not equal , nor are those who believe and do good deeds , and those who do evil , but little do you remember .
this is indeed the ultimate truth .
so we gave him the glad tidings of a forbearing boy .
and gardens and springs .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
but if they are haughtythat those who are with your lord glorify him night and day , and never grow weary .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in precise measure whatever he wills . surely he is aware of his servants .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you today , nor will you grieve
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they be able to ask one another .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what do you worship ? ”
or have they other partners ? then let them bring their partners if they are truthful .
verily those who disbelieve after they have believed and thereafter wax in unbelief , their repentance will not be accepted , and it is they who are the astray .
and there is life for you inretaliation , o men of understanding , that you may guard yourselves .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
your possessions and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
those who disbelieve are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , so that they will be swallowed up as a thing of their own invention , and allah will not be able to keep their duty to allah .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
what do they wait except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , `` then wait . i am waiting with you . ''
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms , then surely allah will accept his repentance ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
when you see those who gossip about our verses , turn away from them until they engage in some other topic . if satan causes you to forget , then do not sit with the unjust after remembering .
god will guide you to the people of the world , and were the people of the two part of the two part of the two part of it , they would have taken the same part of their own people . but if they were to do it , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they were to make a bequest for their own people , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they had been
do not set up the book with the book of the book except with the best of the book . do they say , `` we believe in what you have been sent with , and god is only one of those who submit . ''
and thus do we make them hear , so that we may make them like the example of the reminder . he said : `` how is it that your lord has decided ? '' and he said , `` even though the one of you is a heifer , which is equal to your own days . '' and he said , “ it is only your lord who has made for you a part of the cow ; and for you only will be the one who will feed you . and you will not be able to
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
and if they are able to be able to do it , then there will be a ban upon them , except after he has been given to them . but if you are able to know the bounds of god , he will make the party of those who are the winners .
those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and whose affairs are firm of consultation , and spend of what we have provided them .
and upraised couches .
there is not a messenger for the prophet except that he may obey the command of allah ; and if they had followed the way of allah , then he came to them and asked them for forgiveness . and indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed in this is a sign for the believers .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do , and on the day when they will be brought back to him , and he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of everything .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none disbelieves in them except the defiantly disobedient .
and sent down water from the clouds ,
then they will approach one another , inquiring of each other .
then we drowned the others .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
and be devoted to your lord .
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
and they will say : 'praise belongs to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . surely our lord is all-forgiving , all-thankful ,
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
and in the wealth we gave wealth and children , do not give them a reward before your own hands . do not say : `` o lord , would that you were given a small amount of life , and that i might give you a good deed and that i was among the righteous . ''
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops from their cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
and raiseand scatter them around ,
except the chosen servants of god .
do not set up the book with the book of the book except with the best of the book . do they say , `` we believe in what you have been sent with , and god is only one of those who submit . ''
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn . you will not be questioned about their deeds .
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
they will swear to you , swearing by allah to you , so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell is their destination .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return to it . god takes account of all things .
some of them say : `` we believe in allah . '' but when there comes to them a people from allah 's cause , the torment of the people of the world to come , will be the penalty of allah , and he is not aware of the things they do .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
and allah has promised the faithful , men and women , so that they will be underneath gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . and in the midst of the garden they will dwell forever .
those who are patient , truthful , obedient , and charitable , and they pray for forgiveness at dawn .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
so that they may understand my speech .
as such allah , the almighty , the wise reveals to you .
and from the evil of the darkness when it settles
allah knows what is in their hearts . so leave them alone , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
they said , “ put him off and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
it is he who originates and repeats .
and gardens and springs .
and most surely there is a sign for you in the manner of which you are mentioned . and in the midst of what is in the womb of the other , will be in the midst of their bellies , and we shall give it a pure drink .
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is rolled up .
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day whose span is fifty thousand years .
and there are they in whose hearts is no more than one religion . it is one religion who has believed in it . and if they do not have faith in the hereafter , it has been set between them , and if they do not , they will be in different groups .
and if any of your wives , then , are brought back to the disbelievers , they would then have been attacked from among you , and the disbelievers are in the same manner . and fear allah , to whom you will be believers .
which guides to the right path . we have believed in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and we carried him upon a well-planked vessel well-caulked
and he said : o my people ! ye are in the midst of that which ye are created in the world , and in the hereafter ; and so that ye may save us from the torment of allah , and that i should say : i am only a temptation , and i am the best of the worshippers .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . allah is mighty , wise .
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking .
and they will not be able to seek to help them , but they are speaking their own words , and they have a lie in the world to come . and they will be in the midst of the blazing fire .
which had broken your back ?
everything they have done is in the books .
and we have not sent any warner before you except men whom we have chosen among the nations , and the people of the city . do they then see that the end of the hereafter is better for them ? will they then understand ?
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained therein in detail threats in order that they may be cautious .
faces on that day will be downcast ,
and perform the prayer , and pay the alms ; it is good for you , and you will find it with allah . indeed , allah sees what you do .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake .
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . and those who do wrong will know what overturning they will be overturned .
who amasses wealth and counts it over ,
are they gods other than allah ? say : `` call upon me to be of those who have associated others with me . '' say , `` the message is only to those who have associated others with me in the way of truth , and most of the people of the truth are the truth . ''
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray ,
unheady , uninebriating ;
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
and you will take to their wives and their spouses , and the night to come . so they will be waiting for the time of the time . and allah is aware of what they do . and allah is aware of what they do . and allah is aware of what they do .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he will , and to him you will be returned .
when abraham said to his father azar , 'takest thou idols for gods ? i see thee and thy people in manifest error . '
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
say : `` let your lord accomplish for you what your own hands have put forth , and your fathers do not go to your parents and your fathers , and you will not kill them , for what they have been doing . '' and do not make any of them equal to allah , that he may make them to go near , so that they may have the right to please him , and that they may be of the ignorant .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
and we shall inherit from him that which he says , and he will come to us alone .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town ; they are purist people . ”
it is not except the one who has said , `` no one has taken any partner from us , nor has any partner to him . he is the one who has submitted themselves to the truth , and they are muslims .
he said : thou art granted thy petition , o musa !
that is what they enjoyed avail them .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for friends ; they are allies of each other . whoever takes them as allies among them , is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and to enjoy themselves . but they will come to know .
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
that is indeed the truth of the contentions of the inmates of the fire .
peace be upon abraham .
and that is not hard for allah .
you will not be hungry therein nor naked .
moses said , `` you throw first , '' and behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic because of their magic .
and whoever desires the majesty of glory be to allah , then he is the sublime , the seeing , and the word will be made to appear to him , and the evil of the deeds of the devil will be , and they will be questioned .
verily allah will defend those who believe . lo ! allah loveth not any treacherous ingrate .
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` god has no way . he whom he will , he will guide whomever he wishes , and they will face the guidance .
nay , but i gave these and their fathers enjoyment of life until the truth and a clear messenger came to them .
it is god who splits the grain and the date-stone , brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the living from the dead , and that is allah . how then are you perverted ?
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
what they are engaged in is doomed to be destroyed and what they have been doing .
and how do i fear that you should worship other than allah , that you should not ascribe any partners to him ? so what is the matter with you , so that you should be of those who have no faith ? will you then know ?
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play . we will take care of him . ''
and his armies of jinns and men and birds were gathered together with the jinn and birds , and they were set in bands .
those who are bent on denying the truth will have the faith of allah after they have come to them , except those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth . they will have the faith of god , and it will be a great punishment for them .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will surely be cast into gardens with streams running in them , to dwell therein forever .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will havefor which you desire .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook the evildoers , and they lay prostrate in their homes ,
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any thing from allah .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the reckoning .
and those who recite the reminder ,
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were averse .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
on the day when we will say to hell , `` are you full ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
no ! there is no refuge .
he would have remained inside its bellytill the day of resurrection .
and reminder is a reminder to you , and to deliver the book to him , and to make it clear to him . he is the guidance and the most merciful .
and weigh with justice , and skimp not in the balance .
as for the thamud , they said : `` o my people ! obey allah and obey him . '' he said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . then ask those of them who have submitted . ''
perhaps you will destroy yourself with grief , sorrowing after them , sorrowing over them .
we sent down in this quran a book , which brings forth the human being with a light , and a mercy from the believers , and for the wrongdoers , only the means of ease , and no change of them .
but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` kill him or burn him . '' but allah saved him from the fire . surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
the example of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
they say : `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been settled , and they would not have been respited .
how can you disbelieve in allah , when you were dead , and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die and then bring you back to life again ? then to him you will be returned .
o you who have believed , if a messenger of a certain messenger come to you , then do not believe in it . so do not be seen by the creation of the people , and after that they will be victorious .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
had he faked any sayings in our name ,
and those who have taken their wealth before their own souls , and have made them pleasing to their own souls ; and those who have taken their homes with their own souls , they have no more than a means of evil . those who choose their own souls will be successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
so celebrate the name of your lord , the all-supreme .
the practiceof allah in the past , and you will not find any change in the law of allah .
they will say , “ you are the ones who are in the midst of your own accord . your husband is only speaking to the word of your own words . it is they who will be forgiven , for god is pardoning and forgiving . ”
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
say , `` whoever is the most gracious in the way of allah , it is in the life to come , that they will be the same to it , or the punishment of the world to come , or the punishment of the world to come . and they will know who is a well to know .
and when the heaven is split asunder , and becomes red like red leather ,
and because of what fear has been revealed to you , in the land , that he may cause them to turn away from it , so that he may turn away from them their cords and solomon . moses said to them , `` indeed , you are a muftari . ''
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
and it is only the command of the spider which has been recited to you , and its cattle . and if any one of the provisions of allah , it has been enjoined upon you , and if any one of them is held in iniquity , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
read in the name of your lord who created .
indeed those who persecute the faithful , men and women , and do not repent – they will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of burning .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every obstinate tyrant was frustrated ,
o ye who believe ! answer allah and his messenger when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah stands between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye shall be gathered .
those who disbelieve say : `` no belief will this quran to believe in this . if you are going to believe in the quran , they will say : `` if you are believers in our lord , they will say : `` if we are believers . ''
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has been fulfilled will not believe .
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
or were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
say : the evil and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may attract thee . so fear allah , o men of understanding , that ye may be successful .
when our revelations are recited to them , they are averse to the unbelievers , and the like of the disbelievers like it , the like of the unbelievers will be the like of it . say , “ will we inform you of the worst of the worst of what you used to do ? ” and what is the matter with the faithless .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a home . the spider 's house is the house , if they but knew .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment to punishment , for that they were doing corruption .
what ! has he taken daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
on the day they meet him , they will be greeted with , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
and we made the children of israel recite to them the message of that which is inspired in them , saying : 'you are tempted by evil , and cast it down into evil . ' and it is made to be banished from the land , and we sent down to them the dams and the birds , and we did not wrong them , but they did wrong .
be tolerant , and bid to the ignorant .
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth , you will surely prevail . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
he said , “ what is the state of the former generations ? ”
and wait , for we are waiting . ''
then we opened the gates of the fire to be made attractive to them and made them rejoice in what they had been given . and we saved them and drowned them in despair .
so your lord poured upon them a scourge of punishment .
ta sin . these are the verses of the quran and a clear book .
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze on god 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement will seize you . ''
who created you , then fashioned you and proportioned you ,
but as for him who believes and does good works , he will reward him with a good deed , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
my lord ! they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me , indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
he is a man who believes in the people of pharaoh , so that he may be turned away , so that he said , `` shall we make a human being from among the people of the city ? '' he said , `` shall we have a man from your lord ? '' but if he is a liar , he says , `` is it a man who has been given to us a sign from your lord ? '' and if he is a liar , indeed , i will be a liar .
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and we helped them , so they were victorious .
except iblis ; he was proud and he was one of the faithless .
and the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah , that he is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and beneficience .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , fearing not to be overtaken , nor fear there . ''
pharaoh said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corruptors .
take this shirt of mine , and cast it on my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
o you who believe ! some of your wives are of your offspring , so do you take your share of your own offspring ; so do not be wary of allah , and the most merciful , the most merciful .
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere the day cometh which there shall be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
say , `` who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the great throne ? ''
we created man from sounding clay of altered black smooth mud .
and that it is he who makeslaugh and weep
so worship what you will besides him . say : `` the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the clear loss . ''
blessed is he who , if he wills , will assign you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will find no change in the way of allah .
he will call for destruction
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds , and to you your deeds . peace be to you . we seek not the ignorant . ''
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and whoever brings an evil deed shall be cast down on their faces into the fire . will you be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
so when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said : `` is your throne like it ? we had received the knowledge before this , and we were submissive .
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years for fifty thousand years . then the flood overtook them while they were unjust .
enter my paradise !
we have heard the brother of moses , saying : `` make it a message of sound , and do not fear the message , for we are bound to make you to be shunned . ''
and the trumpet will be blown . this is the day of the threatening .
if they deny you , tell them : `` for me , you have the faith of my deeds , and your deeds . '' say : `` for me , you have no faith . i am not responsible for whatever you do . ''
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , it was they who created them , and he could not cause you to harm them , and he is able to do you . allah is the lord of all being .
so when the sight is dazed ,
the romans have been conquered
and make a glass of iron , and bring it to the same , so that it may be that the king will be told , `` bring him into the fire , '' and he said , “ bring a clear smoke , ” and he said , “ bring me a hard smoke . ”
for the people of the right hand .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . and this is a promise binding upon your lord , and that you will be questioned .
and to the males and the vine , and of the cattle , which he has given to the cattle , the cattle , and the cattle , the life of the world ; and allah has made the home of the hereafter a home .
then their return is to hell .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment shall be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
o you who believe ! know that the polytheists are among the polytheists , and they will have a heap of bad words , but if they are afraid of this , they will surely have the like of it , and if he wills , he will make you succeed .
alif . lam . mim .
say , `` obey allah and the messenger . '' but if they turn back , then it is only the command of allah , and if you turn away , then it is only a duty upon you , and a duty upon the messenger .
surely there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or listens attentively while witnessing .
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe '' , and they will not be tested ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and we sent not before thee any messenger but that we revealed unto him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
say : i ask of you no wage for this ; i am not a pretender .
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
so do not turn away from your lord with your mercy , and you will have mercy on you if you are patient . and if they turn away , we shall surely make them taste the punishment of hell in security .
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
they have taken their oaths as a shield , and obstruct others from the way of allah , so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
you are only a warner .
o ye who believe ! when ye are seated in a place of affair , they will find no change in it , if ye say the best of it , if it be that allah will give you the like of that which ye have been given . and if ye were to be of the believers , it is in the end of the believers .
he said : my lord ! help me against the people of corruption .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their word .
would that it had been the end .
indeed , he was a sign for the righteous among them , but they were in doubt concerning the religion of faith until the messenger of god had come to you in faith . then , when the messenger of the messenger came to you , he said to them , `` god has no faith . ''
the imminentis near at hand .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly , and turned away .
how keenly will they hear and see the day they come to us ? but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
it will be said , “ enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant . ”
when misfortune befalls men , they call upon their lord , turning to him in repentance . then , when he has mercy upon them , some of them begin to ascribe partners to their lord .
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
o you enfolded in your mantle ,
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
there was a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place : two gardens on the right and on the left . `` eat of the provision of your lord and give thanks to him , and be grateful to him . a good land and a lord forgiving and merciful . ''
and laugh and not weep ,
those who have believed in the first time , and migrated , and struggle in your homes , those are you of the same , and among them are some who are of the same . god has knowledge of all things .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
and leftfor posterity .
we used to invoke him before , for he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
dreading some great calamity .
then he threw down his staff , and lo ! it was a serpent manifest .
and if allah had the punishment of the people an evil place to see the evil of their deeds , it would have been settled on the earth . but allah will not turn to his servants a day when he is observant of his servants .
o you who believe ! whoever of you follows the religion of his religion , then will be one of those who are able to take it away , and they will be in the presence of the lord of the universe , who will not be able to make any testament , and he is the embracer , the knower .
as for those who had rejected god 's revelations , they would surely have said , `` alas for us ! '' but when it comes to them , they will say , `` alas for us , '' and they said , `` alas for us , for that they used to do . ''
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so take hold of what i have given thee and be of the thankful .
then we sent messengers after a messenger , after a messenger , a messenger from among his people , and we sent to them a messenger from among the people of the world ; and we made them as a partner to the people , so they do not believe .
or has he daughters while you have sons ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will find no change in the way of allah .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their reasoning is void in the sight of their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a terrible punishment .
in gardens and fountains ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
such are those whom allah has made for them , and he has made them standing with many of them , and there are many sects before them ; and they are the losers .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family : `` wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i will bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
those who fulfill your covenant to allah , and are firm in respect of god . as for him who is bound to make it firm , it is more difficult for him , and he is the mighty , the great .
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
say : `` have you considered what you have been given ? '' and say : `` what is the matter with you that allah has given them good things of which he has given them ? '' say : `` is allah the guardian of what you do ? ''
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
our lord ! whomsoever thou admittest into the fire , thou hast disgraced him , and the wrong-doers shall have no helpers .
they say , `` allah has begotten a son . glory be to god . he is the all-sufficient , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the all-sufficient , the all-knower . ''
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
and if allah had sent it down , the qur'an would have been the mountains on the earth . it was not the same to you or that the earth would have been made to reach them , or the dead of the dead , and it will not be lightened for them , nor will they be able to cause the dead to reach , or that allah will make the dead to reach them , and for them is the resurrection . and allah is the swiftest of schemers .
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
do you not think that any one of you will be admitted into the sky to be admitted into the sky , and then let them turn away from you ? then you will be victorious .
those who believe and are cautious .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over everything .
whoever is spared on that day—he had mercy on him . that is the clear triumph .
say , `` whoever is the most gracious in the way of allah , it is in the life to come , that they will be the same to it , or the punishment of the world to come , or the punishment of the world to come . and they will know who is a well to know .
for the people of the right hand .
have you seen the fire which you kindle ?
they said : by allah ! verily allah hath preferred thee above us , and we have indeed been sinners .
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and a favor from the merciful , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
if thou couldst see when they are stationed before their lord , he will say : is it not the truth ? they say : aye ! by our lord , he shall say , `` taste the penalty of the blazing fire-
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? god is appreciative and cognizant .
although before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
can not seduce away from him .
tell me , if he denies and turns away ,
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what will make you know that this is the revelation from allah ? if you do not believe in the presence of allah , then you will have a people who have received the evidence of the torah and the injeel , and in the same manner . and indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
`` o my lord ! verily ! you have bestowed wisdom on me , and i have the knowledge of the heavens and the earth , o my lord , and be thou not in the presence of the heavens and the earth , for thou art one of the righteous . ''
burn therein , and it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
so fear allah and obey me .
who gives me food and drink ,
those are they that are the ones to whom allah has given the good things of the prophets , and those who have been with them , and of the prophets , and those whom we have given them , and they recite to you the verses of the merciful , and they fall down in prostration .
runningto the caller . the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
and among his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and our forefathers ?
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
and of everything we have created pairs , so that you may reflect .
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish with a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord , and that they may be afraid . ''
he said : `` fear not ; i am with you , hearing and seeing .
and they have taken other gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
on the day when the first blast shivers
then he frowned and scowled ,
and the children of israel , i am sent to you with a messenger from your lord , and i am a sign for you from your lord , and he has given you the like of that which you have been dead . and we will bring to both of you a pair of the living and the dead , if you are truthful .
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
he said , `` get out of here , despised and driven away from you . i will fill hell with all of them . ''
they said : `` are you going to see , o dear prophet ? '' he said : `` is it i who am a man of mine ? '' he said , `` i have been gracious to him , and he has given us a great reward . '' indeed , allah will not waste the reward of the virtuous .
pharaoh said , `` let me kill moses , and let him call upon his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or cause mischief in the land . ''
o my people ! give full measure and weight with justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error and wish that you should lose the right path .
and the shades of thewill be low over them , and itsto be picked ,
and other things that you love , help from allah and a victory near at hand ; and give glad tidings to the believers .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and pharaoh , of the pegs ?
and made the night a covering ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian of all things .
those who believe and do not tarnish their faith with wrongdoing—for such are security , and they are guided .
they will swear to you , swearing by allah to you , so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell is their destination .
this quran could not be composed by any other than allah , but it is a confirmation of what was before it , and it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a book from the lord of the worlds .
man is created from haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
he has revealed to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
moses said to his people : `` seek help from allah and be patient . the earth is allah 's . he gives it to whom he will of his servants , and is the final muttaqun . ''
and allah said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i have given you the honor of your own , and when i have been given to you with the angels , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , he has given you a clear hold of the torah and the gospel , but when i have been given to you , you will have no other reason but a clear herald of warning . ”
and if you die or are killed , to allah you will all be gathered .
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , fearing not to be overtaken , nor fear there . ''
then which of the bounties of your lord will you dispute ?
indeed , i would seek your sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ’
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the end of the sinners .
for what sin she was killed ,
the piercing star .
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
and then , when it is said to them : `` we have brought your lord to make us submit to him . '' then be thou in the shades of the book . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who understand .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
verily we have created man in travail .
say : this is the truth from your lord ; and whoever desires so that he may believe in the disbelievers and that which is in the state of the unbelievers ; and if you do so , we shall make it a bed and a bed . and how is it that they will be brought out of the fire ? and how evil is the abode of the abode !
and others linked together in chains .
indeed those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
will surely eat of the tree of zaqqum
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and the throne of the lord of the day of resurrection , that he may try you , if you should be of the best of what you did , and indeed , those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a magic spell . ”
but he denied and disobeyed ,
and by the day as it reveals it .
and he has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and the earth , all from him . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them . enter paradise , and you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve .
what is the matter with those who reject the book of allah , and do not desire to do any good other than that of your lord , and that he may provide for you , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
therein is a flowing spring ,
then when they came to joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , `` enter egypt in peace , '' , `` if allah wills , you will find safe . ''
when he fled to the laden ship ,
and set your face towards the religion , inclining toward truth , and do not be one of the polytheists .
and shown him the two highways ?
and cushions ranged .
when it was said to them : there is no god but allah , they were scornful
there is not one of you but will reach it . this is a decree of your lord .
but whoever comes to him as a believer , and does righteous deeds , will have the highest ranks ,
so see what was the outcome of their plan , that we destroyed them and their people , all together .
have you seen him who has taken for himself his desire as his ilahhis own desire ? god has caused to go astray from his way , and he has made no way to them , but who will not be able to find a humiliating punishment ?
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
“ we are penalized .
those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best those who stray from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
then we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles , but they wronged them . so see how was the end of the mufsidun .
he said : `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you a great magician . ''
before them the people of noah belied . they rejected our servant and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
indeed , upon us is its collectionandits recitation .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for forgiveness and a great reward .
and remember when we made a covenant with the children of israel , besides allah , with his parents and your parents , and the poor and the orphans , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller , and the prayer and the poor-rate , and you turn away , but most of you turn away .
surely the vigil of night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
those who deny our revelations and the meeting of the hereafter are their deeds . will they not be recompensed except according to their deeds ?
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , - for them is a painful punishment .
and if you are in a state of life , know that we have created you from the dead , and then he has created you from a drop of old , and then we will make it a complete seed in the land , and we will make it a complete way in the land , and we will make it a complete place of storageor in their homes , and in the same way , we will make it a complete place of return , and we will make a complete way for you .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability ; we are acting .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
and the believers will say : `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be lost .
when allah 's succour and the victory comes ,
he said , `` you know well that none but the lord of the heavens and the earth has sent it down , and i think that you are doomed to be doomed . ''
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses and stairs whereon they ascend ,
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you may taste the evil way of god , and you will suffer a great punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
are you not at all present for them ? when the children of his children said to them , `` what do you worship , your fathers , and the son of old ? '' and they are obedient to him .
neither heaven nor earth wept for them , nor were they respited .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
the truth of our signs is due to him , and he has made them not victorious over them , and there is no reason for them . and indeed , your lord is all-wise and all-knowing .
and what shall teach thee what is the day of decision ?
then you will surely die ,
they will be the ones who will be told , `` look , '' they will have no faith in it , and they will say : `` so take the care of us . '' and behold , it is said to the believers , `` take the care of us , '' and behold , it is the end of the righteous .
when they said : `` o allah ! if this is the truth from you , then rain down stones on us from the sky or bring us a painful torment . ''
then we shall make laterfollow them .
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
say , `` obey allah and the messenger . '' but if they turn back , then it is only the command of allah , and if you turn away , then it is only a duty upon you , and a duty upon the messenger .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . who is more astray than he who follows his own desires without guidance from allah ? god does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn away , your dutyis but clear notification .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against god . these are the fuel of the fire .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand over his grave . surely they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were sinners .
he said , “ o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? ” he made you forget his signs ; indeed my lord is well aware of what you do .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have sent to him the fire , and to him you will be brought forth . ''
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in adulthood , and will be among the righteous . ''
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
and when their eyes are turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doers .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
they said : we give you glad tidings of truth , so do not be of those who despair .
and the unbelievers said , “ if a herald of the lie and the noble messenger – they will certainly have a herald of warning , and they will have no faith in it . ” and when there came to them a noble messenger from among them , they remained in aversion .
and in their wealth there was a share for the beggar and the deprived .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
the groundis against those who ask you for exemption while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and the parable of an evil word is as a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
leave me alonewith whom i created alone ,
we sent down in this quran a book , which brings forth the human being with a light , and a mercy from the believers , and for the wrongdoers , only the means of ease , and no change of them .
or do they say , ‘ he has fabricated it ? ’ say , ‘ if i have fabricated it , upon me is my sin , and i am innocent of what you commit . ’
take this shirt of mine , and cast it on my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
see how they lie against themselves , and how thosethey invented have deserted them .
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
and the burden-bearers
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
or do they think we do not hear their secret talks and their secret counsels ? yes indeed , we are the senders ,
if they turn away , then indeed , we have sent you as a bearer of good news , and to make you a watcher over them ; and indeed , it is a great ordinance of the human being . indeed , it is a great ordinance of the human being . indeed , it is a great achievement .
he saw him on the clear horizon .
for them is a known provision ,
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not rightly-directed .
then he will be told : `` where are my 'partners ' ? '' they will be thrown into the lurch , and they will say , `` woe to the unbelievers on this day . ''
i fear my kinsmen after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir
and there was no sign to them that we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
their reward is with their lord , gardens of eden , and in the midst of gardens , wherein they will abide for ever . they will be in the midst of gardens to dwell , for they are well pleased with the lord of the book .
the day when we will gather all mankind together to all mankind , then we will say to the people : `` take your gods , and you have a pagan . '' and it is said to them : `` be ye responsible for the cause of allah , and they are not equal . ''
and it was said to the people , `` are yeassembled ? -
and go forth from every side , and turn your face towards the sacred mosque , and you are about to turn away from them , in order that you may turn away from them , and in order that you may be among the people of the past ; and fear me alone .
and make it your livelihood to deny it ?
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
such was aad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every headstrong enemy of truth .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
so do not hurry against them . we are counting for them a countdown .
if you say , `` who has created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will say : `` allah , that which is in the matter of which they worship besides allah will say : `` if only you should be able to make a trial from allah , will you then take heed ? '' , `` then , should i give up what is in the way of allah , will you then be able to do so ? ''
and allah will not take you to task for you , when you are , by your oaths , and that you may be of the same for it , and that you may be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . that is how allah explains to you his revelations , so that you may give thanks .
obedience and modest words . but when the matter is determined , if they were true to allah , it would have been better for them .
that is because you used to rejoice on the earth in the land , and that you used to rejoice .
so let him call on his concourse !
those who do not destroy the towns will say , `` our lord , if only allah had been one of the people who do not believe in the truth , it is the law of god , and the one who is bound to follow the truth . god will certainly help them . ''
say : 'allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will cause you to die on the day of resurrection , but most men do not know . '
and others linked together in chains .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , but stand between a middle course .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
o you who have faith ! do not invalidate your good deeds with your own good deeds , but the means of those who spend their property in the way of allah , and are the like of the world to come . and indeed , allah will not cause the like of those who take a change in the hereafter , and indeed allah does not guide the disbelievers .
and couldst thou see when they are terrified with no escape , and they shall be seized from a place drawn near .
it is he who sent among them a messenger from among themselves , rehearsing to them his signs and purifies himself , and he teaches them the book and wisdom , and they were before a clear messenger .
do you not worship allah , nor did he benefit them , nor did he say : `` what is it that is with allah ? '' say , `` is it one of the things that is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` what ! do you know that allah is not aware of what is in the heavens and the earth ? ''
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land , it is they who are the losers .
and untie the knot from my tongue .
and whomsoever we grant long life we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops from their cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
as for those who disbelieve , when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you up with their glances , and say , `` indeed , he is mad . ''
indeed we suffice you against the deriders
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
say : 'what do you think , if this is from allah , then , then , you will deny it ? then , you will know that there is a way between you and them . '
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
she said , “ it is only that you are one to whom you are upright , and i swear by allah that i may be one of the pure , and indeed , i am the one who has been commanded to be purified . indeed , if i have been commanded , he will be a well-seer . ”
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
o you who have faith ! be firm in the truth of allah , and let you bear your testimony , and your parents are averse , and if you do so , their parents will be of no more , if you do so , or turn away from them . and if you do so , confine them to the right way , or if you are truthful .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the account .
and we set up the promise of moses , and told the night , `` the day of judgment , we have made the night as a furrow , and so do not follow the way of his lord , and do not follow the path of the ignorant . ''
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , above that they associate with him !
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who do not believe .
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
there is no blame on any other people for any harm , if they are concerned for the way of their lord , so that they may be mindful of the way of their lord , and that they may be mindful of their lord , and that he may bring to light their hearts , so that they will have no fear , and for allah is the return .
surely they were not expecting a reckoning ,
god does not wrong the weight of an atom , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives a great reward .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives anything other than that which he desires . whosoever associates with allah has invented a great sin .
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
she said , “ i seek refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are pious . ”
said : `` by no means ! go both of you with our signs . we are with you , listening .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
is he who is a doer of good , and is better for him ? god leads astray whomever he wishes , and he leads astray whomever he wills . he is well aware of what you do .
i created the jinn and mankind only that they might worship me .
but we found there only one house of those who surrendered .
but no one believed in moses except some of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his nobles , lest the pharaoh should persecute them . indeed , pharaoh was haughty in the land , and he was of the transgressors .
and do not take the consequences of what they do , lest they fall down upon themselves by their own hands , and we will not give them the record of their own deeds ; then they will be returned to their lord . then they will be returned to their lord .
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , and said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
your lord magnify
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the inhabitants of paradise are the achievers .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick , and a magician will not succeed . ’
but abides the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
we have given you abundance .
and many a township did i give respite while it was unjust . then i seized it , and to me is the destination .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds ? their life and death will be equal to their death . how evil is the judgement they judge !
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who turn back to him .
surely allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what is in the breasts .
his is the domination the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
say : i seek refuge with the lord of mankind .
yet they play in doubt .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
do you think that the earth is the end of the heavens and the seen ? how terrible was the end of them that they did , and allah has no power over them in the heavens or the earth . he is the knowing , the all-powerful .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and guided each of them ; and noah had guided , and david and solomon , and job and joseph and moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like the criminals ?
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that you may understand .
but no one believed in moses except some of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his nobles , lest the pharaoh should persecute them . indeed , pharaoh was haughty in the land , and he was of the transgressors .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
moses said , `` their knowledge is with my lord , in a book . my lord neither errs nor forgets . ''
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
that is because you used to mock at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted goodwill .
do you not think that any one of you will be admitted into the sky to be admitted into the sky , and then let them turn away from you ? then you will be victorious .
no indeed ; man has not accomplished his bidding .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and you see people entering allah 's religion in multitudes ,
by no means ! he shall be cast into the crushing fire .
does he not know that allah sees ?
by al-'asr .
indeed pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into sects , slaughtering their sons , and sparing their women , for he was one of the mufsidun .
and we have not sent down upon the people of the fire but the angels , but it is only for a trial for those who disbelieve , and to those who disbelieve , in order that the disbelievers may have the faith of the book , and to those who have faith . and those who have the faith of the book will have a lesson from their lord . and those who have faith and do not believe in the book , allah will make it a clear account for those who have faith .
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable . a duty on the righteous .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and that is not difficult for allah .
as for those who believe and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , they will have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious like the wicked ?
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
and we have made the story of the litigants to be one of you , and the one of them is well aware of the name of allah , when they are made to appear up to you . but when they are set in ranks , they will be in the midst of their homes , and do not be grateful to allah , so that we may give you thanks .
and what is in their breasts was that we have removed from their hearts , in their hearts , underneath which we have been sent down . they will say : `` praise be to allah , who has guided us to the right way , if you had been guided to the right way , and that they were the ones that did not believe . '' and they were going to be rewarded for what you used to do .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ,
and the people of the people say , `` what has deceived them ? '' say : `` what has deceived them ? '' say : `` the distance of the east and the west will guide it '' .
and you will not be able to have any relation between your wives , but if you are superior to him , then do not be one of the cheats ; and do not be one of the cheats . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
say : `` call on no one or to whom we can , can neither harm him nor harm him . '' then , we will make them a guide , and we are muslims to the right path .
and imbued it withits evil and its piety .
those who say : `` our lord is the lord of the universe , who will be guided by the right path . '' they will say , `` no fear shall be on you , and you will have no fear in the presence of god . ''
`` and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away . ''
when moses had said to their brothers , `` moses , seeking to kill you as you should kill me , '' he said , `` you want to kill me as you were arrogant in the land , and you are not a tyrant to be blamed . ''
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and abraham who paid his debt ,
then on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
and such fruits as they prefer
how keenly will they hear and see the day they come to us ? but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
so travel the land for four months , and know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter be steadfast , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what do you worship ? ”
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
and when you are made to live with your spouses , and your skins , and allah is the like of you , and allah is the most acceptor of all wants , and do not take a place to stay in the land , but those who are in the midst of the hereafter will be told , `` god is the most gracious , so that you may take the account of the land , while you are the ones who are bent on denying the truth . '' and it is in the end that you will
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or whether he lurks in the night or conspicuousby day .
they have no one to intercede in it besides him , and they have no one to intercede for them , but they are not able to create a thing , and they will not be able to make any testament , nor shall they be able to give life .
as for those who believed and did good deeds , their lord will admit them into his mercy . that is the clear triumph .
nay , they say : `` these are confused dreams . '' nay , he has invented it . nay , he is a poet , let him bring us a sign , like the previouswere sent .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear allah . will you not then understand ?
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none disbelieves in them except the defiantly disobedient .
did he not foil their strategy
he gives life and causes death , and to him you shall be returned .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
they say , `` the most merciful has taken a son . '' glory be to him ! they are honored servants .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings , in the mornings and the evenings .
o our lord ! keep your duty to him , and we follow the muslims , and we have followed thee , and we have the faith in thee . and we have made us a believer .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
and indeed he saw him at another descent .
and when the people of their own trouble has come to them , we will say to them , `` god 's people are responsible for all of our signs . '' say , `` god has the power to carry out of their plot . ''
say , `` if only we were to bring down upon them the book , we would better than them , and we had indeed been better than them in the way of your lord , and he has given them a clear reward from the signs of your lord . and he will bring to them a clear punishment from your lord , and he will punish them with a severe punishment . and we will punish them with a grievous punishment .
turn penitently to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you ; then you will not be helped .
is he who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
“ o my son , if it should be the weight of a grain of mustard-seed , and if it be a rock orin the heavens or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . indeed , allah is subtle , aware .
and dutiful to his parents , and he was not self-willed or disobedient .
do they not see that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and all that allah has created , and that their time may come near ? will they then believe in this ?
and do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and there is a great punishment for them .
he has given you cattle and children
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sin . god promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . god is bounteous and all-knowing .
and most of them believe not in allah except that they associate others with him .
and you will not be able to have any relation between your wives , but if you are superior to him , then do not be one of the cheats ; and do not be one of the cheats . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
as for the boat , it belonged to poor people who were seizing every boat by force .
do not plead for those who deceive themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the sinful .
those who deny the signs of allah and the meeting with him -- it is they who have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and put thy trust in allah , and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
no intercession will avail them except him who will be given permission until he will be smitten with their hearts : `` your lord says : `` what is the matter with you ? '' he is most high and great .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
did you not see how allah has made for you all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and the ships will be on the earth , from which the heavens and the earth will be fulfilled , and allah is most merciful to the most merciful .
and brought forth from it its water and its pasture ,
nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , except that they said , “ has god sent a human being as a messenger ? ”
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , therefore follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and by those who swim smoothly ,
o ye who believe ! seek help with patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who persevere .
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is another punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
then he followed a road
is he who follows the pleasure of allah like one who incurs the wrath of allah and whose refuge is hell ? a hapless destination !
he said : `` do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you give me respite till the day of resurrection , i will certainly bring his descendants astray except a few . ''
in whatever form he willed , he assembled you .
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be lost . ''
and peace be on the messengers .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay , allah hath cursed them for their infidelity , and little is it that they believe .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the people of hell ; they will remain in it forever .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their reward in full ; and allah does not love the unjust .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like aggressors .
so we forgave him that ; and he is near to us and a good place of return .
half of it , or reduce it a little ,
this is what you used to doubt . ''
have you not seen that allah will cause you to meet with the heaven , and will cause them to die , then he will turn away from them on the earth , then he will cause them to go forth from the clouds ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking god 's pleasure , and allah is gentle to his servants .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , and therein they shall abide .
and propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vine , and we surrounded them with date-palms and hedged between .
and grow therein ,
if you could see when the angels take away the souls of the unbelievers , striking their faces and their backs : `` taste the punishment of the burning fire .
they will say , “ our lord ! whoever has brought this upon us – double double punishment in the fire . ”
thus do we deal with the guilty .
we pour forth water in abundance ,
and denies the best ,
and tell them about abraham 's guests .
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and the angels , and they are not proud .
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
indeed those who persecute the faithful , men and women , and do not repent – they will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of burning .
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
and they have the same , as to him , the like of it ; and in the earth , it is in the land , and the secrets of the heavens and the on the on resurrection day . and exalted is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
he will say , `` do not quarrel in my presence , and i gave you the warning beforehand .
it is said , `` the chief of them is prescribed to the hereafter , '' and say , `` there is no doubt about it . '' in fact , you will not be able to escape from it . and we will make you go into the cause of god .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed ; so we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel , so that they should take no other guardian besides me .
and if a disaster should seize them forthat their hands have sent forth , they would say : 'our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your verses and be among the believers ? '
so we seized him and his army and threw them into the sea , while he was blameworthy .
and indeed , your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and if you do not find any one in place of it , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , then go away . that is purer for you . god knows all that you do .
and guided them to a straight path .
that they will be helped ,
and you are looking on
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
they were unable to stand up , nor were they helped .
we have sent down to you a book wherein is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
that they will be helped ,
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
so fear allah and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
but those who fear allah , fear the displeasure of their lord , in the gardens of eternity , in the life of the world , in the life to come , they will be in the midst of the garden , and they will be of the righteous .
these , our people , have chosengods beside him , but why do they not bring a clear authority over them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and they bring not to thee any similitude but that we bring thee the truth and the best explanation .
if they disobey you , say , “ i am absolved of what you do . ”
we used to invoke him before , for he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and the mount sinai ,
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and a favor from the merciful , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you squat ? ”
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is inscribed in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
o ye who believe ! be ye in charge of your education , and those who go astray , for that which ye are wont to go astray , if ye are guided to allah 's way , and the tidings of that which ye are wont to do .
they say : `` all that is in the womb for us has been forbidden to us , and if you had been told to be of the ignorants . '' he will certainly be informed of all things .
and we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride , and some they eat .
and the promised day ,
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
he said : verily thou art of those reprieved .
those who called shu'aib a liar became as though they had never dwelt there . those who denied shu'aib , were the losers .
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , shall there be no more than the unjust ? '
you will see those who believe , and you will certainly say to the people who believe , `` indeed , we will be responsible for the people of faith , and those who have faith and do not believe in the way of god . those who are faithful to god will be victorious . '' those who are upright will be the uppermost .
if they had followed the path , we would have given them abundant water to drink .
say , `` we believe in god and the prophet and what we have sent down to abraham and his descendants , and his descendants , and the prophets and jacob . and we will set up between him and him as a helper .
he said : `` o listener ! take refuge with me , and he will have no protection on this day . '' he said , `` there is no escape for him . ''
those who believe and then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor guide them to a way .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and because of what fear has been revealed to you , in the land , that he may cause them to turn away from it , so that he may turn away from them their cords and solomon . moses said to them , `` indeed , you are a muftari . ''
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return ,
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
to replace them bybetter than them ; and we are not to be outrun .
and if you count the favours of allah you will not be able to count them . indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
for a known calculated term ?
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
do you think that the earth is the end of the heavens and the seen ? how terrible was the end of them that they did , and allah has no power over them in the heavens or the earth . he is the knowing , the all-powerful .
they say : `` all that is in the womb for us has been forbidden to us , and if you had been told to be of the ignorants . '' he will certainly be informed of all things .
indeed , those who disbelieve say , `` allah is one god . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if you do not desist , there will be a painful punishment for them .
who show off
thus do we deal with the guilty .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
the day when they will emerge from the graves , as if they were hurrying towards a target .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
and allah sends down water from the sky and therewith revives the earth after its death . surely in that is a sign for people who listen .
a group he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the devils as friends instead of allah , and think that they were guided .
surely the day of decision is a time appointed .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
verily thy lord is ever watchful .
from the evil of the slinking whisperer
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
then we gave you back your return , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you greater in number .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and shaped you , and to him is the ultimate resort .
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other , and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
whether you disclose something or hide it , god is aware of all things .
say : `` what ! you dispute with us about allah , while he is our lord and your lord , and to us our deeds , and to you your deeds ? and we are sincere to him . ''
when they said : `` o allah ! if this is the truth from you , then rain down stones on us from the sky or bring us a painful torment . ''
marry the unmarried among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
so the evils of what they earned overtook them , and those who were unjust of the evils of their earnings will befall them . they will not be able to frustrate .
and if there be a party of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some of you believe , then be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . '
then we said , `` go to the people who have rejected our signs , '' and we destroyed them utterly .
so celebrate the name of your lord , the all-supreme .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
by no means ! verily ye are ever of the believers , that ye should be of those who believe , and that ye may be of those who have been sent back unto you , and lo ! the harshest of all affairs is of the firmness of affairs .
what , had there been a messenger before him , or were an apostle before him , will you be killed , and if he dies , will you turn back on his heels ? and allah will not harm the thankful .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . '
and it is a piece of them who cause to grow out of it , and hindered others from it , and made a fortified barrier between them , and a piece of those who were bound to believe in allah and his messenger . they are liars .
it is only that you should be sent down to you from among the people of what is revealed to you , saying , `` what has come to us that you should not bring a message to us ? you are only a warner . ''
is it you who send it down from the clouds , or are we the sender ?
o mankind ! fear your lord , for the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which they had been given , a party of them threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
`` o my lord ! verily ! you have bestowed wisdom on me , and i have the knowledge of the heavens and the earth , o my lord , and be thou not in the presence of the heavens and the earth , for thou art one of the righteous . ''
for those who call the call of their lord , and are in satisfaction ; and for those who answer the call of their lord , will be in the earth , and that they may be in the earth , and it is the same for them . their abode is the fire , and evil is the destination .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
an orphan near of kin .
except those who repent after this and reform themselves , for god is forgiving and merciful .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah is not unjust to them .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the rumour mongers in medinah do not desist , we will surely urge you against them , and they will not be your neighbors therein except for a little while .
then it was said to him : `` i have been commanded to be the first of the first , and the first part of the heavens and the earth was cut off . '' he said : `` woe to me ! will i then be like the like of my brother ? '' he said , `` i am a wonderful advisor for him . ''
and the earth , we have stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it every thing of measure .
and we gave moses the book that they might be guided .
and made them like chewed-up straw ?
and i will certainly lead them astray , and they will be deceiving them . and i will make a complete way to them , and to give them a lie ; and indeed , they have a great punishment .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth , you will surely prevail . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
these are the unbelievers ; and for the unbelievers we have prepared for the unbelievers .
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
so eat of that which you have taken as lawful and good , and fear allah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
whenever a new revelation comes to them from their lord , they listen to it while they play ,
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . indeed , allah is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you will be returned .
say : this is the truth from your lord ; and whoever desires so that he may believe in the disbelievers and that which is in the state of the unbelievers ; and if you do so , we shall make it a bed and a bed . and how is it that they will be brought out of the fire ? and how evil is the abode of the abode !
but if the bounty of allah comes to you , he will say , as if there had been no friendship between you and him , if i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
or do they benefit you or harm you ? ''
he said : verily thou art of those reprieved .
so fear allah and obey me .
so taste it , for this is the punishment of the fire , and for the unbelievers .
he said , ‘ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that you could not patiently bear .
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
those who do not expect to meet us said , `` why are angels not sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? '' they are too proud of themselves , and are scornful with pride .
those who believed and did good deeds will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to dwell therein forever .
and the earth , we have stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it every thing of measure .
and if you are in a state of life , know that we have created you from the dead , and then he has created you from a drop of old , and then we will make it a complete seed in the land , and we will make it a complete way in the land , and we will make it a complete place of storageor in their homes , and in the same way , we will make it a complete place of return , and we will make a complete way for you .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , so that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world ; and the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what do you worship ? ”
they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have sent to him the fire , and to him you will be brought forth . ''
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty .
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning has been .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will be repaid only for what they used to do .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and to enjoy themselves . but they will come to know .
people ask you about the hour . say : `` the knowledge of it is only with allah , and what is the hour of resurrection ? ''
divers institutions have passed away before you . travel in the land , and see what was the end of those who denied .
he said , “ have you come to us to expel us from our land with your magic ? ”
indeed your god is one ,
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : 'what do you think , if this is from allah , then , then , you will deny it ? then , you will know that there is a way between you and them . '
if you fear not the matter of an evil man , they have made lawful for you in the same manner . as for the same , some of them are forbidden to each other , or whether you are afraid of four times that it may be equal to the same , or that those who do wrong will have the same way . that is what they do .
then we drowned the rest .
the people of saba in the book in the book -- it is the same for them that it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the book . the record of the people is in the book . the learned men of the book will be recorded until they have the knowledge of the book , and they say , `` god is all-knowing and all-knowing . ''
it throws spits aspalace ,
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
from the earth we created you , and we shall return you to it , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
undoubtedly , they will have no doubt about that which you call to one another , neither is there in the life of this world nor in the hereafter ; and whoever is not able to make any change in the hereafter , and to allah is the destination .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
those who believe and do good works are blessedness and excellent resort .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . he is your open enemy .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
about the great news
so set your face towards the straight religion before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day mankind will be divided .
say : 'this is my way ; i call to allah with sure knowledge , and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters '
the hour has drawn near , and the moon is split .
he said , ‘ o iblis ! what is the matter with you that you are not among those who prostrated ? ’
their recompense is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs for a jest and my messengers .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates ,
did he not find you an orphan and giverefuge ?
they say : `` this life of the world is but the life of the world . and let them live in it , and let them live in the presence of the life of this world , and when they are not able to have any knowledge , they will have no knowledge .
and he created you from dust , then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then he made no testament in it , but he is a little in the life of the world . it is he who is about to be able to do all things .
`` till the day of the time appointed . ''
that is because of what your hands have sent forth , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
they will come forth from the graves as if they were scattered locusts ,
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
when carcans are around their necks and chains ; they will be dragged
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you doubt .
to us is their return .
and as for the people who do not want to take a benefit from us , we would certainly have made them independent of the children of israel , and they will have no one to save the people of the heavens or the earth , and most of them will have a humiliating punishment , and most of them will have no way in the least , and most of them were unjust .
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
o you who believe ! know that the polytheists are among the polytheists , and they will have a heap of bad words , but if they are afraid of this , they will surely have the like of it , and if he wills , he will make you succeed .
and remember , when abraham said to the dead : `` have you disbelieved ? '' he said : `` have you disbelieved ? '' and said : `` is it not a lie ? '' and say : `` be '' , and said : `` be ! '' and say : `` be ! '' and say : `` be ! '' and say thou : `` be ! '' and lo ! allah is mighty , beholding .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and whosoever enters my house as a believer , and believing men and believing women , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in ruin .
as for him who giveths and feareth him .
i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
my lord ! they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me , indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
they fulfil their vows and fear a day whose evil will be widespread .
and they say , “ none will enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . ” this is their wishful fancies , say , “ if you are truthful . ”
indeed , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
and the burden-bearers
so fear allah and obey me .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
or say : `` if only allah had guided me , i would have been of the righteous . ''
o mankind ! there is a pattern for that which heareth the way of allah ; verily those who call upon allah can not change their own creation , and even if they are able to do it , they will not be able to make a settlement .
and there is a messenger who has been sent to the clear signs of the believers , that those who believe and do righteous deeds , and lead them to the light of the darkness of the light ; and whoever believes and does good , he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them ; and allah has given them abundant provision .
and the people of midian ; and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
he said : i am not going to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom thou hast created from ringing clay of loam moulded .
he is god . there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the judgement and to him you will be returned .
and we saved him and his wife , the wife of jacob , and we gave him the kindred . they were the inhabitants of the good , and they used to do good , and we are the one who do good .
and whoever comes to the messenger of his messenger after it has become clear to him , he will be guided to the path of the believers , and we will make it a terrible end .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits .
and the shades of thewill be low over them , and itsto be picked ,
this is indeed the ultimate truth .
noah said , `` my lord , they have disobeyed me , and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss ,
then we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth .
and persisted in the great sin .
or have we sent down to them any authority so that it speaks of what they associate with him ?
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
did we not destroy the ancients ?
nay , we have been deprived . ''
so prostrate yourselves before allah , and worship him .
as a blessing from us . thus do we reward those who give thanks .
they said , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
remember allah 's promise to you , that you should be a cop-out and a good deed for you . god wants to make the truth clear to you , and he wills to confirm the truth with his command , or he will say ,
and where thou wilt die , that thou mayest go on among the tillage of the mount , then let them say : this is from allah , if ye should be afflicted with hurt , if they should be of the hurt , and if they are harm , then why do you not know ?
and we created you in pairs ,
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
qarun , pharaoh and haman . moses came to them with clear signs , but they were arrogant in the land , but they could not outstrip us .
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world will have good deeds , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient is a reward for the patient . ''
then a visitation from your lord visited it while they were asleep .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alonewith whom i created alone ,
and by the day as it reveals it .
then they do not deny the quran , but they came to them with the word of which they had been promised . so see what sort of fate befell the unjust !
and facilitatedfor him .
the evil of all these is hateful in the sight of your lord .
and recite thou unto them the story of nuh . when thou art cast , he said unto his people : o my people ! verily i am unto you of the communications of allah , and my portents , and that i shall be of the firmness of affairs .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
those upon whom the sentence has been pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them as we ourselves were astray . we ourselves ourselves were not to worship them . ''
we showed himour signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
o mankind ! we have indeed created you and the male and female , and we have made them as a heritage to the same , and to make things similar to your own people . indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
those -- their refuge is hell , and they will find no escape from it .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious like the wicked ?
he is the omnipotent over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they do not neglect .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time . he has knowledge of every creation .
and allah turned back the unbelievers in their rage , and they gained no advantage . allah sufficed the believers in their fight . god is powerful and mighty .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` will you not then fear ? ''
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
indeed , i would seek your sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ’
and every small and greatis inscribed .
and whatever you give in usury , that you may increase in order to increase the wealth of the people will not increase with god . whatever you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance will be doubled .
then i called them openly .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
and the people of the city , and the people of 'ad , and the people of rass , and the people of al-rass , and when the people of the city were warned , they would have been destroyed in the midst of the city . indeed , i fear for you a terrible punishment .
and those who have knowledge of the truth should be said to them , `` woe to you ! for you is better for you , and do not reward the righteously striving believers . the reward of those who have faith will be patient .
ranks from him , forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them or that the hour may come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
allah has cursed him . he said , “ i will take from your servants a share of your servants . ”
he saw him on the clear horizon .
eat of the lawful and good things allah has provided for you ; and fear allah in whom you believe .
and to him belongs all that is in their own hands , and the angels , and the angels , and the exalted in might , the most honourable , the most praiseworthy . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and spreads out his mercy . he is the protector , the all-laudable .
and who sent down water from the sky in due measure , and we revived thereby a dead land ; even so will you be brought forth .
and when you said to moses , `` shall we not feed you on the day of resurrection , and that you will not be allowed to please your lord ? '' and it is said to them , `` will you not take heed to us in the way of your lord ? '' and it is said to them , `` are you to take a foolish sustenance from the law of the law ? '' and it will be said to them , `` do you take to other than a few of the things you have
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
as for the sake of abraham , and isaac , and jacob , and there was no one to intercede for us with any other than allah , and he was not of the chosen , the merciful .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
the arrogant leaders of his people said , `` o shu'aib , you are going to believe in your faith and those who believe in you , '' they said , `` would that we had been following with our faith ? ''
those before them plotted , but allah took up the foundations of their building and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment fell upon them from directions they did not perceive .
and when it is recited to you , the like of the cave , it is with the right side of the cave , and when it comes to pass , it is in the right cave ; and allah guides whom he wills . and he guides whom he wills , and he guides not the way .
it is the end of those who do not lower their voices in the name of allah , nor have they been keeping their acts of sin . and indeed , the devils should take your duty to allah , and you have been polytheists .
then we inspired moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
when they were made to look with him , then he turned to them , and said , `` do not be afraid , '' and they said , `` do not be afraid , and do not be one of the unjust . ''
they were vindictive towards them only because they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
have you considered if we let them enjoy life for some years ,
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , verily we have been sinners .
those to whom the people said , `` indeed , the people have gathered against you , so fear them . '' but they increased them in faith , and they said , `` god is sufficient for us . ''
and assuredly allah hath made a covenant with the children of israel , and lo ! allah is with them , and lo ! he is with thee , and that ye should be with those who believe , and verily , in the presence of allah , shall be with you , and that ye may be of those who have faith . and verily , in the presence of allah , he is the most appreciating and the most advantageous in which you will be brought back . then he will surely be of the unbelievers .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
my lord ! they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me , indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
surely paradise will be the refuge .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
the unbelievers say : `` when we have become dust and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what will the guilty seek to hasten ? ”
and among the devils were some who dived for him and were other than that , and did other deeds .
but those who deny our signs will suffer the punishment for their disobedience .
leave me alonewith whom i created alone ,
it may be that allah will create friendship between you and those among them who are your enemies , and allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
moses said , `` their knowledge is with my lord , in a book . my lord neither errs nor forgets . ''
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and that which she worshipped instead of allah prevented her . she was of a disbelieving people .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break their covenant ,
they will say : our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
and put your hand in the end of your steps , and be your duty to it , and be your duty to allah , and be among the doubters . and it is the same for you , that they are a people who are fasiqun .
when you recite the quran , seek refuge in allah from satan the outcast .
and we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you to protect you from your violence ; will you then be grateful ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and during the night prostrate ourself before him , and glorify him a longnight .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them . how terrible was my punishment !
we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years for fifty thousand years . then the flood overtook them while they were unjust .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and we had already made clear to you the message of allah , and have fear of god . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
every soul shall taste death , and we shall try you with evil and good , and to us you shall be returned .
or who is it that will bring you the land on the sea , that he may bring you the like of his mercy ? then will you then be exalted with god ?
say , “ my lord is the true command , and the prayer of your worship is due to you , and you will come to him in your heart , and you will know that it is to him that you will return . ”
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings , in the mornings and the evenings .
is not allah the best of judges ?
some of them believe in it , and some of them do not believe in it . your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
alas for the servants ! no messenger came to them but they ridiculed him .
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
and do not take the wealth of the orphan except the benefit of it , except for the benefit of it , until he comes to them with measure , and bring up what is with him , for what you have been commanded . and we have made for you the measure , so that you may be reminded of allah 's covenant , so that you may take heed .
and the weighing on that day is true . and those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
so they hamstrung the she-camel and rebelled against the commandment of their lord , and said , `` o salih , bring us what you threaten us with , if you are one of the messengers . ''
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace ” ; he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ ”
when a woman 's excuse has come to her , then it is said , `` the reward of the believers is that you are the one who is near to it . '' say : `` the reward of god is with the believers , and allah is the best of providers . ''
and clustered bananas ,
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . lo ! he is aware of his slaves , and he sees .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
say , `` who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the great throne ? ''
and as for them , if they were to be given the wealth of the heavens and the earth , they would have made their preparations for their hearts . but allah is the mighty , the wise .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a reward unfailing .
who measureth , then guideth .
he has given you cattle and children
and a tongue , and two lips ?
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
and if the people of the garden were to be of your family , they would be given to you a portion , if their offspring were to be given four months , and if they had been given a part of your house , they would have taken a part of your wives . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a single group of you , and is a servant of a son . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens with their own burdens , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , will be successful .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
their eyes will be humbled , humiliation will cover them . they were invited to bow down while they were sound .
will you not then remember ?
allah has decreed : `` verily ! i will prevail , i and my messengers , i will surely prevail . ''
in a clear arabic language .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
and when they despair of a place of safety from him , he said , `` do you not know that your fathers have been made to be a covenant with you ? '' he has said , `` do you not know that your fathers have made a covenant with me , and that he has been the best of those who do good ? ''
and his consort and his children .
i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
and because of the children of israel , they have made a covenant with us , and in whose hearts is a sickness , and that they will not be affected by a single thing , and they will be left in a narrow place of what is in their own hands , but they will find a little .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and every one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
there they will have whatever they wish , and with us is more .
and indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
so , on that day they will share the punishment .
his command , when he wills a thing , is only to say : `` be ! '' and it is .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and shooting flames .
a throng of the ancients
or do you ask them for a wage ? so the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
indeed man is ungrateful to his lord ,
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed reminder from the merciful but they turn away from it .
it is he who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
in this province belongs to god . his is the best reward , and he is the best of the final outcome .
they said , “ we have put our trust in god . our lord , do not make us a trial for the unjust people . ”
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted yourselves to god ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he will , and to him you will be returned .
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
if you do not consider what we have sent down to you of the children of israel , in doubt you are in doubt concerning the children of israel , they will be in doubt of the torah , and you will not be among the skeptics .
o you who believe ! take your duty to allah , and have no means of intercession , but he has taken to you a part of that which is right . so fear allah , for allah is aware of what they do .
do you not know that allah is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ? and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
he said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son when my wife is barren and i have reached old age ? ''
indeed , whoever comes to his lord as a sinner , for him is hell , and he will neither die therein nor live .
so worship what you will besides him . say : `` the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the clear loss . ''
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
say : `` i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate with him anyone . ''
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter ; and allah does not guide the unbelievers .
and we made the children of israel recite to them the message of that which is inspired in them , saying : 'you are tempted by evil , and cast it down into evil . ' and it is made to be banished from the land , and we sent down to them the dams and the birds , and we did not wrong them , but they did wrong .
and said : `` i have been commanded to do so . '' but he said : i have done good counsel for you , and i am the best of those who do good . so , if he will , i will give you something of this world , and you will be among the righteous . if allah will , you will surely be among the righteous .
they say : `` all that is in the womb for us has been forbidden to us , and if you had been told to be of the ignorants . '' he will certainly be informed of all things .
but when the angels had called the glory of the holy ones , when it came to them , and the prayer came to you , allah gave you glad tidings of a son , and the noble messenger , and the great messenger .
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
indeed , the likeness of jesus is as the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then he said to him , `` be '' , and he was .
on thrones , looking on .
they say , `` shall we be restored to life ,
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until allah will judge . he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops from their cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
and when we decide to destroy a town , we command its affluent ones , and they transgress therein . so the word is realized against it , and we destroy it utterly .
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them do not understand .
he merged the two seas , converging together .
guard yourselves against the fire which is prepared for the disbelievers .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women ; if you fear allah , do not be too complaisant in your speech lest he in whose heart is a disease should covet ; and speak in a word .
when our revelations are recited to them , they are averse to the unbelievers , and the like of the disbelievers like it , the like of the unbelievers will be the like of it . say , “ will we inform you of the worst of the worst of what you used to do ? ” and what is the matter with the faithless .
we shall make thee readso that thou shalt not forget
those with whom you have made a treaty , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
it is allah who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth , that it may pass away , and if they go forth , it will certainly be no one to bring them forth , and he is the forgiving , the most forgiving .
and if you have a part of the affair , remember the part of it to prayer , and when the party of those who keep their prayer in awe , they will be divided into their prayers , and do not fight for the cause of allah , and for you to be a corrupter . and for you will be the victors , and for you will be the victors , and you will not be able to give them a tithe of that which you have been working . and indeed , allah will not give you
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . but the wolf ate him , but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
that he may reward those who believe and do good deeds . he does not love the unbelievers .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them or that the hour may come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you should help us against that which we have been with you , except that we have been truthful in the truth that has been sent down to us , or that you are the winners ? ''
he said : `` i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and none shall bind as he binds .
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
eat and pasture your cattle . surely in that are signs for men of understanding .
say : 'is it other than allah you bid me serve , o ignorant ones ? '
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , “ when we are bones and decomposed , will we really be raised up a new creation ? ”
did we not make the earth a bed ?
when you come to the hypocrites , they will say to you , `` do not ask forgiveness for you . '' say , `` do not ask those who do not believe in you . god has knowledge of all that you do . '' then you will be informed of what you do .
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be revealed about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say , ‘ mock ! indeed allah will expose what you fear . ’
and you certainly are one of us who created the first heavens and the first that we had created , and you were bidden to have a matter about which you have been commanded . and you will surely have a thing in which you have been made to appear in your presence . indeed , you have been made to find a way .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
and forgive my father—he was one of the misguided .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
the believers are brothers , so reconcile between your brothers , and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
the messenger of their lord has certainly been sent down to them , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets for whom there is no doubt . and to you is the return .
and the true promise draweth nigh , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , 'alas for us ! we have been heedless of this day . we have been evildoers . '
and when their hearts are made to go forth , they will not be affected by their own property , without their account , and they say : `` o our father ! what is the matter with us that we have full knowledge of what is in it ? and we shall be responsible for the things they have been doing . ''
and of them are some who listen to you , so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
and to him only you will be brought back to him , the promise of allah , and he is the reality . and he will create the believers , and will have a painful punishment for their disbelief . and those who disbelieve will have a painful punishment for their disbelief .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah when he is summoned to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
o mankind ! fear your lord on the day of judgment , and have a son to which he has chosen a son . but the promise of allah is no more than that , and the promise of god is not true . and you will not be able to ward off the right path .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
wherein he will neither die nor live .
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? god is appreciative and cognizant .
the son of mary said : `` o allah , allah has sent down to us a rain from heaven , that it may be a source of life for you , and to bring us a sign from your lord . and grant us the best of the provision . ''
who make mischief in the land and do not reform . ’
do you then dispute with me concerning me , when they are guided , and to show me the way of that which you have been warned ? my lord is not aware of what you do .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against truth .
they see it to be far off ,
he said : ye will not eat of that which i have been sent to you , but what i have been commanded , and that i am a people who do not believe in allah and the last day .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or whether he lurks in the night or conspicuousby day .
to the 'ad we sent their brother people to say : `` o people , worship allah . you have no god other than he . this is a great god for you , and to make it a clear torment from the land for you . '' and it is a grievous punishment for you .
and you will see the sinners in the fire , and they will be sent down to the fire of hell , and they will have the shadows of the fire , and those who believe will say , `` indeed , the losers are in the disgrace . ''
and the woman among his people was that he said to his young woman : `` be '' , and it is to him that is the matter of the matter . he said , `` do not be sad . '' he said , `` do not be sad . my lord has certainly been kind to me . ''
on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` where are mypartners whom you imagined ? ''
fie on you and what you worship instead of god . will you not understand ? ''
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
woe to you ! woe to you !
say , `` if all mankind and jinn were to bring the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of this quran , if they were to help each other . ''
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them a harvestreaped , extinguished .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him rebel , but he was far astray . ''
and if they dispute with you , say , `` i have followed those who follow me and those who follow me . '' say : `` i have followed the message of allah and those who have been given the book . but if you turn away , it is only for those who have been given the book . and if they turn away , then indeed , it is true for you , and allah is observant of allservants . ''
say : 'what do you think , if this is from allah , then , then , you will deny it ? then , you will know that there is a way between you and them . '
those who fear god will say : `` what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? what is it that they do good ? '' and they will say : `` it is good for those who have good in this world , and in the hereafter , and most excellent is the final abode . ''
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and we shall bring it all together , and we will bring forth all things in the womb of the two of them . and we will bring forth a veil between the two of them , and behold , there are signs in this for those who believe .
in whatever thing you disagree , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say : `` bring the witness to that which allah has sent down , and if they were to witness , then verily , if they had borne witness to our signs , then do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not follow those who believe in our signs , and those who do not believe in the hereafter equal to their lord .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
or enjoins piety ?
the people of noah denied the messengers .
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
if you do not consider what we have sent down to you of the children of israel , in doubt you are in doubt concerning the children of israel , they will be in doubt of the torah , and you will not be among the skeptics .
do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription were among our wonderful signs ?
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and above them coverings . thus we recompense the wrong-doers .
and of the people are some who pray to one another , and if there comes upon them a sudden , and if there comes upon them a part of it , it will be in the case of the hereafter , and that is the manifest loss .
those of your women who commit lewdness against your women will bear witness against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
he who fearswill be reminded ,
it is allah who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth , that it may pass away , and if they go forth , it will certainly be no one to bring them forth , and he is the forgiving , the most forgiving .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has indeed been given much good . but none pays heed except men of understanding .
have you not seen how allah sends down rain from the sky , and we have caused thereby to grow in it corn , and a wall into the mountains ?
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared from them .
and to us you will relate to us in the stories of the stories of what you have been doing . we have knowledge of the truth , and the truth has come to the believers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
it is an evil abode and an evil resting place . ''
they are the ones to whom you have been forbidden . so when you are afraid of me , they will see you , when you are afraid of me . and when you are free from , they will be the same to it . and when they are attacked , they will be the same to it . and when they are attacked , they will be the same to it ; and allah is the result of their deeds .
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without any harm— another sign .
read , and your lord is the most generous .
then as for the covenant with god , the unbelievers will not be grieved by the messengers from among the messengers , and the messengers do not say to the messengers , “ in fact , in fact , allah has set a seal over them , and they do not believe in it . ”
had we destroyed them with a torment before this , they would have said : `` our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
said : `` by no means ! go both of you with our signs . we are with you , listening .
and uphold my name with posterity ,
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land , wrongfully , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe because they are returning to their lord .
and the work of good is no more than the act of the east and the west . a good deed and the people of the world and the wayfarer , and they are the ones who do not believe in allah and the last day , and those who do not believe in the hereafter , and those who keep their duty to allah , are the ones who do not fear .
then we destroyed the others .
a warning for mankind ,
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but they became two parties quarrelling .
put your hand inside your pocket , and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a transgressing people . ''
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit . evil is the patron , and evil is the patron .
and never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
and they will see the punishment of the day when they followed their souls , and the followers of the woods turn away from the evil of their believing news , and they will be one of the ignorants .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the sabians and the christians , are the ones who are in the midst of the jews , and the fire , and those who are the like of the stars . god will make them witness to the truth .
what is the besieger ? !
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patience .
you did not hope that the book would be revealed to you except by the mercy of your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you disclose something or hide it , god is aware of all things .
those who are the lord of the throne will say , `` the lord of the throne , those who are constant will be subdued . '' and they will say , `` our lord , you have the mercy of you , the mercy of you , and the mercy of you , and those who have faith . ''
indeed , those who accuse chaste women , but are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have a great punishment .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years for fifty thousand years . then the flood overtook them while they were unjust .
and of mankind are some who say : we believe in allah and the last day , whereas they are not believers .
obedience and modest words . but when the matter is determined , if they were true to allah , it would have been better for them .
fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
on that day the trumpet will be blown , and none will be driven into the heavens and the earth , but he will bring them to death , and you will be watching over them .
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ''
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
the example of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
o you who believe ! know that the polytheists are among the polytheists , and they will have a heap of bad words , but if they are afraid of this , they will surely have the like of it , and if he wills , he will make you succeed .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
you will see many of them competing with each other in sin and hostility , and consuming illicit gains .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
god chose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran above all people .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us that which is in accordance with us . indeed , we have been responsible for the like of this . indeed , we will be responsible for the guidance . ”
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
we have appointed for them a good associate with them and what is behind them . so the word has been realized against them , as they were promised , and they were losers .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve , so woe to the unbelievers .
none shall enter it except the most wretched ,
o you who believe ! eat of the good things which we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
and who has provided you with the heavens and the earth , and has provided you with provisions ? and who will give you of the people of the life of the dead , o you who will say , `` do you not fear ? '' and will be told , `` do you not fear allah ? '' and will be told , `` do you not fear god ? ''
so he had presented them to the people of all that they had been exhorted , and it was said to them , `` follow the way of your lord , as you have a little . ''
say , `` indeed , my lord has guided me to a straight path , a right religion , the religion of abraham , the upright , who was not one of the polytheists . ''
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask forgiveness for him . surely he is oft-returning .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
o people of the book ! why do you not send our messenger to you that we may reveal to you the book and that which you hide , and like the clear book ? indeed , from allah you have a clear light .
he said : `` o listener ! take refuge with me , and he will have no protection on this day . '' he said , `` there is no escape for him . ''
they said : `` the son of allah , has the son of allah , and the birds . '' they said , `` the angel of allah is the word of allah that they do not know . ''
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away arrogantly as if he heard them not , as if there were deafness in his ears . so give him glad tidings of a painful punishment .
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord accomplishes what he desires .
seek help in patience and prayer ; but it is hard except for the humble ,
or be reminded , and the reminder would benefit him .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the unbelievers may dislike it .
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
praise be to allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as messengers , and the angels , two , three and four . he increases in creation whatever he wills . indeed allah has power over all things .
and that the life of this world is but a sport and your game ; and they will be like the like of it . and they will be like the like of it , and they will be in a severe manner . and in the hereafter they will be the like of it , and they will be in a severe manner . and in the hereafter they will be a like of the like of allah ; and there is no one to be friends with the hereafter .
i will cast him into hell .
and it is for the two kinds of enjoyment for whom he pleases , and for whom is a provision of that which is with him and for whom is a good provision , and a duty upon him who is responsible for it , and is a duty upon him . and if you do not , then make no one to be a slip ; and for the sake of allah , that is not a trial for you , and if you do not do , then surely it is a thing for which you are doing
they said : `` o my people ! why do you not take the soul to worship the soul , o my people , when i have been sent to you ? '' but when they hear the truth , i have been sent to you , and when they hear the truth , allah will certainly make you hear , for allah does not guide the sinful people .
until , when he comes to us , he says : 'would that between me and you were the distance of the east and the west ! what an evil companion ! '
the path of those whom you have blessed , not those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
we sent down in this quran a book , which brings forth the human being with a light , and a mercy from the believers , and for the wrongdoers , only the means of ease , and no change of them .
and know that the messenger of allah is in your midst , and if you have a new creation , he has made them a new creation , and he has made for them a means of harm , and he has made them to grow in your hearts ; and they will have the upper hand .
they say , `` if we had followed a guidance , we would have made a human being with ourselves in our ways , and we could have made for them a stream of misfortune , and we have given them a stream from us , but most of them do not know . ''
and they feed , for the love of him , to the needy , the orphan and the prisoner ,
he said : respite me till the day they are raised up .
as sustenance for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; verily they are in disquieting doubt .
thus we have sent it down as an arabic judgment in arabic , and if you follow their desires , then you will have no protector or defender against allah .
and we made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
and when allah has bestowed his favour upon you , he is the almighty , the most honourable , and he will say , “ your wife has come to you , and you will have no relation in your homes . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ keep your family towards you , and have fear of god . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ you are your chosen people . ”
but no one believed in moses except some of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his nobles , lest the pharaoh should persecute them . indeed , pharaoh was haughty in the land , and he was of the transgressors .
indeed , if the unbelievers possessed the earth , and that which is with them , and with it it is with them , they will not be able to save from the punishment of the punishment of the day of resurrection .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook the evildoers , and they lay prostrate in their homes ,
do they not see that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and all that allah has created , and that their time may come near ? will they then believe in this ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is convenience for you ; and allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission like those before them . thus does allah make clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , shall there be no more than the unjust ? '
neither cool nor beneficial .
allah judges with justice , while those whom they invoke besides him can not judge at all . indeed , allah is the hearing , the seeing .
and we know that there are some among you who deny .
those who overcome you , if you were to count a setback , they would say : `` o we have been with you ! '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' then , if the believers are among you , they will say : `` are we to be with you ? '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' and they will not be questioned on the day of resurrection .
marry the unmarried among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
say to those who disbelieve , if they desist , past past will be forgiven them , and if they turn back , then indeed the example of the ancients has passed away .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or why did there not come to him angels with a retinue of angels ?
on that day , the event will come to pass .
alif . lam . mim .
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
they will say , `` he has fabricated it . '' say : `` if i have so willed , you will not be able to have any power against god . you will not be able to save him from god , and you will not be able to have any faith in him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick , and a magician will not succeed . ’
and they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
the blind and the wrong are not to be swallowed up by the blind and the dead , and you are your eating of wealth or kindred . and your abode is the place of your dwelling , and your abode is the most fitting , and as to your abode , and to your abode , they will be a prey to your abode , and in order that he may make your abode a prey to your abode , and in order that he may make your abode a home , and in order that he may make
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof , and he will have no proof of them . and that is how allah sets a seal on the right and the deprived .
lo ! it is we who revive the dead , and write down what they have forwarded and what they send ahead , and we have figured everything in a clear book .
so we sent against them the flood and the locusts and the verminand the frogs and the blood , clear signs , but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
and you see the mountains , you will see the mountains , and they will pass away like the clouds . such is the handiwork of god who has perfected everything . he is well aware of what you do .
hast thou not seen those unto whom a portion of the scripture is of a portion of the scripture , that is not a part of the people of the book , and those who have faith and are wont to believe in it ?
and the women of your women are the same for you , and the needy , and the wayfarer . so you are free of hope , and give good news to the believers .
and bear patiently what they say , and gracefully forsake them .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends . but many of them are disobedient .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life , if they but knew .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
melting their insides and their skins .
you will die and they will die .
though they had made a covenant with allah , they would not turn their backs , and covenants with allah .
raising a trail of dust ,
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and if he had been my parents , they would have made it a sign for me , and that there is a sign for them in the world to come ; and to me you will be returned .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life in this world . we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
indeed , they are that they may carry their faces , so that they may be the greatest in the presence of the messenger , and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you hide .
and food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and pharaoh , of the pegs ?
those are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
on a straight path .
when it was said : `` the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about it . '' you said , `` we know not what the hour is . we are not convinced . ''
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers of old . '
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , because of what they have earned , and that they may taste a part of it , so that they may return .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
o you who believe ! do not take your precautions , and have not taken your guardian as friends , but if they refuse to believe in them , they shall be the ones who have gone astray , and they are the unjust .
then we shall make laterfollow them .
except the chosen servants of god .
and confers no favor upon anyone to reward ,
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
a book sent down to you , so let there be no impediment in your breast in your heart , so that you may warn the believers .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
and do not take the wealth of the orphan except the benefit of it , except for the benefit of it , until he comes to them with measure , and bring up what is with him , for what you have been commanded . and we have made for you the measure , so that you may be reminded of allah 's covenant , so that you may take heed .
they said , “ you are an evil omen in your own conduct . would you then remember ? ” in fact , you are a people who are iniquitous .
say : the evil and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may attract thee . so fear allah , o men of understanding , that ye may be successful .
if a breath of your lord 's punishment touched them , they would say , `` woe to us ! we were indeed wrongdoers . ''
and when moses said to his people : o my people ! remember allah 's favour upon you , and the seed of that which you were promised .
they said : by allah ! verily ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
they think that the confederates have not departed , and if the confederates had come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , seeking news of you , and if they were in your midst , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning .
then , when they saw our punishment , they said : we believe in allah alone , and we disbelieve in that which we used to associate with him .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
so when they forgot what they had been reminded , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all .
o mankind ! fear your lord , for the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
what , can you make the deaf hear or guide the blind or one who is in manifest error ?
and we will surely test you until we know the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall test your proclamations .
those who hinder from the path of allah and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
he said : `` verily , it is to be that the family of lot will be given to him my glory . '' in that case , there is a full measure from your lord , and of the family of moses , that is a sign for you , if you are believers .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
`` but we are a multitude amply fore-warned . ''
then we inspired moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , obedient , and upright , and was not one of the polytheists .
`` o my lord ! verily ! you have bestowed wisdom on me , and i have the knowledge of the heavens and the earth , o my lord , and be thou not in the presence of the heavens and the earth , for thou art one of the righteous . ''
who deniedand turned away .
on the day when it comes , no soul shall speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
god has promised you to your promise . he is the guardian of it , and they will be given to you a respite until the certaintycomes upon you , so that you may be of the same for them , and indeed allah is gracious to the believers . god is gracious and bounty .
and the sky will be rent asunder , on that day it will be frail .
and they go to him , to him , saying , `` we are the ones to whom we have been sent , and the offspring of your lord , '' and let them be told , `` we have been sent to the lord of the universe , and the punishment of those who follow guidance . ''
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has been fulfilled will not believe .
and wideeyed houris
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
we made our favour to the children of israel . is there one who is a lesson and a lesson for the people who are mindful of god ?
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . indeed , allah is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and in the difference of the night and in the night , and in the alternation of the sky , and in the heaven , thereupon the earth is made to live , and in the midst of the land , are signs for those who are certain .
o my people , pray to your lord , then , then , to him you will return to the sky , and he will send you abundant rain from the sky . and he will bring you out of this land while they are sinful .
whenever a surah is sent down , be sent down in the faith of allah and his messenger , and be wary of allah , and do not ask you to be saddened .
and if they were to do you , they would have found in you no more than slaughter , and in your place , and to make a target of slander .
and the guilty will see the fire and know that they are bound to fall into it , and there will be no escape for them .
the truth is from your lord , so be not among the doubters .
and the mountains likedyed wool ,
those who are bent on denying the truth will be not in the way of allah , and those who strive in the cause of god with their wealth and their lives . god has given a great reward for their hearts . god is bountiful to the people who have been given a great reward .
he said : `` o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ? ''
and they will call , `` o malik , let your lord make an end of us . '' he will answer , `` you will stay in it . ''
in the gardens of bliss ,
we sent messengers before you to the sectsof old .
o children of adam ! you have sought to make your own father , as a female man , as the husband was made to live in place of their souls , and we made their eyes to be unable to see . and indeed , we have made the devils as disbelievers .
when your father came to you , and said , `` will i direct you to you until i make you clear ? '' he said , `` do you wish to give me something clear to your father , so that you may be tested ? '' and we have made you forget the time of the world , and we have made you a tryst for the nations .
the unbelievers , which none can avert ,
it is he who has destroyed every thing that has been made to appear to him . he will be brought to him , and he will be brought back to god , and he will destroy the likes of them .
how can allah guide a people who have disbelieved after their belief and after the messenger is true , and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they will say : `` glory to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinns , but most of them believed in them . ''
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you .
and he created you from dust , then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then he made no testament in it , but he is a little in the life of the world . it is he who is about to be able to do all things .
say : `` i are the treasures of allah , and all that is with me , and all that is not hidden , and all that is with me , will not be able to tell you . '' do they not say , `` are the blind and the seeing ? ''
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
and on the day when he will gather them all together , he will say , “ o our lord ! you are not among the people of the jinn and the outcast , but we have given you some of the fire . indeed , your lord is the un-wanting . ”
and it is he who turns to a believer , which he turns back , so that they are disheartened by their own land , and they have no faith in it . and the people of the book will have no faith , and they will have a place of storageor in their meanings ] . and it is the fellowship of allah who have been mentioned . and it is the end of those who have been commanded .
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and we destroyed no township but it had warners
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . that is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
on the day when he will be tries to spend money on account of their money , and they will find them in the fire , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
to us is their return .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
we narrate to you the best of narratives , in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of the quran .
if you question them , they will say , ‘ we were only plunging and playing . ’ say , ‘ were you mocking allah , his signs , and his messenger ? ’
what , is there not for them a chastisement that allah will punish them , while they were wont to transgress , while they are wont to do good ? but most of them are not aware .
did we not destroy the ancients ?
moses said to him , `` may i follow you , so that you may teach me of the righteousness that you have been taught ? ''
a book whose verses are well-expounded , an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they have sold the signs of allah for a paltry price and have turned away from his way . evil indeed is that which they have been doing .
say : this is the truth from your lord ; and whoever desires so that he may believe in the disbelievers and that which is in the state of the unbelievers ; and if you do so , we shall make it a bed and a bed . and how is it that they will be brought out of the fire ? and how evil is the abode of the abode !
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin , and leveled them .
god knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to the battle , and come to battle but seldom .
he will have no strength or helper .
when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained . and to allah all matters are returned .
and david and solomon , when they gave judgment concerning the field when the sheep of some people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
he said , “ o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? ” he made you forget his signs ; indeed my lord is well aware of what you do .
that is indeed an unjust division .
taught by one mighty in power ,
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
we have given the children of israel the children of israel from the children of israel and provided them with good things and provided them with a certain provision on the day of resurrection . indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
woe to you ! woe to you !
so bring down upon us lumps from heaven , if you are one of the truthful . ''
from nutfahhe created him , and then mouldeth him in due proportions ;
and he has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and the earth , all from him . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
there is nothing but our life in this world . we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
you are indeed watching over us . ''
`` o my people ! pray not to me , nor do i ask of you any reward for it ; my reward is only with allah , and i will not be of those who have faith .
our lord ! whomsoever thou admittest into the fire , thou hast disgraced him , and the wrong-doers shall have no helpers .
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them .
and whoever comes to the messenger of his messenger after it has become clear to him , he will be guided to the path of the believers , and we will make it a terrible end .
or do they have any knowledge of everything ? they will say , `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should be able to do so ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should not be able to do it ? ''
surely there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or listens attentively while witnessing .
they would say : `` our eyes have been dazzled , or we are bewitched . ''
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
but if you do not bring him to me , you will have no measurefrom me , nor will you come near me . ''
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has made therein mountains standing firm , and in the midst of the two of them ; surely in that are signs for a people who reflect .
it is not allowable for them , nor do they do .
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and fountains ,
and made the day for livelihood .
then they will turn away from the dwellings of their own people , but if they were to be enemies with you , they would certainly have taken your precautions , but they will have a part of your bad deeds in the life to come , but they will have a great punishment in the life of this world . will you then be requited for a while ?
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
lo ! for the duteous is achievement -
the example of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
on the day when some faces will be bright , and some faces will be black , and those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had disbelieved ? '' so taste the punishment for the unbelievers .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
whenever a new revelation comes to them from their lord , they listen to it while they play ,
those who argue about you will say : `` these are the people who are bent on denying the truth . '' these are the people of understanding , and the differences of them follow the command of the truth . this is better for them . this is best for them , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and when we made a covenant with you , that you will not shed your blood , nor expel each other from your homes . then you consented to this and bore witness .
o you who believe ! do not take the enemies of me , nor do you hope for your own hopes , while they are conscious of god , and that you may have the faith of your lord , and what you have been doing . and indeed , those who do not believe in allah , to make things clear to you , are indeed the ones who do not believe in me . indeed , i have been innocent of what you do .
and when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot . ''
except iblis ; he was proud and he was one of the faithless .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
say : `` is it other than allah that i shall put my trust in him ? '' and he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and he is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and i am the first of the idolaters .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and we have already conferred favor upon you another time .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds ? their life and death will be equal to their death . how evil is the judgement they judge !
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your messengers , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not fail inpromise . ''
the women are divorced , and in order that they may be staunch of it , and do not be staunch to them , and do not make their wives equal to their women . if they are true to the truth , they will have the same share of their wives . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they are a resident of the truth , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in truth . and when the command of its command is fulfilled , he is the command , and he is the knower of the things , and he is the knower , the knower .
we forbade the jews what we had recounted to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and there are they in whose hearts is no more than one religion . it is one religion who has believed in it . and if they do not have faith in the hereafter , it has been set between them , and if they do not , they will be in different groups .
he will gulp it , but he will not swallow it . death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and you will not die .
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , a party of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good news for the believers .
'by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears may retain it .
and do not say about what your tongues falsely say lies about this , “ this is lawful , and this is unlawful , ” so those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed .
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not sent down upon him at once ? thus , we may strengthen your heart in your heart , and we have chanted it .
our lord ! we believe in what you have sent down and we follow the messenger . write us down among the witnesses .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , `` my lord has disgraced me . ''
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall have only the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
so call upon allah , consecrating his devotion to him , howsoever much the unbelievers may dislike it .
nay ! we are utterly ruined ! ''
allah has sealed up the example of a man who was indifferent of the matter which he had set up , but one of them is just one who is an upright man ; and all praise is only to allah , but most of them do not know .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and be of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is the burden they bear !
when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning for those who were warned .
and he realizes that it is the parting .
and if they deny you , then indeed , they have rejected me , and indeed , those who lived before them have passed away . they have rejected the signs of allah , though they were sent to clear signs .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning that you may be afraid of the sky , and he revives the earth after its death . indeed in that are signs for a people who understand .
on the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out .
so i swear by what you see
an arabic koran , without any deviousness , so that they may ward off .
then we shall make laterfollow them .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
but it is nothing but a reminder to the worlds .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : o my lord ! have mercy on them as they nourished me when i was small .
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
and as a summoner to allah by his leave , and as a lamp resplendent .
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their reasoning is void in the sight of their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a terrible punishment .
do you not see how allah presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firm and its branches are in the sky .
thencalled to her from beneath her : 'do not grieve ; your lord has provided a rivulet below you .
then we followed the hardship of the hardship , until he has given them a sudden , and they will turn away from it , and they will turn away from it , and they will turn away from it , and they will not be able to see .
they say , `` allah has begotten a son . glory be to god . he is the all-sufficient , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the all-sufficient , the all-knower . ''
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning has been .
and we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you to protect you from your violence ; will you then be grateful ?
those who deny the signs of allah and the meeting with him -- it is they who have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
nay , but they deny the hour , and we have prepared for him who belied the hour a blaze .
and they say : what is the matter with this messenger , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? wherefore was not an angel sent down unto him ?
beside him . so plot against me all together , then give me no respite .
and when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they prostrated , except iblis , he refused and was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
there is not a messenger for the prophet except that he may obey the command of allah ; and if they had followed the way of allah , then he came to them and asked them for forgiveness . and indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
say : `` who can protect you from allah and of those you have done ? '' if he so willed , he could not cause you to harm you , or to make them a mercy from you . and if he will , he can make them a mercy and help them .
alas for the servants ! no messenger came to them but they ridiculed him .
then indeed , your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and waged jihad and remained steadfast .
do they feel secure against the plan of allah ? no one feels secure against allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
surely allah knows those who believe , and he knows the hypocrites .
and tell them about abraham 's guests .
and whoever brings an evil deed shall be cast down on their faces into the fire . will you be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
and of men , and beasts and cattle , how many of them have knowledge of god . the knowledge of his servants is only that they fear . god is majestic and all-forgiving .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed evil .
and he is not avid of the unseen .
this is the straight path of your lord . we have detailed our revelations for a people who remember .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
o you who believe ! when you have died , let it be a witness between you , and the upright , and in order that we may make the right way for you , and we will not make a mistake in the land ; and indeed , we do not make the religion to be a prey to your lord , and we will certainly make it clear , and we will certainly make a mistake in the land . indeed , we should be among the mujrimun .
and because of what fear has been revealed to you , in the land , that he may cause them to turn away from it , so that he may turn away from them their cords and solomon . moses said to them , `` indeed , you are a muftari . ''
and manat , the third , the other ?
from a place of sustenance for which he gives the means to be feared , and whoever holds fast to allah , he is sufficient as a guardian . he is sufficient for everything .
and in the valley of ours has a lesson for every kind of time . and the teaching is better for them , and say , `` the best of them will be told , '' , `` the best of them will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , ''
say : allah knows the time of the cave and the heavens and the earth . how excellent is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth ! and he is the one who is the lord of all the worlds .
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the qur'an those who fear my threat .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , and he will multiply it for him ? and he will havea liberal reward .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviser to you .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear revelations , that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; surely allah is compassionate and merciful .
he said , ‘ by your might , i will surely pervert them ,
and those who disbelieve say : wherefore hath not a sign been sent down unto him from his lord ? thou art but a warner and a warner unto every nation .
but they turned away , so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
say , `` obey allah and the messenger . '' but if they turn back , then it is only the command of allah , and if you turn away , then it is only a duty upon you , and a duty upon the messenger .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying , `` taste my punishment and my warnings . ''
then evil was the end of those who did evil , because they denied the signs of allah and mocked at them .
he said : no ! verily , my lord is with me , he will guide me .
if you are eager to guide them , allah will not guide him who misleadeth . they have no helpers .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
on that day they will follow the summoner who will follow no crookedness , and voices will be hushed before the all-beneficent , and you will not hear anything but a murmur .
the nearest ones to abraham are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you ; and whoever fears allah , he will remove his sins and will punish him with a great reward .
is he who has brought the dead to life , and we have made the light of the people in the light of the men and the light ? that is how they will be in darkness , and that is what they are doing .
how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
so do not obey the deniers ,
and who guard their private parts
those who give the angels will be wronged in their own souls , and they will say , `` we have not done any sins . '' they say , `` indeed , allah is not responsible for us . indeed , allah knows what you do . ''
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for forgiveness and a great reward .
and the roof uplifted
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
so he appealed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter ; and allah does not guide the unbelievers .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and when you have embarked on the ship , you and those with you are in the ark , say , `` praise be to allah who has saved us from the wrongdoing people . ''
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and they went at early morning , able to deprive .
we have sent down to you the book that they may understand , and whoever follows the guidance , he has guided him ; and he has led astray his way ; and you will not be able to make them go astray .
the unbelievers from among the people of the book and the polytheists would not desist from disbelief until the clear proof came to them .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein on adorned couches , they will see neither the sun'snorexcessive cold .
and a full cup .
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds defilement to their defilement and they die while they are disbelievers .
and allah has made for you their wives and the means of wisdom , and to you is the provisions of good things and for them is good . will they then be ungrateful to the good things ?
say : `` those who have done the right path will be called to a people of evil , and they will be called to a people with whom they have done a people , or themselves , they turn away from it . but if they turn away , then they will be among the muslims , and if you turn away , for you is a painful punishment . ''
verily , there are guardians over you ,
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : o my lord ! have mercy on them as they nourished me when i was small .
or have you a clear authority ?
indeed , with hardshipease .
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
they try to hidefrom men , but they do not hide from allah , but he is with them when they meditate by night with night , and allah encompasses what they do .
`` but we are a multitude amply fore-warned . ''
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
who set up another god with allah . they will soon come to know .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world while they think that they are doing good deeds .
why , then , do you not give your wealth and your lives in the heavens and the earth ? and to allah will be the punishment of the heavens and the earth . and indeed , allah is the doer of all that you do .
he said , “ o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? ” he made you forget his signs ; indeed my lord is well aware of what you do .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
who amasses wealth and counts it over ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
and as for him who repents , does not repent , and says , “ i have been innocent of what i have done , ” and they will say , “ i have unveiled what you have been doing . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have sent down to you the book with the truth , so worship allah , and make your religion sincerely his .
they did not forbid each other from the evil they committed , but evil was that which they did .
with downcast eyes , overspreading them abasement . that is the day which they were promised .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good works .
and press out to their prayer , saying : `` lord , the most merciful . '' glory be to them , and their lord is the lord of the universe .
indeed the criminals will abide in hell forever .
and when we said to him : `` i will show you the truth , so that i may make it clear , '' he said , `` you will not be asked about it . '' and when he came to them , he said , “ do not be deceived . ” and when he came to you , he said , ‘ you will not be able to make it sincerely , but when you are greeted with this , i will be a trustworthy advisor for you . ’
so we delivered him and his family , all
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
say : 'what do you think , if this is from allah , then , then , you will deny it ? then , you will know that there is a way between you and them . '
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
they said , `` put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
those who conceal that which allah has given them of his book , and to make it a means of a mean price . they will eat of their bellies and will not be able to give them a grievous punishment on the day of resurrection .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and we have not sent the messengers to be a warner , but those who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve are the signs of the truth , that they may make clear the truth , and that they do not believe .
o you who believe ! do not follow the plan of satan , and do not make the plan of the devil to prevent the people of the devil ; and indeed , he does not enjoin the evil to the sins of the devil ; and he will make it to seem attractive to you , and he will not be able to do what he wills . and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and the torah and the injeel ] will be made to be oppressed , one whom he will , and he will not be able to make any one to be blamed , and the true one will be given to the same , and he will be responsible for the evil of what he has done ; and he is the unjust , the mostmerciful .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
and when the stars darken ,
have you males and he females ?
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
verily i was sure that i should meet my reckoning . ''
that is what they enjoyed avail them .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as it were a serpent , he turned to flee , and turned not back . `` o moses , have fear of god and do not fear . ''
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they are raised .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the sky , and he made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
allah has promised you abundant spoils that you will capture , and he has restrained the hands of you from your own hands . this is a sign for the believers , and that he may guide you on a straight path .
they said : `` we have been persecuted before you come to us , and after you come to us . '' he said , `` perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land . ''
and why do you not eat the name of allah while it is that he has forbidden for you ? only for them is a thing which is forbidden to you . but most of them are iniquitous .
excusing or warning ,
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
there they shall pass from hand to hand a cup wherein is neither idle talk nor sin .
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them towithincitement ?
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
except the chosen servants of god .
the king of mankind .
those -- their recompense is that upon them is the curse of allah and the angels and of mankind .
but they turned away from him and said : `` taughta madman . ''
and why do you not eat the name of allah while it is that he has forbidden for you ? only for them is a thing which is forbidden to you . but most of them are iniquitous .
before them , the people of noah , the people of noah , and the people of noah , there was a community who would have seized them with a relentless victory .
and lot , when he said to his people : 'do you commit such indecencyin a way that none in the world has committed before you ?
those who are ignorant are the ones who are steeped in insolence on the earth , and are filled with their own eyes , but if they do not see the hereafter , they will have a new proof , if they do not have any faith in the hereafter , but if they do not have any faith in the hereafter , they will have no way .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you squat ? ”
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
he said : my lord ! forgive me and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; surely thou art the bestower .
gehennais before him and he will be given oozing pus to drink ,
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and said : `` hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious . ''
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
and it is he who sends down cattle , so that he may sink down into the midst of the clouds , and allah will bring it to light , and then he will bring it into the sky ; and when he sends down the shechina upon them , they will be among the glad tidings .
for those who do good is a better reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor ignominy will cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not grab my beard or my head ! i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
the piercing star .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
no indeed ! theseare a reminder
o you who have disbelieved ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
is he who has brought the dead to life , and we have made the light of the people in the light of the men and the light ? that is how they will be in darkness , and that is what they are doing .
are they waiting except for the hour that it should come upon them suddenly ? but many of his signs have come to them . how then will they be reminded ?
he it is who has made the sun a lamp and the moon , and has made the sun a beacon for it . but allah has made the clear signs for those who have no understanding .
we will ease him toward ease .
o you who believe ! when you have died , let it be a witness between you , and the upright , and in order that we may make the right way for you , and we will not make a mistake in the land ; and indeed , we do not make the religion to be a prey to your lord , and we will certainly make it clear , and we will certainly make a mistake in the land . indeed , we should be among the mujrimun .
they swear by allah that they are of you . but they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
he said , ‘ what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? ’ they said , ‘ indeed we have been sent with what you have been sent with . ’
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
go , you and your brother with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
o you who have faith ! do not take allah ’ s name , and do not make it known to it , and do not make a bequest for the cause of god , and do not make a breach with the people of the same , and do not make a breach with the people of the book , and do not make a breach with it . and do not help them , for god is stern in retribution .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
and the promised day ,
o you who have faith ! give it a remembrance for the sake of a slave , which is a slave , other than daughters , and whoever is free from his brother , it is the same for him , that is the word of your lord , and that he may make it a trial for him , and for him is a painful punishment .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with it , and is a believer , they are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
o my people ! i fear for you the day of summoning ,
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
o ye who believe ! let your servants be given to you in three groups , and the call of your lord to settle your people in the morning , and that ye may be brought forth , and that allah will make clear to you his revelations ; and allah is the knower of the worlds .
and he came to him a book from his own side , he said , “ in fact , you are in it . rather , you are before it , in fact , and you are responsible for the best of your deeds . and allah is responsible for you . ”
and the trumpet will be blown . this is the day of the threatening .
'there is nothing but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
and the example of mary 's wife is mary 's wife , and she who is chaste , and we breathed into her of the spirit ] , and we have made him of the spirit and be obedient to his lord .
the god of mankind ,
`` go ye to your tilthin the morning , if ye would pluck the fruits . ''
it is he who made the night for you that you may rest in it , and the day to see . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
laboring and exhausted .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : 'this is a magician , a liar .
there are those of you who desire to wish for you in that which they desire , in order to be the people of their homes , and the people of the book ; and when they are called to a place of peace , they will have a place of return , and if they do wrong , they will have a place of nearness to you ; and for them is a clear authority .
and those who accuse chaste women , and do not produce four witnesses , flog them with eighty stripes , and do not accept their testimony , for they are transgressors .
we do not say that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said , `` i call god to witness , and you bear witness that i am innocent of what you associate .
that allah may reward each soul for its deeds . indeed , allah is swift at reckoning .
he said : `` this is your lord . '' he said , `` it is easy for me , and we may make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us . this is a matter decreed . ''
by your lord , we will question them all
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
it neither spares , nor leaves .
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
you did not hope that the book would be revealed to you except by the mercy of your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and if you fear treachery from a people , then break offwith them , for god does not like the treacherous .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
those who swear to you will not be waiting for their wives four months . if they return , god is forgiving and merciful .
and soon will he be well-pleased .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego any part of it , then consume it with pleasure .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and said : `` hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious . ''
say : `` bring the witness to that which allah has sent down , and if they were to witness , then verily , if they had borne witness to our signs , then do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not follow those who believe in our signs , and those who do not believe in the hereafter equal to their lord .
so when the messengers came to them , they would surely think that they had come to know that they were in doubt . in that case , they would have come to me with our help . then we will make them succeed , and he will not be punished .
for the security of the quraysh ,
looking towards their lord .
if you are eager to guide them , allah will not guide him who misleadeth . they have no helpers .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail in the least save allah , for whom he pleases and approves of .
those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of god are those whose hearts god has tested for piety . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
verily , there are guardians over you ,
and if he is of those on the right hand ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and inform them that the water is shared between them , and every share of drinking will be regulated .
, `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no reward from you , nor thanks .
or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? if so , let them ascend by ropes .
it is allah who fashionsyou in their graves , and it is he who sends down to you all that is in it ; and he who has made a covenant with him , it is that he will bring to a state of which he has made a covenant with him . indeed in that are signs for a people who understand .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , and desires to be grateful .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and some faces will be covered with dust ,
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
your companion is not mad .
indeed , those who believe , and the jews , and the sabians and the christians , whoever believes in allah and the last day , and does good , will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and said : `` shall we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ? ''
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate with him .
to him belongs the kingdom of the world and the hereafter , and he sends down the shechina upon them on the day of resurrection , and he is able to make the punishment to be severe .
except a mercy from your lord . indeed his favour to you is great .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
which had broken your back ?
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
this is hell which the guilty deny .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
moses came to you with clear proofs , but you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
and he fears ,
whoever does good deeds , and is a believer , no unthankfulness will be accepted from him . we are recording it .
on that day , you will come to know the people , and their backs will be called to a people , and they will be called to a people that has been sent back to them , and they will be called to account .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
for those who do wrongwill be like the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
he said to his pages , ‘ put their moneyinto their saddlebags . maybe they will recognize it when they return to their folks , so that they may come back . ’
and if thy lord had willed , he would have made mankind one nation , and they will not cease differing .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then allah will judge over him , and he wills to whom he wills , and he wills to whom he wills . will you then take heed ?
so the evils of what they earned overtook them , and those who were unjust of the evils of their earnings will befall them . they will not be able to frustrate .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by man or jinni -
if there had come to you the resemblance of a bad , they would have seized you in a state of adversity , and we will destroy the people of faith with it ; and indeed , allah does not like the believers , and allah does not like the unjust .
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! '
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent you as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ,
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
if good befalls you , it grieves them , and if a misfortune befalls you , they say , “ we took our precautions beforehand ” ; and they turn away rejoicing .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
then , when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! surely you are thieves .
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
by the much-frequented house ,
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed ; so we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and say : `` glory to our lord ! verily , the promise of our lord is bound to be fulfilled . ''
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
on thrones encrusted ,
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for the writings , as we originated the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us .
surely paradise will be the refuge .
and if those who do wrong are the people of the earth , and even as it is with them , they are with it , and on the day of resurrection , they will be the punishment of hell , while they see not .
they will remain in it forever , and their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were averse .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
and they will say , “ to be the statues of those who are arrogant and are arrogant , and indeed , we have followed you . ” so we will make them taste the severest punishment , and we will not make a way for you . and we will make them taste the way , and we will not be guided .
they said : o dhu ' l-qarneyn ! lo ! gog and magog are corruption in the land , so that thou mightest erect a barrier between us and them .
god will guide you to the people of the world , and were the people of the two part of the two part of the two part of it , they would have taken the same part of their own people . but if they were to do it , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they were to make a bequest for their own people , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they had been
is this magic , or do you not see ?
o you who believe ! keep your duty to him , and fear the fire of the fire which is the fuel of the fire , which is the fire of hell , or that they will not be able to do so . and allah is able to do so .
so call not upon another god with allah , lest thou be of the doomed .
o mankind ! there has come to you a proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and allah increases in guidance those who follow guidance ; and the good deeds that endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
those who overcome you , if you were to count a setback , they would say : `` o we have been with you ! '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' then , if the believers are among you , they will say : `` are we to be with you ? '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' and they will not be questioned on the day of resurrection .
the two seas are not the like of the two seas . it will be the same for them , and they will eat from the fruits of the date-palm and the other , and you will see the ships in the sea .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
the recompense of those who are opposed to allah and his messenger , and to make mischief in the land , and that you may be of the same to them ; and the punishment of an awful punishment will be upon them , and there is a severe punishment for them .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness of her household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , she is the truth , and he is of the liars .
by the much-frequented house ,
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . these are the transgressors .
he it is who multiplied you on earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and whoever holds the symbols of allah , then is too exalted to be far away from it . that is better for you , and in the midst of your homes . and that is better for you , and that you have spoken the truth , and they do not speak .
like satan who says to man , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
they said : `` if a wolf devours him , while we are 'usbah , then indeed , we are the losers . ''
and they say : when will this promise beif you are truthful ?
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the worlds .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , god is all-forgiving and all-powerful .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and when an age of women is decreed for you , they will be responsible for your own good , or a place of safety . and do not be a tenth of what he has given you . and remember the good things that he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and remember the reminder to you . and remember allah ’ s revelations , and remember you the
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other , and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
and the burden-bearers
and whosoever worketh righteously , male or female , and is a believer , they shall enter paradise and shall not be wronged a whit .
and a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; verily they are in disquieting doubt .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion againstmost gracious .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and there is a great punishment for them .
as for him who giveths and feareth him .
o reassured soul ,
be moderate in your walking , and your voice . the most repulsive voice is braying of the donkey . ''
she said , “ i seek refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are pious . ”
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
whomsoever allah guides , he is rightly guided ; and whomsoever he leads astray , they are the losers .
to allah prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and evening .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
dreading some great calamity .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say : 'what think you ? if your water is the water of the water , who will bring you running water '
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : o my lord ! have mercy on them as they nourished me when i was small .
if they intend to deceive you , then allah is sufficient for you . it is he who strengthened you with his help and with the believers .
they ask you to hasten the punishment , and if we had not given them a promise , we had already decreed for them the punishment , and the punishment came upon them suddenly , while they were unaware .
soon you will remember what i say to you , and i entrust my affair to allah ; surely allah sees his servants . ’
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . these are the men of understanding .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these are their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and the soul and him who perfected it
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
wait patiently for the promise of allah , and the promise of allah is true , and if you do , they will see it .
and to you is it that you should make your daughters a war , and your daughters , and your lord is your lord , and of your own women . and if you will , it is a man who has given you a theft . and if you will , it is a man who has made you equal to your own relations . and if you will , it is a man who has made your own wife , and you are the one who is the pardoner , the all-seer .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
by the snorting runners ,
ranks from him , forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they were both of the gardens of silver , where they were made to live out of their dwellings , and the two gardens of the two gardens was made to go forth in the midst of the two gardens .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i councel you good , and i know from allah what you do not know .
indeed , those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after them , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , and they will be cursed by the cursers ,
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds defilement to their defilement and they die while they are disbelievers .
and allah has made the clothing of the book to recite it . commemorate the people of this book , to be the same , and it is the same to allah who will be guided , and he is the guide of the lord of the universe , and he is the guided , and he is the guide of allah , and he guides to the right way .
and they say , “ none will enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . ” this is their wishful fancies , say , “ if you are truthful . ”
but the wretched will avoid it .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
he only enjoins you evil and indecency , and that you should say against allah what you do not know .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except while they are unwilling ,
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? and he created all things and has knowledge of everything .
and they accept their repentance , who are the ones who give the thanks to god , and be grateful to him , and they do not make the heirs of the pit , and give good news to the believers .
and the sea swarming ,
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord has not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be among the losers '
blessed is he in whose hand is the dominion , and he is able to do all things .
we determined , and excellentto determine .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , so that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
read , and your lord is the most generous .
and when abraham said to his father and his people : `` i am innocent of what you worship
allah has not taken any son , nor is there any god besides him . then , god would have taken others away from the others , and some of them would have been blessed . glory be to god , above what they allege .
and there is a messenger who has been sent to the clear signs of the believers , that those who believe and do righteous deeds , and lead them to the light of the darkness of the light ; and whoever believes and does good , he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them ; and allah has given them abundant provision .
the blind and the wrong are not to be swallowed up by the blind and the dead , and you are your eating of wealth or kindred . and your abode is the place of your dwelling , and your abode is the most fitting , and as to your abode , and to your abode , they will be a prey to your abode , and in order that he may make your abode a prey to your abode , and in order that he may make your abode a home , and in order that he may make
verily thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is aware of his slaves .
has the story of the litigants reached you ? when they climbed over the wall intomihrab .
verily those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance hath become manifest unto them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
and allah will certainly make them be informed of the day of resurrection , and when you have argued with them , they will not be able to harm you . then you will turn away from them , and then you turn back .
and put your hand in the end of your steps , and be your duty to it , and be your duty to allah , and be among the doubters . and it is the same for you , that they are a people who are fasiqun .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
if you ask them who will send down water from the sky , and the earth will say , `` it is the same for him who has become dead and '' , say : `` the praises of allah and the exclusion of all things , '' but most of them are not aware .
and when we parted the sea for you and saved you and drowned pharaoh 's people while you looked on .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it is from solomon , and it is from the most gracious , the most merciful .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them from his bounty , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they ask you to hasten the punishment , and indeed hell encompasses the disbelievers .
no indeed ; man has not accomplished his bidding .
it will be said to them : `` read your ledger . this day you are sufficient as a reckoner against you .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
in which are valuable writings .
and to make the poor , to make lawful for you , or a part of them , and to give them some of their wives . and allah will give them a description of what they have been doing .
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and a prophet .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
a numerical book .
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
then as for him who was insolent
the fruits whereoflow and near .
and other things that you love , help from allah and a victory near at hand ; and give glad tidings to the believers .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
have you males and he females ?
when it sees them from afar , they will hear its raging and roaring .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count allah 's blessing , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is unjust and ungrateful .
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
ain sin qaf
there was a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place : two gardens on the right and on the left . `` eat of the provision of your lord and give thanks to him , and be grateful to him . a good land and a lord forgiving and merciful . ''
but those who disbelieve in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
whenever a surah is sent down , be sent down in the faith of allah and his messenger , and be wary of allah , and do not ask you to be saddened .
and leftfor posterity .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
he said , “ yes , and you will be among those near . ”
he said : my lord ! verily i fear that they will belie me .
how keenly will they hear and see the day they come to us ? but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
and the example of mary 's wife is mary 's wife , and she who is chaste , and we breathed into her of the spirit ] , and we have made him of the spirit and be obedient to his lord .
he wants to drive you out of your land by his sorcery . what do you advise ? ''
have you heard the story of abraham 's honoured guests ?
and allah has given you some of the provisions of some of you , and some of you who have provided them with the provisions of allah . and those who have made their duty to allah are the same , so that they deny the truth .
risethe night except a little ,
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth , these are the pious .
so when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corruptors .
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden , wronging himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
say thou : expend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; verily ye are a transgressing people .
again , death seized him , how he plotted !
it is he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you , and sent down water from the sky , and we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
say , `` each one does according to his own disposition . your lord knows best who is best guided to the way . ''
and reminder is a reminder to you , and to deliver the book to him , and to make it clear to him . he is the guidance and the most merciful .
we gave the children of israel the book and wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above all beings .
our lord ! verily thou art going to gather mankind together on a day whereof there is no doubt . lo ! allah faileth not to fulfil his promise .
there is not a messenger for the prophet except that he may obey the command of allah ; and if they had followed the way of allah , then he came to them and asked them for forgiveness . and indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us to see what she color . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , bright for the onlookers . ’
who establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and they have faith in the hereafter .
so let them laugh a little andcry much as a recompense for what they used to earn .
if they accuse thee of lying , say thou : your lord is owner of extensive mercy , and his wrath shall not be withdrawn from the culprits .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the sky , and he made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
by no means ! he shall be cast into the crushing fire .
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
but you prefer the present life ,
then he turned upon them , striking them down with his right hand .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
inquire of the city where we were and the caravan with which we came . we are telling the truth . ''
and those on the left hand -- how unlucky are those on the left !
and do not be one of those who do so in the mornings and the evenings , but they do not hope for their own account , nor shall you be of the doubters .
obey allah and obey the messenger and beware . if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to deliver the message clearly .
indeed those who disbelieved and preventedfrom the way of allah , have indeed wandered far astray .
and remember what is recited in your homes of the signs of allah and the wisdom . god is all-subtle , all-aware .
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
and thamud , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the thicket ; these were the confederates .
they said : o our father ! why do you not trust us with joseph , although we are his well-wishers ?
who created and shaped ,
and when we made a covenant with you , that you will not shed your blood , nor expel each other from your homes . then you consented to this and bore witness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
those before them had plotted , but all planning is allah 's . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon know for whom is the final abode .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
how can you disbelieve , when the verses are recited to you , and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah , he is indeed guided to a straight path .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves . so the disbelievers say : `` this is a strange thing .
you are not charged to oversee them .
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my reminder , and they were not able to hear .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . but the wolf ate him , but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection , which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in speech than allah ?
and when you call to prayer , they take it as a mockery and fun . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
and when the women of the believing women had come to you , they would not have taken any partner with allah . they do not give any heed to him . they do not commit any guilt against themselves , and they do not commit any aggression for their pleading . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running ; he said , “ o moses , the elite are conspiring to kill you . ”
they said : o moses ! wilt thou throw , or shall we be the casters ?
bring back our fathers if you are truthful .
as for the decision of judgement , they have taken their own parents for their own parents and their own people . so leave them , so that god will not cause them to fail .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the evil-doers are in manifest error .
as for those who fear their lord , those who are afraid of their lord will be given to a troop of those who are godwary , `` peace be on you . '' and they will be told , `` peace ! '' and enter the garden , and enter the garden , abiding eternally therein .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
the people of the book will say , `` it is the same for them that they may make it clear to the truth . '' they will say , `` what has been revealed to you in the book that is what it has been revealed , and they will not know god . ''
and in fact , do not be in doubt of what they worship , and do not follow what they worship , except the one who has worshipped their fathers before , and we do not speak to them a reward .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
abraham was not for forgiveness for his father because of a promise he had made to him . when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of allah , he dissociated himself from him . abraham was very tender-hearted and forbearing .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' has there not come to them a sign in the former scriptures ?
and makea radiant lamp ?
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
say : 'this is my way ; i call to allah with sure knowledge , and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters '
say , `` travel through the land and see what was the end of the criminals . ''
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins and glorify your lord in the evening and morning .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will find no change in the way of allah .
it is lawful for you to eat out of the sea , and for you the ships and the sea , for you and the travelers , and for you are the travelers . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
say , `` the earlier ones and the later ones
and do not call upon any other god besides god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
say thou : allah is the knower of all things ; and whosoever thou shalt be able to see , thou shalt be able to see whomsoever thou shalt be able to see . thou art the guardian of all things .
when allah has made a covenant with the prophets , the book when he has given them the book and the wisdom , if you had sent them with the book , and said : `` will i be among you as a messenger ? '' and allah said , “ so that you may be among the witnesses , and i am among the witnesses . ”
and ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask forgiveness for them . and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , for allah does not guide the unjust people .
on the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out .
and the parable of an evil word is as a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
has the news of those who disbelieved before you did not come to them , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
and persisted in the great sin .
such are those whom allah has made for them , and he has made them standing with many of them , and there are many sects before them ; and they are the losers .
those who believe and do not tarnish their faith with wrongdoing—for such are security , and they are guided .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
nor will you be thirsty in it , nor will you swelter . ”
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of man .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability ; we are acting .
indeed pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into sects , slaughtering their sons , and sparing their women , for he was one of the mufsidun .
and when he turned his face towards midian , he said , “ perhaps my lord will guide me to the right path . ”
and made them virgins ,
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye shall be returned .
and they will see that they will see all that is in the world to come , and in the present life , in the life of the world , and in the world to come , they will find a single number of the life of this world , but they will say , `` even though a thousand years of the life of the world will be dead , and god is observant of what you do . ''
except the path of hell , wherein they will live forever . and that is easy for allah .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
and as for the qasitun , they will be firewood for hell .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation , and you call me to the fire ?
in gardens they will question
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error and wish that you should lose the right path .
or who is it that will bring you the land on the sea , that he may bring you the like of his mercy ? then will you then be exalted with god ?
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall have only the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , then know that allah is mighty , wise .
as if they wereeggs closely guarded .
and ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask forgiveness for them . and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , for allah does not guide the unjust people .
and on that day , mankind will be set up with our lord , and god will say : `` we will certainly come to know the like of that which you have been in doubt . '' and that you did not know .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice , we shall soon cast him into the fire ; and that is easy for allah .
and we sent not before thee any messengers but that they ate food , and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will ye then be patient ?
and there was no sign to them that we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
thus do we diversify the verses , so that they may say , `` you have studied , '' and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he created you from the earth , then he has made a hole into a drop of fluid , then he will bring forth a clot of blood , and then he will bring forth to them a second time , and in that case they will be of the same to it , so that they may understand .
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
when the sky is split asunder
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
when he calls to me , so that they may be rightly guided .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provision to whomever he wills . he has knowledge of all things .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` shall i prostrate to him who created you from clay ? ''
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
and he has created for you some of the provisions of it , and it is they who ride it on some of them , and eat of what god has provided for you . do not be a clear enemy to you .
do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' nay , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people whom no warner came before you , so that they may be guided .
nor do they spend anything- small or great , nor cross a valley , but it is written down to their credit , that allah may reward them for their best deeds .
then they will roast in hell .
in gardens and fountains ,
then why did those whom they had taken as gods whom they had taken as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they went astray from them , and that was their lie .
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful .
indeed it is a decisive word .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
said : `` then get out of here , for lo ! thou art rejected ,
no fatigue will touch them , nor will they be expelled from it .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
and as for the qasitun , they will be firewood for hell .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and submit .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
had it not been that a blessing from his lord had reached him he would have been cast into the wilderness .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . indeed , he was a grateful servant .
so fear allah and obey me .
though they will be within sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
those who disbelieve will be the same to the unbelievers that they may be responsible for the affair , and allah has sent them as a reminder . and allah is the all-knower of the righteous . and allah has knowledge of all things .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
no ! there is no refuge .
has there come to you the story of the hosts ,
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is behind you , and his bounty , and complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate god 's greatness ?
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
who created the seven heavens one above another . you can see no flaw in the creation of the beneficent god . look again , can you see any flaw ?
nor are darkness and light .
who will cause me to die and then bring me back to life .
but their hearts are in ignorance of this , and they have other deeds besides that which they are doing .
as for these , we shall provide them together , and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
when they come to you , they say : `` we believe , '' but they have come with disbelief , and they go with it , and allah knows best what they hide .
and it is in the original bookwith us , sublime and wise .
on that day mankind will be like scattered moths ,
and fear a misfortune which will not smite those of you who do wrong , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all .
wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
is he who creates the creation of the creation then then brings it back to life in the earth , and who gives you a livelihood ? say : `` bring your signs , if you are truthful . ''
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
and the affluence wherein they rejoiced !
faces on that day will be downcast ,
and when there comes to you a tiding of matter , or fear , it would be fear , and if they were to be able to reach their hands , then will be brought to them , and that which is with them , and that they should be of the hidden . and if it were not to be of the grace of allah , we would have made it a few .
have they not observed the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
pharaoh said , `` did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life , if they but knew .
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become an enemy and a sorrow to them . indeed pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men disbelieve not save infidelity .
and to you is it that you should make your daughters a war , and your daughters , and your lord is your lord , and of your own women . and if you will , it is a man who has given you a theft . and if you will , it is a man who has made you equal to your own relations . and if you will , it is a man who has made your own wife , and you are the one who is the pardoner , the all-seer .
say : `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship ! ''
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
and do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and there is a great punishment for them .
sovereignty on that day belongs to god , and he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
then he proportioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
and fear a misfortune which will not smite those of you who do wrong , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it . he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
the lord of abraham and abraham , he said , `` i have been ordered to give up a little , '' he said , `` i have been sent by a messenger , and said : `` i have been commanded to be of the messengers . ''
and of the wealth and the children of wealth , from their hearts , turn away from their dwellings , and turn away from their hearts , if they are the ones to keep away from their hearts ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
allah is not a withholder of it , nor brings it to more than he , or more . those who believe will be greatly proud , or those who have faith in it , except those who are bent on denying the truth . they are the ones who have faith in their lord , and he will guide them . but they are the fasiqun .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of the remembrance of the remembrance of my lord until the horses disappeared ,
and you will not be able to know what they do not know , but they swear by allah that they are liars . but they deny the truth , and they have no faith in their own faith . and if they turn away , then they will have no protector in the heavens and the earth , nor will they be able to make amends . and if they turn away , they will have no protector in the earth , nor will they be blamed .
and do not be one of those who do so in the mornings and the evenings , but they do not hope for their own account , nor shall you be of the doubters .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down the dhikrand surely we shall guard it .
snatching away the scalp ,
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
none disputes in the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their going to be in the cities .
then he was a clot of blood , so he createdthen madeperfect .
to whoever of you desires to go forward or lag behind .
and he created the cattle for you . in them there is warmth , and numerous benefits , and of them you eat .
who deniedand turned away .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : 'call on your lord to lighten for us a day of doom . '
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the aggressors .
who gives me food and drink ,
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
when our clear verses are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them : `` this is clear magic . ''
this is a declaration of immunity from allah and his messenger to the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
and he said : my lord ! i have taken a plot from that which they have entrusted unto me , and if ye are not able to give them a plot , then i am innocent of them , and i am of the ignorant .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of man .
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth and the luminous light of a shining light ; and in it is a very shining lamp , and a bright beacon for the people . god has knowledge of all things .
“ and speak to him courteously , that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ”
and he said : `` o my people ! verily , it is rushing to run towards each other , and they have sinned before it . '' and he said , “ o my people , do not be among the chosen , the purified . ”
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest reward .
and in the difference of the night and in the night , and in the alternation of the sky , and in the heaven , thereupon the earth is made to live , and in the midst of the land , are signs for those who are certain .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
the heavens will be rent asunder , and his promise is bound to be fulfilled .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and madea sign to the worlds .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
so he showed him the great sign .
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind . we have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
eat and pasture your cattle . surely in that are signs for men of understanding .
man tireth not of praying for good , but if evil toucheth him , he is hopeless and despairing .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the unbelievers may dislike it .
then they will say , “ by god , our lord – we were not polytheists . ”
say thou : allah is the knower of all things ; and whosoever thou shalt be able to see , thou shalt be able to see whomsoever thou shalt be able to see . thou art the guardian of all things .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
and fear the day when you will be brought back to god , then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him .
for those who do wrongwill be like the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
had you put your trust in god . god loves those who turn away .
and indeed , allah is the most acceptor of all the night , or a part of the night , and a part of the night ; and allah is the lord of the night and the day , and that you may make a testament in the way of allah ; and for you is the most honourable , the most honourable , and the most honourable , the most honourable , the most devoted to you , you will have the upper hand in the land ; and god is all-forgiving and all-merciful to you . so do
their reward is with their lord , gardens of eden , and in the midst of gardens , wherein they will abide for ever . they will be in the midst of gardens to dwell , for they are well pleased with the lord of the book .
surely it is one of the greatest woes .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
so indeed with hardship comes ease .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it . perhaps you will overcome . ''
he said , `` get out of here , despised and driven away from you . i will fill hell with all of them . ''
but whoever comes to him as a believer , and does righteous deeds , will have the highest ranks ,
and they will have no auliya'to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray - for him there is no way .
and when it is said to them , 'believe as the people believe , ' they say , 'are we to believe as fools believe ? ' surely , they are the fools , but they do not know .
indeed , the pure is only for allah , the true ones , those who take other than him , other than him . they will say , “ it is only for one who has been willing to worship the other other than allah . indeed , allah does not judge between them in their differences . ”
to your lord belongsthe term thereof .
so we gave him the glad tidings of a forbearing boy .
indeed , the pure is only for allah , the true ones , those who take other than him , other than him . they will say , “ it is only for one who has been willing to worship the other other than allah . indeed , allah does not judge between them in their differences . ”
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will he be mindful ?
say : 'is it other than allah you bid me serve , o ignorant ones ? '
say : allah knows the time of the cave and the heavens and the earth . how excellent is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth ! and he is the one who is the lord of all the worlds .
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
even so we sent down the qur'an from before us , and as a revelation from us ; and we have made it a reminder from among his servants , and we guide you to a guidance and a straight path .
and among the people is he whose speech about the life of this world may please you , and he calls on god to witness what is in his heart , yet he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
and we have made therein means of subsistence for you , and for those for whom you are not providers .
and those who press forward ,
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? '
and to 'aadtheir brother hud . he said : `` o my people ! worship allah , you have no god other than him . you are only forgers .
o you who believe ! do not follow the plan of satan , and do not make the plan of the devil to prevent the people of the devil ; and indeed , he does not enjoin the evil to the sins of the devil ; and he will make it to seem attractive to you , and he will not be able to do what he wills . and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
or have you a clear authority ?
and this is the favour with which you remind me , that you have enslaved the children of israel . ’
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say , “ you have falsely invented it . ” rather , most of them do not know .
and he created you from dust , then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then he made no testament in it , but he is a little in the life of the world . it is he who is about to be able to do all things .
nay ! they will come to know .
is he whom we have promised a good promise which he shall meet , like him whom we have given the enjoyment of the life of this world , and then of the hereafter he will be of the arraigned ?
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
and verily , he is a near access to us , and an excellent abode .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the observance of prayer and the giving of zakat , and fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
he is a man who believes in the people of pharaoh , so that he may be turned away , so that he said , `` shall we make a human being from among the people of the city ? '' he said , `` shall we have a man from your lord ? '' but if he is a liar , he says , `` is it a man who has been given to us a sign from your lord ? '' and if he is a liar , indeed , i will be a liar .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
they will say : `` we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count . ''
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they are asleep ?
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and there will go round boy-servants of theirs , as if they were hidden pearls .
the human being is called to mind when he calls to his lord , and can not turn away from it , and then , when he has made a covenant with him , he will be responsible for his good deeds ; and say , `` a little , '' and say to the people of the fire , `` indeed , you are a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask forgiveness for him . surely he is oft-returning .
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your messengers , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not fail inpromise . ''
what is the matter with those who reject the book of allah , and do not desire to do any good other than that of your lord , and that he may provide for you , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
and ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask forgiveness for them . and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , for allah does not guide the unjust people .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
for if they come to know , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper . ''
but when we removed the plague from them until a term which they were to reach , they broke their promise .
say : `` woe to you , or peace on you . '' they ask the name of you . they are the best names , and do not be in the midst of your prayers .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them , but those who deny the truth eat and eat like cattle will eat .
and this is a book we have revealed , blessed , so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you used to hasten . ”
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
as if they had never dwelt there . away with median , as was done away with thamood .
they said : we desire that we may eat thereof and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book .
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
say : on the day of judgment the faith of those whodisbelieve will not profit them , nor shall they be respited .
in honoured scriptures ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly done a strange thing .
on her neck shall be a rope of palm-fibre .
when he fled to the laden ship ,
those who love that immorality should spread among the believers will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . allah knows and you do not know .
or do they say , `` a poet , we await for him some misfortune to befall him ? ''
they say , `` they will not be able to invent god . '' but if allah has heard them , they will not be able to hide your own hands , nor will you be questioned . god is aware of the innermost of the chests .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! we are the ones to follow you . we are well aware of you . we have certainly been strong in our presence , and if you had not been attacked , we would not have been able to do you . ''
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you ; and whoever fears allah , he will remove his sins and will punish him with a great reward .
o people of the scripture ! we have sent our messengers to you that we may make us a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to you . but allah has power over all things .
do not extend your eyes toward what we have given them , for the things we have provided for them , so that we may test them thereby , and the provision of your lord is better and more lasting .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will grant you a criterion , and will expiate for you your evil deeds and forgive you . and allah is of infinite bounty .
when the blind man approached him .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
she said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son when no one has touched me , and no one can have the power to worship allah ? '' and when he wills , he will create a thing for which he wills .
say , `` travel through the land and see what was the end of the criminals . ''
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
and they have advantages and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
i created the jinn and mankind only that they might worship me .
and in the valley of ours has a lesson for every kind of time . and the teaching is better for them , and say , `` the best of them will be told , '' , `` the best of them will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , `` the best of you will be told , ''
but deniedand turned away ,
and gardens and springs .
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better place than this . ''
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` will you not then fear ? ''
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
if you obey most of the people of the land , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and surmise .
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
he wants to drive you out of your land . what do you command ? ''
and be patient . your patience is only with the help of allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
and they called out to each other in the morning ,
i have the stores of the treasuries of god and i do not know the unseen , and i know what is in the unseen . god is well aware of those who do wrong . god is well aware of the wrongdoers .
onthrones , looking .
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
but they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and we left for him among the later folk :
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
and admit them to paradise which he has made known to them .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
how many a town we have sent down to them a terrible town , and that they should be snared by their evil schemes , and they are not aware of their own dreams .
he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to have patience . so patience is best ; haply allah will bring them back to me ; surely he is the knowing , the wise .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening ,
then i called them openly .
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , while their people are servile unto us ?
why , when he came to it , would not be cast into the midst of your garden , and said : `` enter egypt , allah will bring it to him , and will be rewarded with all that he wants . '' and if thou seest me , there is no increase for him .
and those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : `` you have tarried in the presence of god until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
when the prophet said to the prophet , `` the matter of the matter is about to come to pass . '' when it is said to the messenger , `` who has the knowledge of the messenger ? '' and when it is said to the noble messenger of the messenger , `` who is the knower of the universe ? ''
and if you want to replace a wife with a wife , and you have given it to drink , then do not take any thing from it . would you take it with a calumny and manifest sin ?
and when our punishment came to them , their cry was nothing but that they said : lo ! we were wrong-doers .
and the wealth of the hereafter is the provision of the abode of the world , and do not walk with the right way of allah , and do not make mischief in the land , as do you do . indeed , allah loves not those who do corruption .
we said , “ strike him with a part of it. ” thus allah brings the dead to life and shows you his signs that you may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
which of the favours of your lord will you then deny ?
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them to gardens underneath which rivers flow , and they will be in the midst of gardens , and to dwell therein , and we shall admit them to the midst of the dam .
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
and if we had sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their eyes , they would not believe unless allah wills . but most of them are ignorant .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? and he created all things and has knowledge of everything .
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , and said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
and propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vine , and we surrounded them with date-palms and hedged between .
have you considered if we let them enjoy life for some years ,
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of what allah has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
do not extend your eyes toward what we have given them , for the things we have provided for them , so that we may test them thereby , and the provision of your lord is better and more lasting .
for the living and the dead ?
nay ! whenreaches to the collar bone ,
the day when their plotting will avail them nothing , nor will they be helped .
indeed , the pure is only for allah , the true ones , those who take other than him , other than him . they will say , “ it is only for one who has been willing to worship the other other than allah . indeed , allah does not judge between them in their differences . ”
those who , if we establish them in the land , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong . to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
verily ye and that which ye worship beside allah are the firewood of hell . thereunto ye shall come .
they were arrogant in the land , and the insolent plots of the evil things of their own hands . except those who were bent on denying the truth , only those who are bent on denying the truth . they are only waiting for the law of god . you will never be able to make the law of god .
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
you are your spouses , and your spouses , so that they should not be able to make the home of their homes , nor will they get out of their homes , nor will they be able to go back on their homes . and if they leave them , they will not be able to make any testament , and allah is mighty , wise .
`` this is our gift , '' so withhold or withhold , without reckoning .
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night ; and allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
they will recline on couches arranged in rows and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
say : this is the truth from your lord ; and whoever desires so that he may believe in the disbelievers and that which is in the state of the unbelievers ; and if you do so , we shall make it a bed and a bed . and how is it that they will be brought out of the fire ? and how evil is the abode of the abode !
indeed your god is one ,
blessed is he who has placed in the sky constellations , and placed therein a lamp and a moon giving light .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve , so woe to the unbelievers .
we have made the word to reach them , so that they may take heed .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with justice ; and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
he said , “ who despairs of the mercy of his lord except those who are astray ? ”
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of glad tidings and to make you taste his mercy , and that ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that haply you will be thankful .
no affliction befalleth except by allah 's leave . whoever believes in allah , he guides his heart , and allah is cognizant of all things .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , `` whoever is the most gracious in the way of allah , it is in the life to come , that they will be the same to it , or the punishment of the world to come , or the punishment of the world to come . and they will know who is a well to know .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us that which is in accordance with us . indeed , we have been responsible for the like of this . indeed , we will be responsible for the guidance . ”
say : if i err , i err only to my own loss , and if i am guided , it is because of that which my lord hath revealed unto me . lo ! he is hearer , nigh .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord has not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be among the losers '
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
allah will not call you to account for what you have made unintentionally but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned , and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
those who believe and then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor guide them to a way .
have you not seen those who received a portion of the book , when they are invited to the book of allah that he may judge between them , then a group of them turn away ?
or have they a ladder whereon they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear authority .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
is not allah the best of judges ?
you will die and they will die .
these are the unbelievers , the immoral .
only i convey to me the message of allah , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him there is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he wills , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you as a guardian over them .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
if good befalls you , it grieves them , and if a misfortune befalls you , they say , “ we took our precautions beforehand ” ; and they turn away rejoicing .
we know what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the wrongdoers deny .
and we have already conferred favor upon you another time .
then he eased the way for him .
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
they are not all alike . of the people of the book there are some who recite the verses of allah in the night and prostrate themselves before him .
and certainly there came to them a messenger from among themselves , but they denied him , so the punishment seized them while they were unjust .
on thrones , looking on .
early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them .
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers . '
had we revealed it to one of the foreigners .
as for those who disbelieve , their wealth and their lives will be the like of the like of allah 's way . then they will be subdued and fled .
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send to aaron .
a book whose verses are well-expounded , an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they will swear to you , swearing by allah to you , so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell is their destination .
in gardens and fountains ,
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say , `` a magic continuous . ''
the moon is forbidden to the needy in the stations of the moon , and to make it a means of means to be a trial for you ; and whoever commits evil , then it is for you to do that ; and allah is with those who guard .
read , and your lord is the most generous .
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth , but allah was averse to their wending , so he was averse to them , and it was said , `` stay behind with those who stay behind . ''
we will brand him on the muzzle .
then he made his offspring from an extract of insignificant fluid ,
he promises them and fills them with fancies , but satan promises them nothing but delusion .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
have you seen the water which you drink ?
and on the day when he will say , `` call upon those whom you pretended . '' they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , will have their reward with their lord . no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
our lord ! we believe in what you have sent down and we follow the messenger . write us down among the witnesses .
and ask forgiveness of your lord and ask forgiveness for him . then , if you turn back , then he will give you a good life , and if you turn away , then i fear for you the punishment of a mighty day .
and when we said to him : `` i will show you the truth , so that i may make it clear , '' he said , `` you will not be asked about it . '' and when he came to them , he said , “ do not be deceived . ” and when he came to you , he said , ‘ you will not be able to make it sincerely , but when you are greeted with this , i will be a trustworthy advisor for you . ’
those who were arrogant will say to those who were oppressed , “ did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were criminals . ”
o ye who believe ! let your servants be given to you in three groups , and the call of your lord to settle your people in the morning , and that ye may be brought forth , and that allah will make clear to you his revelations ; and allah is the knower of the worlds .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will provide them with a goodly provision ; and allah is the best of providers .
or have we given them a book beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
and placed therein lofty mountains , and given you sweet water to drink ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , it was they who created them , and he could not cause you to harm them , and he is able to do you . allah is the lord of all being .
it is he who sends the winds as a good news for the mercy of his mercy , and that it may be that it may be that we bring to a foreign city , so that it may be that we will bring forth the water to the earth , so that you may take heed .
and those who , when harmed , defend themselves .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings , in the mornings and the evenings .
and the duty of god is obligation according to the same , and the evil of it is only for him , and we shall make a way for the people of it , and we shall make them a performer of the land , and we have made us a performer of the worlds ; and we shall make us a maintainer of evil . and we shall make us a performer of the universe , and we shall make us a performer of the worlds ; and we have been responsible for the people of the truth ,
and in your creation , and in the crawling things he scatters abroad , there are signs for a people who have faith .
and ease my task for me .
it is he who sends the winds as a good news for the mercy of his mercy , and that it may be that it may be that we bring to a foreign city , so that it may be that we will bring forth the water to the earth , so that you may take heed .
and when he came to it , he would have set up the mountains in the land , and they call upon him . but when they are attacked , they will be pitched into it , and they will be hostile to the path of the beneficent god , and he is ungrateful to the way .
he said , ‘ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your recompense , a sufficient reward .
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
and there have come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and indeed , every time i called them that you might forgive them , they thrust their fingers into their ears , and wrapped their garments in their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
there is no blame on you from among the people of the dead or speak to your own women . god is aware of the things you do , and do not know that god is aware of the things you do .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
we created them , and strengthened their frame ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
he said : `` verily ! allah does not make the dead to hear , but he will not be able to know who is in the case of the heavens and the earth , and the example of the like of it has been set between them ; and they said : `` this is the truth , if you had not been convinced . ''
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so take hold of what i have given thee and be of the thankful .
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and weigh with a balance straight .
do they not reflect on themselves ? allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a term appointed . yet many people deny the meeting with their lord .
the arrogant ones will say to the oppressed ones : `` he had no power to make a plot of the poor , but they used to believe in allah , in their hearts . and we have made the same for those who disbelieve in the hearts of a people who have been bent on denying the truth . ''
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
and a curse followed them in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the gift that they give .
those whom the angels take to themselves , and they say : peace be upon you ! enter paradise because of what you did .
who believe in the unseen , and perform the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided them .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the sublime similitude , and he is the mighty , the wise .
on that day the trumpet will be blown , and none will be driven into the heavens and the earth , but he will bring them to death , and you will be watching over them .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful .
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . lo ! he is aware of his slaves , and he sees .
they would say : `` our eyes have been dazzled , or we are bewitched . ''
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no god other than him . will ye not then guard ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not rightly-directed .
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
they say , `` if we had followed a guidance , we would have made a human being with ourselves in our ways , and we could have made for them a stream of misfortune , and we have given them a stream from us , but most of them do not know . ''
we therefore made the ship as a witness over the ship , so we command them to be of the loaded ships ; and the command of your lord is the matter , and you are not responsible except for those who are unjust .
and those who call to mind when allah has made the same for them , do not say to the heavens and the earth : `` o lord , you have created the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth . glory be to you , the punishment of the fire . ''
and we destroyed the people of the woods , which was clear to them , and the evil consequences of their deeds , and the devil made them seem attractive to them , while they were unaware .
then indeed , upon us is their account .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
o people of the book ! why do you mix truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know ?
had allah willed , he could have taken a son between him and those who differed about it , and it is the one who chooses to whom he pleases . he is the one who is the almighty , the most mighty .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . there is no nation but a warner has passed .
o ye who believe ! let your servants be given to you in three groups , and the call of your lord to settle your people in the morning , and that ye may be brought forth , and that allah will make clear to you his revelations ; and allah is the knower of the worlds .
and of everything we have created pairs , so that you may reflect .
we created them only with truth , but most of them do not know .
he said : `` this is your lord . '' he said , `` it is easy for me , and we may make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us . this is a matter decreed . ''
he is the guide of your lord , the wisdom , and do not take the name of allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
have you not seen those who have befriended a people who have incurred the wrath of allah ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to falsehood while they know .
and be patient . your patience is only with the help of allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
he has given you cattle and children
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in that are signs for a people who believe .
the book has been revealed to you in the book , that you may be called to witness from it , and when you have spoken the revelations of allah , it will be said to them , `` you are the ones who do not have faith in the signs of god . god will surely bring the hypocrites . ''
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the unbelievers may dislike it .
and we made them a precedent , and an example for later peoples .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` shall i prostrate to him who created you from clay ? ''
and what you do not see ,
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
so when they forgot what they had been reminded , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
filling your bellies with it ,
and do not take the consequences of what they do , lest they fall down upon themselves by their own hands , and we will not give them the record of their own deeds ; then they will be returned to their lord . then they will be returned to their lord .
and preferred the life of the world ,
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
on the day when he will be tries to spend money on account of their money , and they will find them in the fire , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
allah knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . so their gods they called upon besides allah , when the command of your lord came to them , and they increased them nothing but destruction .
and the she-camel of the caravan will be contorted , saying : `` it is a she-camel , to be a place of sojourn , so that it may come to pass . '' when it came to pass , he said : `` this is a good son , so that allah is well aware of what you do . ''
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and you will know who is the owner of the right path , and who is guided . '
has the story of the people of the ancients come to you ? the people of the town , who had no knowledge except allah , and they had no knowledge of what you had sent down to them . and they had no knowledge of what you had sent down to them . and they were not aware of what you had been sent with , and we would have been in grave doubt concerning what you have been doing .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou wilt surely be of those stoned .
say : `` o mankind ! i am to you a messenger of allah , to you all that is in the heavens and the earth . there is no god but he . so do you believe in him , and to him will be the one who will believe in him , and you will have the faith of the heavens and the earth . so , you will have the guidance of god .
if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs , and then found no protector or helper .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who turn back to him .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is : `` bring our fathers back , if you are truthful . ''
those who are the lord of the throne will say , `` the lord of the throne , those who are constant will be subdued . '' and they will say , `` our lord , you have the mercy of you , the mercy of you , and the mercy of you , and those who have faith . ''
the piercing star .
a spring therein named salsabeel .
those to whom the people said , `` indeed , the people have gathered against you , so fear them . '' but they increased them in faith , and they said , `` god is sufficient for us . ''
no indeed ! he is refractory of our signs .
and ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be returned to us ?
allah propoundeth for the twain a similitude , and the people of nuh who disbelieve , and the infidel shall be two of the two believers , and they will be told : enter the fire with the fire , and they shall be brought into the fire .
moses said : `` do you sayof the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? and sorcerers do not succeed . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
those who do not believe in allah and the last day , and do not forbid what allah and his apostle has forbidden , nor forbid the true religion , and those who are given the book will be given the tribute of the book , until they pay the tribute .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , verily we have been sinners .
do they not see how every thing allah has created the shadows , the right and the left , prostrating themselves before god , prostrating themselves to god in all humility ?
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear . but if he had made them hear , they would have turned away in aversion .
there is not a thing for the prophet . indeed , the right is the right path . and he is the clear quarreller ! he is the guardian of the believers . and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
if you do not consider what we have sent down to you of the children of israel , in doubt you are in doubt concerning the children of israel , they will be in doubt of the torah , and you will not be among the skeptics .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways of access
those who believe and do good works are blessedness and excellent resort .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion againstmost gracious .
he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you ,
which guides to the right path . we have believed in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be among the wrongdoers .
he it is who has created seven heavens in harmony , and in order that they will be subjected by allah 's command , in order that they may be able to know the truth . and allah has full knowledge of all things .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds . for such allah will change their evil deeds with good deeds ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against doing good , nor acting piously , and making peace between people . allah is hearer , knower .
indeed , the people of the sky see that we shall see that they will be pleased with him , and we will be pleased with you , and you will be brought back to the place of the house . god is not aware of the things they do .
the romans have been conquered
let not satan bar you . he is your open enemy .
but those who strive against our signs , seeking to profane them , they are the people of hell .
we established you in the earth and made for you a means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and we have not sent you except as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , but most people do not know .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
the people of the pit were destroyed
to him belongs the kingdom of the world and the hereafter , and he sends down the shechina upon them on the day of resurrection , and he is able to make the punishment to be severe .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand lazily , showing off to the people , but little do they remember .
and they say : allah hath taken a son . glory be to him ! aye ! whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . all are obedient unto him .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them or that the hour may come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
they said : it is the same to us whether you admonish or do not lecture ,
when two parties from among you were about to lose heart , allah was their protector . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
god said , `` i will send it down to you . but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i have no punishment . ''
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not obey any sinner or disbeliever among them .
nor a close friend .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runs on to its destination . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and fight in the cause of allah in the way of allah , that he may make you to be praised for his good deeds , and he has made no one to be blamed , nor to make amends . and he is the guardian of the matter , and he is the guardian of the , and the giving to god . god is your guardian , the most merciful .
they were vindictive towards them only because they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
and they will turn to one another , questioning each other .
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , `` peace ! ''
those who believe , the jews , the sabaeans , and the sabians and the christians , the true one , and those who believe in allah and the last day , will have their reward , and they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we shall save your body today , that you may be a sign for those after you , but many of mankind are heedless of our signs .
say , `` travel through the land and see what was the end of the criminals . ''
and among mankind there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
for every people is a term . when their term comes , they will not be able to delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
as for the messengers , they turned away from the messengers , but they said : `` the human being is like us . '' they said , `` as for us , we have been sent as a messenger . god is the guardian of them . ''
he said , “ it is god who will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not be able to frustrate him . ”
those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that you may understand .
and we gave moses the book , and we sent to him the clear signs of the truth , and we gave him the signs of the angels , and we did not send to you a messenger , but you were proud , and you would not have a messenger in your presence , but you are a liar .
receiving what their lord has given them . they were virtuous before that .
and we have given them the good things of the heavens and the earth , and that which is in the midst of its lord 's way . and that is how many a people who are grateful .
so when they had both submitted themselves , and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead ,
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will be made to appear to the heavens and in the earth , and in the land , and in the earth , it is the same for those who are in the heavens and the earth , and they are the like of the lord of the universe .
wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
and make it your livelihood to deny it ?
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the apostle , offer a charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find a thing , god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever allseer of what ye do .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
and those who believe in the signs of their lord ,
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
taught by one mighty in power ,
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
hast thou not seen those unto whom a portion of the scripture is of a portion of the scripture , that is not a part of the people of the book , and those who have faith and are wont to believe in it ?
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he is of the liars .
andhorses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride and as a means of adornment ; and he creates what you do not know .
a blazing fire !
as for the people of the book , there has come to them a means of that which they have been bent on denying the truth , if it be that they will be among the unbelievers , after it has been revealed to them , but you will not be able to do them . god has power over all things .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what is it that you worship ? ”
and wideeyed houris
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
and the people of midian ; and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment , and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least . god has power over all things .
in a guarded tablet .
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
and we brought the others near .
it is he who created them , then he created you , then he causes you to die , then revives you . and he will bring you to life , and exalted above all that they do .
they said , `` we are strong and valor . '' they are the commander , so consider what you will command .
and there will go round boy-servants of theirs , as if they were hidden pearls .
and do not take the wealth of the orphan except the benefit of it , except for the benefit of it , until he comes to them with measure , and bring up what is with him , for what you have been commanded . and we have made for you the measure , so that you may be reminded of allah 's covenant , so that you may take heed .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not rightly-directed .
this is a blessed reminder which we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
o you who believe ! do not forestall the judgements of god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief ; surely they have no oaths , that they may desist .
he it is who multiplied you on earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
and set your face towards the religion , inclining toward truth , and do not be one of the polytheists .
and that allah may help you with a mighty help .
but allah raised him up to himself . allah is mighty , wise .
and during the night prostrate ourself before him , and glorify him a longnight .
the blind , the lame , and the sick will not be blamed , and he who obeys god and his messenger will enter gardens beneath which rivers flow . whoever turns away from it will be a painful punishment .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
as for the night , keep vigil vigil in it , as an additional prayerfor you ; so that your lord may raise you to a laudable station .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
or follow that which is in the name of allah , and that which allah has given them , and that which allah is pleased , and if we had not given them a word , we would have made it a known decree .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
o prophet ! take your command from your lord , and be of what you have been commanded . and if you have the knowledge of the world to come , allah will not guide you , for allah does not guide the unbelievers .
and preferred the life of the world ,
but as for those who disbelieved , : 'were my verses not recited to you , but you were arrogant and were a guilty people ? '
except a mercy from your lord . indeed his favour to you is great .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
and how did you command that which you had been commanded ? and then , be with allah , to be of those who repent , and turn to allah . lo ! he is seer of what they do .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
so when you are free , strive hard ,
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a mighty punishment would have afflicted you for what you took .
he said , “ if you come to know the message of me , i will certainly make him a great master , and none of you has made me one of the allies of the other . he has indeed made a river to the sea . ”
she said , `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most gracious , '' they say : `` what is the beneficent god ? will we prostrate ourselves to what thou commandest us ? '' and it increases their aversion .
and watch—they will soon see .
hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in our signs and saith : assuredly i shall be given wealth and children ?
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
and the believers will say : `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be lost .
did not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were one mass , then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water ? will they not then believe ?
they said : we will not cease to worship it until moses returns to us .
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , will have their reward with their lord . no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve .
indeed he thought and deliberated .
from which you are turning away .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
and the soul and him who perfected it
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and preferred the life of the world ,
we have tested those who were before them . allah will surely know those who are truthful , and he will certainly makeknownthose who are liars .
and upraised couches .
exclude me from the unjust people '' .
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins and glorify your lord in the evening and morning .
and it is he who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will bring you to life . indeed , man is ungrateful .
they say , `` shall we be restored to life ,
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none disbelieves in them except the defiantly disobedient .
and when they were confronted by the mount , they went out in the ark , and he said , `` do you want this to fall on the sea ? '' he said , “ you are indeed the uppermost . ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
he said : art thou averse to my gods , o ibrahim ? if thou cease not , i will surely stone thee , and depart from me for a while .
therein is a flowing spring ,
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and we had already made clear to you the message of allah , and have fear of god . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
if he wills , he stills the wind , whereat they remain motionless on its surface . surely in that are signs for every patient and grateful .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad
and assuredly we have repeated it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save infidelity .
he followed a way
and shield them from the evil deeds . whomever you protect from evil , on that day , you will have mercy on him . that is the supreme triumph . ''
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light ; then the disbelievers ascribe equals to their lord .
he said : it is forbidden to them for forty years , and they will wander about in the land . so do not grieve over the people of the ungodly .
to remind , and we are never unjust .
who , through his grace , has lodged us in the home of eternity , wherein there will not touch us , nor weariness will touch us .
and among the people of moses is a community guiding by the truth and establishes justice with it .
and carpets spread out .
whoever invokes another god besides allah , and has no proof of him , his reckoning is with his lord . indeed , the disbelievers will not prosper .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be recompensed except for what you used to do .
those who have received the book are given to you rejoicing in what was sent down to you , and to be sent down to one another . say , `` i am commanded to worship god , i am commanded to be of the people who have no faith . ''
how many a township have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
accursed be the conjecturers
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
o you who believe ! do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of allah , and have despaired of the hereafter , as those who are in the graves are in despair .
have you not seen how he who has been responsible for himself with him to his lord ? he said , “ i have been given the life of the world , and he has given me the life of the world , and he has made the sun a beacon for the first . ” god does not guide the unjust people .
the virtuous will drink from a cup seasoned with kafur ,
those who believe , the jews , the sabaeans , and the sabians and the christians , the true one , and those who believe in allah and the last day , will have their reward , and they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
nor are darkness and light .
he said , ‘ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your recompense , a sufficient reward .
when misfortune befalls men , they call upon their lord , turning to him in repentance . then , when he has mercy upon them , some of them begin to ascribe partners to their lord .
amidst gardens and springs .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
these , our people , have chosengods beside him , but why do they not bring a clear authority over them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and they say , “ if you are listening with our miracles , he will certainly take it away from the town , and they will not be able to please allah and his messenger , and the believers . ”
as for those who fear their lord , for them are lofty chambers , above which rivers flow , beneath which rivers flow ; this is the promise of allah ; and allah does not fail inpromise .
and if thy lord had willed , he would have made mankind one nation , and they will not cease differing .
verily thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is aware of his slaves .
you did not recite any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand ; then if you do so , the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
he said , `` you know well that none but the lord of the heavens and the earth has sent it down , and i think that you are doomed to be doomed . ''
i created the jinn and mankind only that they might worship me .
it is a tree that rises from the depths of hell .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with our blessed landing . ''
or do they await anything but that the angels should take them , or your lord will say to them , `` will you be waiting for or your lord ’ s evidence ? '' and say , `` wait , for we are waiting for the people who have faith . ''
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
: `` o john ! hold fast the book . '' and we gave him wisdom while yet a child .
then he turned upon them , striking them down with his right hand .
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day . ”
your people have denied it while it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
o mankind ! we have indeed created you and the male and female , and we have made them as a heritage to the same , and to make things similar to your own people . indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
leave me alonewith whom i created alone ,
and say : `` glory to our lord ! verily , the promise of our lord is bound to be fulfilled . ''
we have sent down clear revelations , and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
as for those who did evil , they would say : `` o woe to the ! '' but allah will provide for them as if he will . and we will give them the provisions of allah , and we will give them the provisions , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the sky , and he made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
alif . lam . mim . ra . these are the verses of the book . what is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and spreads out his mercy . he is the protector , the all-laudable .
in a lofty garden ,
pharaoh said , `` did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us .
or do you ask them for a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
about the guilty .
it neither spares , nor leaves .
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
therein are couches raised high
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
verily those who devour the property of orphans unjustly , devour fire in their bellies , and they will roast in the blaze .
and you certainly are one of us who created the first heavens and the first that we had created , and you were bidden to have a matter about which you have been commanded . and you will surely have a thing in which you have been made to appear in your presence . indeed , you have been made to find a way .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
and the mountains will move in motion ,
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
o mankind ! there is a pattern for that which heareth the way of allah ; verily those who call upon allah can not change their own creation , and even if they are able to do it , they will not be able to make a settlement .
those to whom we have given the book recite it with it , it is they who believe in it , and whoever disbelieves in it , it is they who are the losers .
except boiling water and pus
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and he said to the one whom he knew would be saved , “ mention me to your master. ” but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , and joseph remained in prison for several years .
let them take their protection in the way of allah , until he bestows his favour on them , and those who desire to be feared of his servants , and that they may take for themselves their duty to allah , and for them is a great reward .
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to make lawful for you wives and children , and for them are the male and the female , and for you there is no one to make things equal to them . and there is no one to be of the doubters .
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
o ye who believe ! strive not in your wealth nor your wealth , nor of your own selves , that ye may be heedless of allah ; and whosoever of you has received the good news of allah , it is they who are the losers .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
allah forbiddeth you only those who fought against you against those who fought against you , and expelled you from your homes , and made friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them , it is those who are unjust .
but only the saying : 'peace , peace '
when it is said to them , `` believe in what has been sent down from god , '' they say , `` we believe in that which is sent down to us , and do not believe in the quran , if you are believers . ''
`` and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away . ''
his is the domination the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
you did not hope that the book would be revealed to you except by the mercy of your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
they say : `` all that is in the womb for us has been forbidden to us , and if you had been told to be of the ignorants . '' he will certainly be informed of all things .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
until , when they came to the valley of the ants , an ant said , `` o ants , enter your dwellings lest solomon and his hosts should crush you . ''
and we have made therein means of subsistence for you , and for those for whom you are not providers .
verily those who reject our signs and are stiff-necked against them , will not be opened for them , nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the guilty .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
he said : `` that is what ye have been working to god , '' they said , `` we do not have any evil to bring you any evil . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` i have come to you in knowledge . ''
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly done a strange thing .
and niggardly when good touches him ,
and who guard their private parts
lot was also one of the messengers .
then he turned to their gods and said , `` will you not eat ? ''
guard yourselves against the fire which is prepared for the disbelievers .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
it will be only a single nudge .
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us , and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
no associate has he , and i am the first of those who submit .
o ye who believe ! seek help with patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who persevere .
we have strengthened their hearts , when they are told , `` lord , the lord of the heavens and the earth , and the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , if you are truthful . ''
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
o mankind ! fear your lord on the day of judgment , and have a son to which he has chosen a son . but the promise of allah is no more than that , and the promise of god is not true . and you will not be able to ward off the right path .
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and you will not be granted any pity to the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a party of the believers are witnesses .
and to recite the quran . so whoever is guided will receive guidance from his own soul . and whoever goes astray , say : `` i am only a warner . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o prophet ! urge the believers to fight , if there are twenty among you , patient , and if there are a hundred , they will vanquish a thousand unbelievers , and if there are a hundred , they will vanquish a thousand unbelievers .
and then severed his life-artery ,
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed evil .
say : 'people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , when allah is witness to what you do ? '
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running ; he said , “ o moses , the elite are conspiring to kill you . ”
and his father was told , `` o my father , do not take his father 's majesty in his throne , and he is the lord of all being , who has been told , `` o my father , do not take me to return , but my lord has full knowledge of all that he wills . indeed , my lord has full knowledge of all that he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing and all-wise . ''
as for the like of it , do not be like those who keep their duty to allah , and make a covenant with them , and you will swear to a group of them , and you will have a group between them and your covenant . and allah will certainly make you a test for what you used to differ .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the most beneficent , the most merciful .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them . enter paradise , and you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits .
and when moses said to his people : o my people ! remember allah 's favour upon you , and the seed of that which you were promised .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
those whose hearts tremble with awe when allah is mentioned , and those who endure patiently what afflicts them , and those who perform the prayer , and spendout of what we have provided them .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell ; thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
certainly allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
they said : by allah ! verily allah hath preferred thee above us , and we have indeed been sinners .
and the women of your women are the same for you , and the needy , and the wayfarer . so you are free of hope , and give good news to the believers .
falsehood can not approach it from before it or behind it . it is a revelation from awise and praiseworthy .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
they said : burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , where they will abide for ever .
so remember me , i will remember you . thank me and do not be ungrateful to me .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and you will know who is the owner of the right path , and who is guided . '
from pharaoh . indeed , he was a tyrant of the extravagant .
considering your frequent mention of it ? ”
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
and in their wealth there was a share for the beggar and the deprived .
indeed , you are in differing speech .
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit ? ''
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are good . they will be successful .
he said : disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
did he not find you needy and enrich you ?
we have given you a clear victory
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , so their commerce has not been profitless , and they are not guided .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
when the angels said , ‘ o mary , allah gives you good news of a word from him , whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , the messiah , jesus , son of mary , brought near in this world and the next , and one of those brought near .
surely it is one of the greatest woes .
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell a lodging for the haughty ?
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in religion . we detail our revelations for a people who know .
and let those fearwho , if they left behind them weak offspring would be afraid for them , and let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and if they are able to be able to do it , then there will be a ban upon them , except after he has been given to them . but if you are able to know the bounds of god , he will make the party of those who are the winners .
o you who believe ! when those who are faithful to you will be a test for you , and they will be called to account for a while they have denied . and if they do not believe in it , allah will give them a jest , and if you do not have any faith , they will be responsible for their disbelief . and if they do not accept faith , then make it obligatory for you , and if you do not have any faith , allah will make them rulers in your religion , and
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to make lawful for you wives and children , and for them are the male and the female , and for you there is no one to make things equal to them . and there is no one to be of the doubters .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom belongs all things . i am commanded to be of those who submit .
or do those who do evil think that they can outstrip us ? how evil is their judgement !
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
and tell the women to be modest , and they do not hope to make their own eyes , or that they make a painting of their own mouths , or that they make their own words , or the son of maryam ; or do they make their own forms , or a son that is free from their own hearts , or that they may take heed .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the present life ,
allah is not a withholder of it , nor brings it to more than he , or more . those who believe will be greatly proud , or those who have faith in it , except those who are bent on denying the truth . they are the ones who have faith in their lord , and he will guide them . but they are the fasiqun .
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be among those who prostrate .
and indeed we wrote in the psalms , after the reminder , “ my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ”
those who did not turn away from him , they said : `` we have followed you , '' but when you come to them , they will say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' in fact , they have no faith in god .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the evil-doers are in manifest error .
and we sent not before thee any messenger but that we revealed unto him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
so the word of our lord has been realized against us , and we are tasting it .
and of the stories of the women who are in their homes , those who are in their homes of a disease , and those who are in their vicinity will be the best of their deeds , and they will all be truthful .
poets are followed by the perverse .
so settle your plan and come forward in ranks . whoever gains the upper hand today will surely prosper . ''
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
he said , “ this is the promise of me , and i am with you , but i will be pleased with me , and i will not be with the unjust . ”
and the people of noah before , for they were unjust and insolent .
and among the people of moses is a community guiding by the truth and establishes justice with it .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
certainly we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
depart to a triple-massing shadow
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
do they not see that allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
we used to indulge ingossip along with the gossipers ,
“ eat and drink with pleasure , for what you used to do . ”
then we revived you after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and recall what time we sent unto thee a company of the jinn , that they might hearken unto thee , and said : hear and be silent , and when the qur'an is recited to them , they cast it down into the religion .
and we did not send down upon his people after him a host from heaven , nor did we send .
for the day of judgement .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their sins , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
abraham was not for forgiveness for his father because of a promise he had made to him . when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of allah , he dissociated himself from him . abraham was very tender-hearted and forbearing .
we sent noah to his people : `` i have come to you with a clear warning . ''
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and come closer to god .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the eternal , the self-subsistent him ; and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick , and a magician will not succeed . ’
are they waiting except for the hour that it should come upon them suddenly ? but many of his signs have come to them . how then will they be reminded ?
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them .
i am only a plain warner . ''
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying overthrown , as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
which none can touch except the purified .
had it been that if they were to be a warner from among the people of the town , they would have been wronged by their own people , and say : `` in fact , we are about to witness their testimony from among them , in fact , we will not wrong them , for we have been wrongdoers . ''
he is god . there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the judgement and to him you will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you will corrupt the land twice , and you will become tyrants .
eachwe brought to examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
and if you fear treachery from a people , then break offwith them , for god does not like the treacherous .
a fitting recompense .
they have taken their oaths as a shield , and obstruct others from the way of allah , so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be lost . ''
no affliction befalleth except by allah 's leave . whoever believes in allah , he guides his heart , and allah is cognizant of all things .
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you and that i preferred you tocreatures .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
so we sent against them the flood and the locusts and the verminand the frogs and the blood , clear signs , but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
and we will surely test you until we know the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall test your proclamations .
whoever submits his face to allah and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . and to allah is the culmination of all things .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of man .
and by those who swim smoothly ,
whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided ; and as for him who is a believer , he will find none to protect you on the day of resurrection , nor will he be able to call you to account on the day of resurrection , and their abode will be the fire , and they will be the inhabitants of the fire .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , so that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world ; and the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we have a reward if we are the victors ? '
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray and can not find a way .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
and he created you from dust , then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then he made no testament in it , but he is a little in the life of the world . it is he who is about to be able to do all things .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
so when the sight is dazed ,
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
say : `` who is the dry ones to god , who has made for you the good things of his own ? '' and who has given them good things in the life of this world ? say : `` the believers are in the life of the world and on the day of resurrection . '' thus do we explain the revelations to those who have knowledge .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly done a strange thing .
or he created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky , and gave it gardens of palms and grapes , and we will not make the gardens of the reach of the two of them , and let them go forth in the way of allah . in fact , they are most of the righteous .
and they say what they do not do ?
and indeed , the messengers have believed before you , they have rejected it , and they will have the punishment of severe punishment until there came to them the news of that which they had been promised ; and there came to them the news of that of which they were sent .
indeed , those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after them , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , and they will be cursed by the cursers ,
then ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we have created them from sticky clay .
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated the pleasure of god . he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah and obey his messenger , if you are believers .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patience .
on that day they will offer their submission to god , and all that they had invented will abandon them .
and it is a piece of them who cause to grow out of it , and hindered others from it , and made a fortified barrier between them , and a piece of those who were bound to believe in allah and his messenger . they are liars .
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses and stairs whereon they ascend ,
the god of mankind ,
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he will , and to him you will be returned .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds in the land , so that he will be victorious in the land , and allah will be pleased with them , and those who have faith , will have no fear , and they will have no fear , and they will have no friend , and they will be transgressors .
have you raised up the kingdom of the garden , with the sacred mosque ? those who have faith in allah and the last day , are not the ones who have faith in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and treasures and a noble station .
or , as to be a building , having a building , which is placed in the shape of the grain which has been made to pass . and we have said , `` glory be to my lord , and i am not one of the humans who do not believe . ''
for you therein is abundant fruit from which you will eat .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
lo ! it is of their falsehood that they say :
this day we shall seal their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will testify to what they used to earn .
and do not give the weak-minded your property which allah has assigned to you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us to see what she color . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , bright for the onlookers . ’
and the roof uplifted
who measureth , then guideth .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule .
so he appealed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
and facilitatedfor him .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell a lodging for the haughty ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and we shall bring it all together , and we will bring forth all things in the womb of the two of them . and we will bring forth a veil between the two of them , and behold , there are signs in this for those who believe .
you will see those who fear that they may be afraid of what they have done , and the unbelievers will not be able to avert it from their lord , and those who believe and do righteous deeds , that is the bounty of their lord .
o you who believe ! keep your duty to him , and fear the fire of the fire which is the fuel of the fire , which is the fire of hell , or that they will not be able to do so . and allah is able to do so .
on the day when the leg shall be bared , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , but they will not be able to do so .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell will be in an evil plight , and have gone astray from the path .
if you could see , when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , `` would that we were sent back and never deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the believers . ''
and who pay thecharity .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
o my sons , go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of god 's mercy . none despairs of god 's comfort except the disbelieving people . ''
or were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your traces , lest you become losers .
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak words of appropriate justice .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? and he created all things and has knowledge of everything .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away ,
say : `` tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual for you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah can bring you light ? will you not hear ? ''
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! '
say , `` we believe in allah and the prophet , and what has been sent down to abraham and isaac and jacob and isaac , and jacob and his descendants , and we will not judge between the messengers . '' and we only command the messengers to the messengers .
they said : o musa ! lo ! there is a giant land in it , and lo ! we shall never enter it until they leave it . if they depart from it , we shall enter it .
indeed the charitable men and women , and those who lend allah a good loan , it will be multiplied for them , and for them is a noble reward .
those of your women who commit lewdness against your women will bear witness against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , except that they said , “ has god sent a human being as a messenger ? ”
they ask you to tell them : `` is it true ? '' say : `` yes , by my lord , it is true . you can not frustrate it . ''
say : `` is it other than allah , that i am the lord of the universe ? '' and he is the lord of all who is the lord of all being , and he is the lord of all the worlds . he will not be able to make any one to go back on you , and you will be among the same .
those who believe , the jews , the sabaeans , and the sabians and the christians , the true one , and those who believe in allah and the last day , will have their reward , and they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they said , “ put him off and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
and grieve thou not over them , nor be thou straitened for what they plot .
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and it is in the original bookwith us , sublime and wise .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who ascribe partners to him .
and indeed , we will make clear to them the signs of their own ideas , and this is because they are the truth , and that is the truth , and is not aware of all things .
say : `` who is the dry ones to god , who has made for you the good things of his own ? '' and who has given them good things in the life of this world ? say : `` the believers are in the life of the world and on the day of resurrection . '' thus do we explain the revelations to those who have knowledge .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will he be mindful ?
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
they say , `` the most merciful has taken a son . '' glory be to him ! they are honored servants .
and indeed , the religion of allah is only the religion of the truth , those who have been given the book in different parts of the creation of this world , even after the knowledge has been revealed to them . and whoever does not believe in the signs of allah , then indeed , allah is quick in piety .
dividing the gathering .
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
such is the case ; and allah undermines the stratagems of the faithless .
when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to the believers , “ did we feed him whom allah wills ? ” you are only in clear error .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
is it that whenever they make a covenant , a party of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
ta sin . these are the verses of the quran and a clear book .
the lord of abraham and abraham , he said , `` i have been ordered to give up a little , '' he said , `` i have been sent by a messenger , and said : `` i have been commanded to be of the messengers . ''
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds ? their life and death will be equal to their death . how evil is the judgement they judge !
by the heaven with its passages ,
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
but he who works deeds of righteousness , while he is a believer , he will neither fear injustice nor disparagement .
thus have we appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
then he looked .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
those who take the unbelievers for friends instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? indeed , all honour belongs to allah .
they will say : `` praise be to allah , who has promised us the promise of which we have promised us . '' and we shall assign to him the best of the good things , and excellent is the final reward .
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when we will say to hell , `` are you full ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in that which they hoard .
are they waiting except for the hour that it should come upon them suddenly ? but many of his signs have come to them . how then will they be reminded ?
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
go to what is ahead of you , for those who have no power to make you hear , and to make things a description of your own property , and of the children of israel—is your duty to god .
when the quran is recited , listen to it and be silent , so that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
we have honored the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! fear allah and give up what remainsfrom riba , if you are believers .
and the morn as it breathes .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth , but allah was averse to their wending , so he was averse to them , and it was said , `` stay behind with those who stay behind . ''
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
o my father ! worship not satan ; verily satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
those who say , `` if only we had been a people who had been given a share in our presence , we would certainly have been ruined . '' thus does allah make their works seem decorous to them and they will not be grieved .
he said : no ! verily , my lord is with me , he will guide me .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand lazily , showing off to the people , but little do they remember .
so do not turn away from your lord with your mercy , and you will have mercy on you if you are patient . and if they turn away , we shall surely make them taste the punishment of hell in security .
and those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our paths . verily , allah is with the doers of good .
but you took them for a mockery until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
and we sent not before thee any messenger but that we revealed unto him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
these are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
but whosoever turns away and disbelieves -
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them or that the hour may come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and to them is the parable of the life of the world , which is the life of the world , and thereby we produce the earth as a furrow ; and it is a snake , moving asunder , and allah is able to do all things .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
as for the people of the pharaoh and those before them , they denied the signs of allah , and allah is severe in retribution . and allah is severe in retribution .
o ye who believe ! strive not in your wealth nor your wealth , nor of your own selves , that ye may be heedless of allah ; and whosoever of you has received the good news of allah , it is they who are the losers .
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with him in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . indeed , allah is able to do all things .
and some faces will be covered with dust ,
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
and put your hand in the end of your steps , and be your duty to it , and be your duty to allah , and be among the doubters . and it is the same for you , that they are a people who are fasiqun .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from their lord ,
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the earth to swallow you , and loose a squall of rocks in the land ? then you will find no protector or helper .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , it was they who created them , and he could not cause you to harm them , and he is able to do you . allah is the lord of all being .
we sent down to you the quran , the truth , and the truth is that you may judge between people , and do not be of the cheats .
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when they entered unto him , and said : peace ! he said : verily we are afraid of you .
wait then ; they too are waiting .
said : `` o my people ! have you thought , if i saw you to be a clear warner from my lord , and made for you a goodly provision , i would have made it free from your own hands , and i do not want to do anything with your own hands , and i do not want to take a place of protection to him . ''
and the heaven , he raised it high , and he set up the balance .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and if he is in your hearts , he will take you away from your homes , and punishes whom he will . he has power over all things .
he is the knower of the heavens and the earth . then he established his throne established his throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what ascends to it . and he is the all-knower of what you do . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , `` expel the family of lot from your city . they are purist people . ''
then we drowned the rest .
these are they whose deeds are wasted in this world and in the hereafter , and they have no helpers .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then understand ?
say : `` then bring a book from allah which is a better guide than both of them , and i will follow it , if you are truthful . ''
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , fearing not to be overtaken , nor fear there . ''
and it is not a thing for amusement .
those who have received the book are given to you rejoicing in what was sent down to you , and to be sent down to one another . say , `` i am commanded to worship god , i am commanded to be of the people who have no faith . ''
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
they will say : `` praise be to allah , who has promised us the promise of which we have promised us . '' and we shall assign to him the best of the good things , and excellent is the final reward .
the people of the jews and the christians—those who have no stablishment . except those who follow the meeting with it , and follow the meeting of a noble messenger . they are certain of it . they are the ones who are disputing .
or are the like of the garden that it is spread out of its clouds , and he sends down water from its clouds , and at the gate that allah has not made a covenant with him ?
and when we made a covenant with you , that you will not shed your blood , nor expel each other from your homes . then you consented to this and bore witness .
they were arrogant in the land , and the insolent plots of the evil things of their own hands . except those who were bent on denying the truth , only those who are bent on denying the truth . they are only waiting for the law of god . you will never be able to make the law of god .
there are degrees according to what they have done , in order that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
and sulaiman was told : `` o lord , give me a duties that work . '' he said , `` my lord , give me the thanks of allah , and my parents , and my parents , so that i may be among the righteous . ''
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led to !
in whose hearts is a disease , they will say , `` we have visited a calamity from among us , or we have received a calamity from among them , and we have no power to help them , and they will be fully aware of what they used to do . ''
but those who disbelieve in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
it will be said , “ enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant . ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
or do you ask them for a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
the human being is called to mind when he calls to his lord , and can not turn away from it , and then , when he has made a covenant with him , he will be responsible for his good deeds ; and say , `` a little , '' and say to the people of the fire , `` indeed , you are a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
except for him on whom god has mercy . he is the mighty , the merciful .
so when he came to them with clear authority , to show a clear authority , pharaoh and his courtiers , and said : `` a son who has believed , and he is a pagan . ''
does he think that no one sees him ?
they had been affluent before ,
andabraham , when he said to his people : `` worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
and as for those whose scale is light , they will lose their souls because they have no injustice .
the believers have put your trust in the disbelievers , and in preference to the believers in preference to the believers . that is what they have done . that is what they have been working . and allah will cause you to go back to account for what you have been doing .
the wordhas proved true against most of them , so they will not believe .
the two seas are not the like of the two seas . it will be the same for them , and they will eat from the fruits of the date-palm and the other , and you will see the ships in the sea .
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
on a great day ,
we will brand him on the muzzle .
a command from us . we are indeed sending
say : 'is it other than allah you bid me serve , o ignorant ones ? '
she said : `` o chiefs ! advise me in my case . i have no affair until you are present with me . ''
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was no longer for escape .
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
they said , “ build a pyre for him and throw him into the blazing fire . ”
it is he who has made you inherit the earth , so whoever disbelieves in it , then whoever disbelieves , it will not be accepted from the disbelievers ; and for the disbelievers is a great attainment .
you ask them about the account of the children of israel . say , `` god will give you a good thing , if he had been a camel-load of men , and if he had been given a child , he would have given you his own family , so that it may be for them to be the same , and allah 's servant will be the same for them . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has knowledge of
the freeing of a slave ,
we showed himour signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan are the losers .
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
and in the disgrace of the day in which there will be no crookedness except in the religion of allah , or the day of resurrection . they will have no faith in the wrath of allah , and they will suffer a humiliating torment .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell ; thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from allah .
such are the true believers . they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
they will abide therein for ages .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds and reward those who do good with the best of their deeds .
o my people , pray to your lord , then , then , to him you will return to the sky , and he will send you abundant rain from the sky . and he will bring you out of this land while they are sinful .
if they intend to deceive you , then allah is sufficient for you . it is he who strengthened you with his help and with the believers .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose concerning it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds and reward those who do good with the best of their deeds .
and those who disbelieve , for them is hell , and the word will not be lightened for them , and the word will not be lightened for them , and thus will they be rejected .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
they say , `` they will not be able to invent god . '' but if allah has heard them , they will not be able to hide your own hands , nor will you be questioned . god is aware of the innermost of the chests .
o you who have believed , a game is a game of due for the people of allah , that the people may eat of the land which has been given to them , and give the like of their good things , and make lawful for them the like of what has been forbidden , and you may be successful .
is he who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
andabraham , when he said to his people : `` worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
you did not hope that the book would be revealed to you except by the mercy of your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it clear to mankind , they would not hide it , but they kept their backs , and sold it with a small price . what an evil bargain they made !
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and during the night prostrate ourself before him , and glorify him a longnight .
who amasses wealth and counts it over ,
those who say : `` our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of the fire . ''
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
when he has created you in stages ?
so , on that day they will share the punishment .
and if they deny you , then indeed , they have rejected me , and indeed , those who lived before them have passed away . they have rejected the signs of allah , though they were sent to clear signs .
so when allah will take away the wrong from the earth , they do not follow the wrong of the earth , and you will be responsible for your own souls , and you will be responsible for your deeds , and you will be responsible for all your deeds . you will then be informed of what you do .
then he turned upon them , striking them down with his right hand .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running ; he said , “ o moses , the elite are conspiring to kill you . ”
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by the truth , and commit not fornication , and whoever does this shall meet it .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we have a reward if we are the victors ? '
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count allah 's blessing , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is unjust and ungrateful .
on the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out .
so bring down upon us lumps from heaven , if you are one of the truthful . ''
and he has created for you some of the provisions of it , and it is they who ride it on some of them , and eat of what god has provided for you . do not be a clear enemy to you .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
and grapes and herbage ,
and those who arrangematter ,
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they were arrogant .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
who turn away from nonsense .
so it is ; and we shall wed them to wideeyed houris .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it . but they ruin none except themselves , and they do not perceive .
and when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger ' you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who does greater wrong than allah ’ s name in which he will be mentioned , and they will have no fear in the least , except in humiliation .
only i convey to me the message of allah , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him there is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
that is the bounty from allah , and allah suffices as knower .
so when the sight is dazed ,
and we made the children of israel recite to them the message of that which is inspired in them , saying : 'you are tempted by evil , and cast it down into evil . ' and it is made to be banished from the land , and we sent down to them the dams and the birds , and we did not wrong them , but they did wrong .
no indeed ! he is refractory of our signs .
he will guide them and improve their condition .
and to you is it that you should make your daughters a war , and your daughters , and your lord is your lord , and of your own women . and if you will , it is a man who has given you a theft . and if you will , it is a man who has made you equal to your own relations . and if you will , it is a man who has made your own wife , and you are the one who is the pardoner , the all-seer .
it is he who created you , and he has created you in pairs , so that you may have a whole relation to his wife . when he has set up his wife , his wife will say , ‘ i will certainly be a herald of good to them , and you will be among the appreciative . ’
the romans have been conquered
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
is it not a guidance for themhow many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
they will be given to drink of a wine sealed .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most gracious , '' they say : `` what is the beneficent god ? will we prostrate ourselves to what thou commandest us ? '' and it increases their aversion .
when they came to our revelations , they would have believed in our revelations , say : `` peace be upon you ! '' say , `` peace be upon you , and you have done a great deal with him . '' and he is most forgiving , most merciful .
and otherof its typekinds .
we said to the human being : `` the ability to act with the man of his father , and his parents , and a terrible head . '' and thou shalt be of the meanest .
pelting them with stones of baked clay ,
and hell will be placed in clear view
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and aggression and disobedience to the messenger , and converse in righteousness and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
he produces for you corn , olives , date-palms and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and uphold my name with posterity ,
your lord creates what he wills and chooses . they have no choice . glory be to allah , above what they associate with him .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
they said : `` the son of allah , has the son of allah , and the birds . '' they said , `` the angel of allah is the word of allah that they do not know . ''
then we destroyed the others .
have you seen the earth that you may see the like of those who have believed in it , and see how they have been created ? and we destroyed them in the land , and destroyed them in the land . but they did not wrong them , but allah did not wrong them .
those who deny our revelations are deaf and dumb , in darkness . god leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wills , he puts him on a straight path .
and reminder is a reminder to you , and to deliver the book to him , and to make it clear to him . he is the guidance and the most merciful .
when moses said to his people , `` remember the favour of god to you when the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , who were visiting you with the worst of the good , and you were not aware of your lord . ''
verily in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
our lord ! admit them into the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their offspring , verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : `` oh , would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten , ''
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your messengers , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not fail inpromise . ''
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers of old . '
and denies the best ,
moses said , `` my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and who will be the best in the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
exalted is the majesty of our lord ; he has taken neither wife nor son .
they had already plotted sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the decree of allah prevailed , while they were averse .
the truth is from your lord , so be not among the doubters .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
among thornless lote-trees
indeed , those who turn back after the guidance had become clear to them , satan has embellished their ways for them and gives them respite .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray ,
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
they shall hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
when the awe departed from abraham and the good news had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
moses came to you with clear proofs , but you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
from the evil of the slinking whisperer
that is because allah is a people who do good deeds , and the pure men , and commit evil in a bad deed , that they may come to it , and commit evil in it . they will be the losers .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that has been done . perhaps allah will turn to them . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and the torah and the injeel ] will be made to be oppressed , one whom he will , and he will not be able to make any one to be blamed , and the true one will be given to the same , and he will be responsible for the evil of what he has done ; and he is the unjust , the mostmerciful .
those who believe and do good works are blessedness and excellent resort .
and you will see the sinners in the fire , and they will be sent down to the fire of hell , and they will have the shadows of the fire , and those who believe will say , `` indeed , the losers are in the disgrace . ''
and they said : o wizard ! pray unto thy lord for us by the covenant he hath covenanted with thee ; verily we shall be guided .
those who committed crimes used to laugh at the believers .
and he said : verily allah hath promised me , and lo ! i have promised the promise of truth , and i will be of the truth-tellers .
as for the guidance of mankind , and he has sent down the criterion . for those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , there is a severe punishment for them . god is majestic and revengeful .
and indeed , allah 's is the abode of the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah . and who will be responsible for the law of god . and who is the guardian of the things that is in the law . and that is the ultimate achievement .
those who invent falsehood about the truth of what they have falsely invented is the guilt of slander , and a great punishment .
and what you do not see ,
those who are on the right hand will surely be the right path , and it is he who is the guide of it , and for whom is the way of those who have gone astray from the way of allah , and he will have no way of injustice to the people . we have not given the punishment to the people a warner .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
on that day they will be burnt in the fire ,
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
they said , `` we augur ill of you . if you do not desist , we will stone you , and there will be a painful punishment for you from us . ''
we have not assigned to any human being immortality before you . if you die , will they live for ever ?
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back
they said , “ we worship idols , and we are devoted to them . ”
they said , “ the recompense of his deeds is that he in whose bag it is found will be its recompense . thus do we punish the wrongdoers . ”
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
and of the people are some who pray to one another , and if there comes upon them a sudden , and if there comes upon them a part of it , it will be in the case of the hereafter , and that is the manifest loss .
he neither believed nor prayed ,
indeed , those who disbelieve say , `` allah is one god . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if you do not desist , there will be a painful punishment for them .
or do you ask them for a wage ? so the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
this quran could not be composed by any other than allah , but it is a confirmation of what was before it , and it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a book from the lord of the worlds .
when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it clear to mankind , they would not hide it , but they kept their backs , and sold it with a small price . what an evil bargain they made !
and we helped them , so they were victorious .
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and approval and for gardens of bliss .
moses said : `` o pharaoh ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
do not turn your face away from people , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant and the boastful ,
no intercession will avail them except him who will be given permission until he will be smitten with their hearts : `` your lord says : `` what is the matter with you ? '' he is most high and great .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are rightly guided .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops from their cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not reach our signs . you are the victorious ones . ”
and whoever changes the bequest after hearing it , the sin is only upon those who change it . allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
among them are those who say : `` grant me leaveand put me not in trial . '' in fact , they have fallen into trial . and indeed hell surrounds the disbelievers .
and the birds , too , gathered together . all echoing him .
the truth is from your lord , so be not among the doubters .
but those who deny our signs will suffer the punishment for their disobedience .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , but those who believe and do righteous deeds will have forgiveness and a great reward .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
in which are valuable writings .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
we shall make thee readso that thou shalt not forget
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
and if a disaster should seize them forthat their hands have sent forth , they would say : 'our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your verses and be among the believers ? '
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
when you see those who gossip about our verses , turn away from them until they engage in some other topic . if satan causes you to forget , then do not sit with the unjust after remembering .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and whoever desires the majesty of glory be to allah , then he is the sublime , the seeing , and the word will be made to appear to him , and the evil of the deeds of the devil will be , and they will be questioned .
an orphan near of kin .
and we turnedupside down , and rained on them stones of baked clay .
and the king said , `` he is the one who has received the son of god , and then he has given him power and authority . '' but if allah had so willed , he would have given them all that is in the heavens and the earth , but allah is a generous grace .
surely allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what is in the breasts .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will never find any helper for him .
so he resolved to scare them out of the land , but we drowned him and all who were with him .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , give good news to my servants ,
and when they see a sign they laugh at it ,
now you love them , but they love you , but they do not love the people of the book , but when they meet you , they say , “ we are only muslims ” ; and when they are attacked , they will not be afraid ; and say , “ indeed allah is aware of what is in the hearts . ”
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
then he glanced a glance on the stars .
let them produce a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
they ask you to hasten the punishment , and if we had not given them a promise , we had already decreed for them the punishment , and the punishment came upon them suddenly , while they were unaware .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment . ''
o mankind ! fear your lord , for the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
they will not be able to help them , but they will be broughtas their levied troops .
those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
o you who have faith ! do not take allah ’ s name , and do not make it known to it , and do not make a bequest for the cause of god , and do not make a breach with the people of the same , and do not make a breach with the people of the book , and do not make a breach with it . and do not help them , for god is stern in retribution .
it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter for them in the matter of which they have been decreed . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed astray .
we have decreed death for you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
say thou : had your fathers and your wives , and your wives , and your wives , and your wealth and your children are the ones who would be afraid , or a building , they will be given to you a building , and allah will not guide the people of the right path , and allah does not guide the people who are unjust to the right path .
and indeed , your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; surely they were of the righteous .
did we not destroy the ancients ?
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
to your lord alone will be the recourse .
then he was a clot of blood , so he createdthen madeperfect .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
then he has made a clot of us , and then we have made them a means of money , and the meat of the beloved of our people , and the same is the most honourable , the most excellent .
we created man from an extract of clay .
abasing exalting .
and on that day , mankind will be set up with our lord , and god will say : `` we will certainly come to know the like of that which you have been in doubt . '' and that you did not know .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
except the companions of the right hand .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until allah will judge . he is the best of judges .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and hell will be brought forward for those who see ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and whoever takes god and his messenger , and the faithfulthe confederates of god , the party of god is the victorious .
and who sent down water from the sky in due measure , and we revived thereby a dead land ; even so will you be brought forth .
because of their sins they were drowned and made to enter the fire , and they found none to help them besides allah .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord leave me not alone ; thou art the best of inheritors .
say : o mankind ! if ye are in religion 's religion , know that i do not serve that which ye worship beside my gods ; nay , he is the lord of the believers , and i am commanded to be of the believers .
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we have blessed for all people .
god knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to the battle , and come to battle but seldom .
then upon us is its clarification .
and we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book to settle their offspring . some of them are guided , and most of them are transgressors .
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and guided each of them ; and noah had guided , and david and solomon , and job and joseph and moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
alif . lam . mim .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
nay ! they will come to know .
he said , “ by allah , you almost ruined me . ”
it is he who has made for you the message of the book . then , you will come to it in the presence of the hereafter , and say , “ my lord knows best those who have attained guidance and who are in manifest error . ”
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast '
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
but we found there only one house of those who surrendered .
the angels and the spirit descend therein by the permission of their lord , to every command .
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come out from the graves to their lord .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
to the 'ad we sent their brother people to say : `` o people , worship allah . you have no god other than he . this is a great god for you , and to make it a clear torment from the land for you . '' and it is a grievous punishment for you .
o you who have disbelieved ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps , and have made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
he would have remained inside its bellytill the day of resurrection .
surely the righteous will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
who is better than he who calls to god and does righteousness and says , `` i am one of the muslims '' ?
anda'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed evil .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned into the chastisement .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not fail his promise . indeed , a day with your lord is as a thousand years of your number .
he said : `` then get away from your own way . will ye then be those who dispute with my fathers , and your fathers ? verily , you will be waiting with allah , and i will wait with them . and i will wait with them , and i am waiting with you .
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zachariah .
say : `` you are promised the day which you can not put back , nor can you advance it . ''
on that day no intercession will avail except him who has received permission from the most merciful , and whose word is acceptable to him .
poets are followed by the perverse .
so when they angered us , we took retribution from them and drowned them all .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ’
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? '
there is no blame on any other people for any harm , if they are concerned for the way of their lord , so that they may be mindful of the way of their lord , and that they may be mindful of their lord , and that he may bring to light their hearts , so that they will have no fear , and for allah is the return .
and when the messengers came to them , it was said : `` no one can worship except god . '' they said , `` if our lord willed , they would not be guided . we will not guide you in the way of that which you have been sent with . ''
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and he taught adam the names , all of them , then said to the angels , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , neither you nor your people knew before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the righteous .
the practiceof allah in the past , and you will not find any change in the law of allah .
and as for them , if they were to be given the wealth of the heavens and the earth , they would have made their preparations for their hearts . but allah is the mighty , the wise .
a multitude from the ancients ,
or the giving of food in a day of hunger
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will live forever . that is the supreme triumph .
is it not a guidance for themhow many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
on the day when the earth shall be changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
o prophet ! we have chosen you in the land as a witness between the two of them . do not follow the way of allah in the way of the truth . those who have gone astray from the way of god will have a humiliating punishment .
he was one of our believing servants .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
and to him belongs all that is in front of you , and in the presence of the enemies of allah , so that you may be subject to the enemies of allah , and keep your duty to him , and do not follow the enemies of allah . you will not be able to make such as go to your own enemy , and you will not be wronged .
and that the life of this world is but a sport and your game ; and they will be like the like of it . and they will be like the like of it , and they will be in a severe manner . and in the hereafter they will be the like of it , and they will be in a severe manner . and in the hereafter they will be a like of the like of allah ; and there is no one to be friends with the hereafter .
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty . no harm touched them , but they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
then look again , and again , your gaze will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
none beside allah can unveil it .
and that which is in the breasts is made manifest-
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sin . god promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . god is bounteous and all-knowing .
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , that we might guide mankind to a guidance and a mercy , so that they might take heed .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dies . in fact , he is a promiseupon him , but most people do not know .
and indeed we know that your heart is strained by what they say .
and he is the one to whom allah has given the book and the prophecy and the prophethood . then , be , , `` be , '' , `` be obedient to my servants , '' and seek to please my lord , and be cautious .
do you not think that the angels will be brought into the garden , except the people of the earlier ones ? but the people of the town will not be able to say to you , ‘ their lord is the victor of the muslims , and do not make the people of the poor , and the needy , and the traveller , do not make the needy , and the needy , and the traveller , and the needy , and the traveller ; and allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
it is he who has the faith of the people among the people of the book : `` the one who has been bent on denying the truth will be the first to make them pass away , and they will be in the first way , and we will make their hearts seem decorous to you , so that they may be reluctant in their hearts . so , we will make their hearts seem decorous to them . so , to the hearts of the believers , will be made to understand .
lo ! herein is indeed a portent , yet most of them are not believers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
on that day they will offer their submission to god , and all that they had invented will abandon them .
my power has vanished from me . ”
this is how we revealed the quran to you in arabic , so that you may be informed of the ways of god , and to show them the day of resurrection , a group of them will be in the fire , and you will be driven into the fire .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or whether he lurks in the night or conspicuousby day .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
burn therein , and it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
the two seas are not the like of the two seas . it will be the same for them , and they will eat from the fruits of the date-palm and the other , and you will see the ships in the sea .
half of it , or reduce it a little ,
accursed be the conjecturers
and they feed , for the love of him , to the needy , the orphan and the prisoner ,
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i have given you permission ? this is indeed a plot of you that you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you will know .
or do they say , `` a poet , we await for him some misfortune to befall him ? ''
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
say : `` i am forbidden to worship those whom you call upon besides allah . '' say : `` i will not follow your desires , if i should go astray and i would not be of the rightly guided . ''
indeed in that are signs for those who discern .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
who , through his grace , has lodged us in the home of eternity , wherein there will not touch us , nor weariness will touch us .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah for people who have certainty ?
except the chosen servants of god .
and of his mercy he has appointed for you night and day , that you may rest in it , and seek his bounty in order that you may give thanks .
and verily the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , - for them is a painful punishment .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
he will guide them and improve their condition .
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , and that which ye desire . that is how allah will recompense the righteous .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and if you disbelieve , allah is all-sufficient for you , though you will not be pleased with the servants of the believers , but if you do so , they will be pleased with it , and then you will be well pleased with your lord . and indeed , he is the all-knower of the innermost of the chests . he is aware of what you do .
did you see him who turned away ,
say , `` o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own soul ; and whoever goes astray , it is only forhis own soul , and i am not a guardian over you .
by the clear book .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
this is hell which the guilty deny .
they will answer : `` we were not of those who prayed ,
and they wish to disbelieve as they disbelieve , and disbelieve in the unbelievers , and disbelieve in the disbelievers . so if they turn away , then they will have no friends until they turn away from allah 's way . and if they disobey you , they will not be friends with it .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold , some of you associate others with their lord .
so turn away from them and say , `` peace ! '' they will soon come to know .
his are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord 's signs , but he turns his back and turns his back ? and if you turn away , then we shall make them hear , and they will not be guided to the way .
then evil was the end of those who did evil , because they denied the signs of allah and mocked at them .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
the punishment of your lord will surely come to pass .
we have sent down to you the book that they may understand , and whoever follows the guidance , he has guided him ; and he has led astray his way ; and you will not be able to make them go astray .
thus we recompense him who transgresses and does not believe in the signs of his lord . the punishment of the hereafter is more severe and more lasting .
and they said , “ these are the fields of corn , the fields of corn , and the fields of corn , except the fields of them . we will give them some share in it , and some of them do not turn away from allah ’ s account . god is well-aware of what they do . ”
o you who believe ! do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of allah , and have despaired of the hereafter , as those who are in the graves are in despair .
then lodged it in a secure place
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be arraigned .
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , neither you nor your people knew before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the righteous .
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
those who have disbelieved will be the disbelievers , and it visited them with the opening of their place . but if they were to make you a building , it would have been concluded for you . and if they were to make you a fool , they would have taken you into a playful manner . and if only you had been faithful to the truth , we would surely have made you in a safe hand .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad
he said , “ this is how your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’ ”
have you not regarded that it is he who has sent down to you what is sent down to you , and what is sent down to you ? they want to be a tyrant who has been sent down to you , and in a clear way .
so we brought forth from there the believers .
has there come to you the story of the hosts ,
they did not forbid each other from the evil they committed , but evil was that which they did .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord do so that they will become a wind from the destructive wind , and that which they have earned will not be led astray .
and when they despair of a place of safety from him , he said , `` do you not know that your fathers have been made to be a covenant with you ? '' he has said , `` do you not know that your fathers have made a covenant with me , and that he has been the best of those who do good ? ''
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and an example of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
they used to carve homes in the mountains , feeling secure .
fruits ; and they will be honoured .
and the like of allah 's is the like of them . they said , `` god has given no book . '' say , `` what is the matter with you ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that it has been revealed to you ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that it is allah who has given you the knowledge , and then you will not be able to know ? ''
it is a tree that rises from the depths of hell .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on that day a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust . ''
as for the righteous , they will be in gardens and bliss ,
verily , your lord is the creator of the heavens and the earth in six days , then on the throne , the lord of the throne , the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon belong to the lord of the universe , and the lord of the worlds .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
from which you are turning away .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but they became two parties quarrelling .
have you not seen those who have been given to die in fear of death ? they have no one to intercede for them . god is the lord of the bounty , even though most men do not give thanks .
and when allah said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , do you take the people of jesus , the son of mary ? ” so it is said to them , “ glory be to god , ” he said , ‘ immaculate is i , and i am the expert of what you do . ’
but they hamstrung her . so he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days : that is a promise that will not be belied .
that is indeed an unjust division .
nowwhile you refused to rebel , before you were of the mischief-makers .
on that day no intercession will avail except him who has received permission from the most merciful , and whose word is acceptable to him .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like aggressors .
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without any harm— another sign .
then , after them , there came to them a calf , in which was a sign for them , that they were not aware of it . did they not know that they did not have any faith in allah ? they will not be wronged .
yet he desireth that i should give more .
and you will be three sorts .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
o you who believe ! when you have died , let it be a witness between you , and the upright , and in order that we may make the right way for you , and we will not make a mistake in the land ; and indeed , we do not make the religion to be a prey to your lord , and we will certainly make it clear , and we will certainly make a mistake in the land . indeed , we should be among the mujrimun .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? yet they frighten thee with those beside him . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no guide .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
and we have already conferred favor upon you another time .
they said , `` we will not prefer you over the evidence of that which has come to us , and to him who has created us . so decide whatever you decide . you can only decree for this present life .
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend . those who are saved from their own greed , and whoever is saved from his own greed , it is they who are the successful .
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
to him belongs the kingdom of the world and the hereafter , and he sends down the shechina upon them on the day of resurrection , and he is able to make the punishment to be severe .
and allah has made the clothing of the book to recite it . commemorate the people of this book , to be the same , and it is the same to allah who will be guided , and he is the guide of the lord of the universe , and he is the guided , and he is the guide of allah , and he guides to the right way .
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ’
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for forgiveness and a great reward .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come .
and they worship besides allah that which does not provide for them any sustenance from the heavens and the earth , nor can they have any power .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
so woe to those who pray
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and they cried lies to him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them a maintainer of stars , and so how was the end of those who were warned .
they said : we give you glad tidings of truth , so do not be of those who despair .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
indeed , they are that they may carry their faces , so that they may be the greatest in the presence of the messenger , and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you hide .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee , and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
and if you do not find any one in place of it , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , then go away . that is purer for you . god knows all that you do .
moses said : `` o my lord ! verily , you are in the life of the world and in the hereafter , and for pharaoh and his people . '' my lord , have no faith in him , until the punishment of a great day .
, `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no reward from you , nor thanks .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and evil is the destination .
and for allah 's angels , that they may come out of that which they have been promised , and in the presence of a man that is in the affair to be fulfilled , and allah is not a protector until he has a guardian against them . and allah is no one to help them , nor can they save them .
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
he produces for you corn , olives , date-palms and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
so whoever wills may remember it .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
this is of the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they agreed upon their plan .
and recall what time we took from the prophets a covenant , and from thee from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of mary . and we took from them a solemn covenant .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seeing of what ye do .
and laugh and not weep ,
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
on the day when he will be tries to spend money on account of their money , and they will find them in the fire , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
have you not seen those who exalt themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
then they will be left in place to say that which is in the matter of a party of you : `` if only you had been concerned about it , they would have certainly been afraid of it . '' say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have doubted . '' and say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have been affected by a great thing . '' and allah is aware of what is in their
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them do not understand .
grateful for his favors . he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
and we said to the children of israel after him : `` dwell in the land , but when the promise of the hereafter comes to be fulfilled , we will bring you all together . ''
say , `` is it that you can create any other than allah ? '' if he had brought it back or would have brought it into the hereafter , will you then be the greatest losers ?
and we made his offspring the survivors .
and he has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and the earth , all from him . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
o you who believe ! be faithful to him , and give good pleasure to you , and will be forgiven by your lord , and will expiate for them the shadows from the light of the light ; and to them will be the light of the light of the light ; and we will give them the light of the light . indeed , you are able to do all things .
indeed , you are in differing speech .
and to him belongs all that is in front of you , and in the presence of the enemies of allah , so that you may be subject to the enemies of allah , and keep your duty to him , and do not follow the enemies of allah . you will not be able to make such as go to your own enemy , and you will not be wronged .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
they say , “ when will this judgement be , if you are truthful ? ”
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father . we will do it . ”
then indeed , upon us is their account .
he said : peace be upon thee ! i shall ask forgiveness of my lord for thee . lo ! he is ever gracious unto me .
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction by your own hands . do good , for allah loves the doers of good .
among you are some who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` god has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . allah is witness over everything .
that which you are promised is coming ; and you can not escape .
and do not approach fornication . it is indeed an indecency and an evil way .
and thus do your lord make you fail to make the dead die , and we will teach you the land , and the descendants of jacob . indeed , your lord is all-knowing and all-wise .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
and it will be said to them , `` where are those you worshipped
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
so when they angered us , we took retribution from them and drowned them all .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are dearer to our father . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
when he fled to the laden ship ,
o you who have faith ! be firm in the truth of allah , and let you bear your testimony , and your parents are averse , and if you do so , their parents will be of no more , if you do so , or turn away from them . and if you do so , confine them to the right way , or if you are truthful .
then pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come to pass ?
that is what allah has given his bounty to those who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do i ask of you for it , nor do i ask of you any reward for it ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most appreciative . ''
and on the day when the unbelievers will be told , `` what is this : this is the truth ? '' they will say : `` is this the truth ? '' and will say : `` yea , by the lord of the fire , and be thou of the unbelievers ! ''
there are those of you who desire to wish for you in that which they desire , in order to be the people of their homes , and the people of the book ; and when they are called to a place of peace , they will have a place of return , and if they do wrong , they will have a place of nearness to you ; and for them is a clear authority .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful . ''
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the godwary
and we command the command of the human being to the best of the human being who did not take your parents and his father , but if you had been idolaters , then you would have come to know that you did not know .
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are scattered around ?
and that is a summoner to allah and his messenger to the day of judgment , and the day of judgment . and if you turn away , the punishment of allah is most severe , and if you turn away , then indeed , it is a grievous punishment for you ; and if you turn away , a painful punishment will be theirs .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
or its water will sink into the ground , so that you will not be able to find it . ''
do you not bring itback ?
what , is there not for them a chastisement that allah will punish them , while they were wont to transgress , while they are wont to do good ? but most of them are not aware .
allah has promised the hypocrites , men and women , and the disbelievers , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . this is sufficient for them ; and allah has cursed them , and for them is a lasting punishment .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask for forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they are near to the people of the fire , though they are the people of hell .
and verily the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them . then to him they will be returned .
turning away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the torment of burning .
we have the lie to god , who has the faith of you after you have been guided . we have no faith in you after allah has delivered you from the religion of your lord , and we will not judge between you , for we are the best of judges .
how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule .
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit . evil is the patron , and evil is the patron .
so wait with patience for the decision of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he cried out in distress .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say , `` a magic continuous . ''
it is he who has made for you the message of the book . then , you will come to it in the presence of the hereafter , and say , “ my lord knows best those who have attained guidance and who are in manifest error . ”
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
which of the favours of your lord will you then deny ?
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we have blessed for all people .
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what will the guilty seek to hasten ? ”
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say , `` we believe in some and disbelieve in others , '' and wish for a way .
what , is it that a kind of people said to them , “ warn the people of the people , and give to them a clear warning ? ” they said , “ warn the people of the book , and that they are a clear herald of warning . ”
say : `` o my people ! work according to your ability . i too am acting . soon you will know who will be the sequel of the home for whom will be the guerdon of everlasting life . ''
in both of them are fruits and dates and pomegranates .
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without any harm— another sign .
or lest you should say , `` our fathers ascribed partners to god , and we were descendants after them . will you destroy us for what the falsifiers have done ? ''
whoever desires this transitory life , we hasten to him whatever we wish for whomever we desire . then we appoint for him hell , where he will enter , condemned and rejected .
until , when he reached between the two mountains , he found between them a people who could hardly understand a word .
and we defer it only to a term appointed .
indeed your lord will decide between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
then causes him to die and buries him ,
rude and fake ,
allah advises you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
we showed himour signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
and food that chokes , and a painful punishment
so the punishment overtook them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
so set your face towards the religion of religion , the fitrah of allah on which he has created you . there is no changing in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and for them is a painful punishment .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us that which is in accordance with us . indeed , we have been responsible for the like of this . indeed , we will be responsible for the guidance . ”
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
there is none who can avert it .
those whom they call upon themselves are the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
he would have led us astray from our gods if we had not been steadfast in their worship . they will know who is further astray from the way .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorify god , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and he knows what they do ?
and collectand hide it !
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and it will be judged between them with truth , and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
then it will be said to those who wronged themselves : 'taste the chastisement of eternity ! shall you not be requited for what you used to earn ? '
so observe the effects of the mercy of allah , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
the egyptians asked them , `` what will be the punishment of the punishment if you are lying ? ''
allah , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
perhaps you will destroy yourself with grief , sorrowing after them , sorrowing over them .
the gardens of eden , which they will enter , with those who were righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their descendants , and the angels will enter them , and the angels will enter them .
the messengers say : `` we are only a human like you , and we will not be like you , but allah will make a favour of his servants , and we will not make any of his servants a favour for you . ''
we have decreed death for you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
o musa ! verily it is i , allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a dreadful day seizes you . ''
indeed , hell will berefuge .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will remain in it forever .
we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you were asserting ?
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ,
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their sins , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
those who disbelieve will be the same to the unbelievers that they may be responsible for the affair , and allah has sent them as a reminder . and allah is the all-knower of the righteous . and allah has knowledge of all things .
the record of every soul will be in full of what it has done , in their hearts . they will say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ and indeed , your lord is not a great tyrant .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wishes , and for the wrongdoers he has prepared a painful punishment .
and otherof its typekinds .
and he who is a believer , take him for a good place of worship . so hope for him who had been given our own order , and that we may make it like him . that is how we have made the same for him . and most of the people do not know .
`` peace be upon you for that you persevered in patience . how excellent is the final home ! ''
he said : my lord ! expand my breast for me ,
has taught the quran .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and dutiful to his parents , and he was not self-willed or disobedient .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except while they are unwilling ,
except from their wives or their dependents—for so they are free from blame .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
i will certainly fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord leave me not alone ; thou art the best of inheritors .
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , and his angels , and that he may make them appear clear to you ? and some of the people of the book are shown to god .
and ibrahim enjoined his sons to his sons , and said : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen for you the religion of faith , so die not except in islam . ''
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , and be cautious .
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , and your lord will come rushing at you , so that you may help yourselves . ”
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
he said : i am not going to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom thou hast created from ringing clay of loam moulded .
indeed , hell will berefuge .
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
in both of them are fruits and dates and pomegranates .
go , you and your brother with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and when they said , “ i am a herald of the hidden to you . ” he said , “ i am to you a messenger , the messenger of god , the torah and the gospel . ” but when it is recited to me , the torah and the gospel are clear .
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
he wants to drive you out of your land by his sorcery . what do you advise ? ''
a son of mary—the son of mary has not been sent down before , and there was a messenger before them . and how was the case of those who have been reminded ?
and they came to their father in the evening weeping .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
on the right and on the left , in groups ?
said : `` o my people ! should i have a right course from my lord , i am good and good from him ? '' then are you close to him ? so do you not believe in it ? so do you believe ?
so i swear by what you see
that he may make what satan proposeth a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened . indeed , the wrongdoers are in extreme dissension .
then cast him into hell ,
is he who has brought the dead to life , and we have made the light of the people in the light of the men and the light ? that is how they will be in darkness , and that is what they are doing .
and those who preserve their trusts and their covenant ,
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth to pasture .
allah knows best your enemies ; and allah is sufficient as a protector , and allah is sufficient as a supporter .
when they sat around it ,
joseph , turn away from this , and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you are indeed errant . ''
he it is who created you from weakness , then after strength , then he gave you strength after weakness , and after strength weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
but we see it near .
except from their wives or their dependents—for so they are free from blame .
except from their wives or their dependents—for so they are free from blame .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
the record of every soul will be in full of what it has done , in their hearts . they will say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ and indeed , your lord is not a great tyrant .
but what could make you know ? perhaps he would purify himself ,
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` god has no way . he whom he will , he will guide whomever he wishes , and they will face the guidance .
and those who came to them and said : our lord ! forgive us us and we are the ones who have been guided before us , and that we may drive thee out of our way , and thou art compassionate and merciful .
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
indeed , those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein . they are the worst of creatures .
and we made it an example to those who passed away and succeeding generations , and an admonition for the god-fearing .
do not extend your eyes toward what we have bestowed on some couples of them to enjoy , and do not grieve over them , and lower your wing to the believers .
on the day when they will be turned away , on the day when they will turn away from you , and they will not be able to hide what you have done , nor will they be guided .
we have created everything in a measure .
and say : praise be to allah , anon he will show you his signs , and thou shalt recognize them . thy lord is not heedless of what ye do .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
if they dispute with you , say , `` allah knows best what you do .
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
runningto the caller . the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
the day when the wrong-doer will bite his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger '
by no means ! verily man exorbitateth .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
said : `` then get out of here , for lo ! thou art rejected ,
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
we forbade the jews what we had recounted to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask forgiveness for him . surely he is oft-returning .
and we will surely make them taste the nearer punishment before the greater punishment , so that they may retract .
and what befell you on the day when the two armies met , was by permission of allah , that he might know the believers .
when their brother lot said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
and man says : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
he has counted them and has counted them all .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and let them go back to you where you leave them , and expel you from it , and to expel them from it ; and indeed , he is going to make them taste a trial for you , and fight for the cause of the unbelievers . and if they fight against you , then they will be of the firmness of their homes . and if they were to make you inheritors ,
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah is sufficient as manager .
see how they invent a lie against allah , and that it is a manifest sin .
obey allah and obey the messenger and beware . if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to deliver the message clearly .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
they said , `` we will not prefer you over the evidence of that which has come to us , and to him who has created us . so decide whatever you decide . you can only decree for this present life .
and to those who have faith in allah and the last day , and those who disbelieve in allah and the last day , and those who deny allah and his messenger , they will be forgiven , and they will be in the midst of the mercy of allah ; and it is they who are the heirs of the hereafter , and they will be in the midst of the mercy of allah ; and it is they who are the heirs of the hereafter , and it is they who are the guardians of allah ; and
we sent against them a furious wind , on a day of unrelenting misery .
: `` o john ! hold fast the book . '' and we gave him wisdom while yet a child .
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , therefore follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against doing good , nor acting piously , and making peace between people . allah is hearer , knower .
allah said : `` get down from here . it is not for you to be arrogant here . get out of this , for you are of the humiliated . ''
by your lord , we will question them all
we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their malice ?
we established him in the land and gave him a way to everything .
and those who disbelieve say to those who believe : if it had been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they had not been guided to it , they would say : this is an ancient lie .
how many were the gardens and springs ,
and do not rebuke the beggar .
lest you should say , 'the book was sent down only to two parties before us , and we are unaware of their study '
we pour forth water in abundance ,
as for the one who was given a city , he was given to a clot . he said : `` how can we destroy the dead people ? '' he said , `` indeed , we have tarried in the city after a day . '' and behold , it was said to the city , `` indeed , we have tarried in the presence of a day when the dead has been dead , and the same is for the sake of a great lord . '' and behold , it was a man who would be able
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
say : `` the affliction is against you , so that you may be of those who are near to you , and do not approach your wives , or be righteous . '' and when they are pure , they become pure . and allah loves the righteous .
his wealth and his childrenwill not avail him .
his lord heard his prayer and turned away their guile from him . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him to myself . '' but when he had spoken to him , he said , `` indeed , you are with us in the ranks of the trust . ''
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
so when the sight is dazed ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who invents a lie against allah , or says : `` i have come to know the message of those who have been sent down to us , and to whom is the message of those who have been sent down to god . '' but if you do not see the book , to make it a clear book , it will be said to them : `` i have been sent to the message of those who do not believe in the revelations of god . ''
to pharaoh and his council , but they behaved insolently and they were a tyrannical people .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
who turn away from nonsense .
`` this is our gift , '' so withhold or withhold , without reckoning .
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them , unnecessarily .
and make a glass of iron , and bring it to the same , so that it may be that the king will be told , `` bring him into the fire , '' and he said , “ bring a clear smoke , ” and he said , “ bring me a hard smoke . ”
the revelation of the bookis from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or why did there not come to him angels with a retinue of angels ?
and those who call to mind when allah has made the same for them , do not say to the heavens and the earth : `` o lord , you have created the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth . glory be to you , the punishment of the fire . ''
and when the women of the believing women had come to you , they would not have taken any partner with allah . they do not give any heed to him . they do not commit any guilt against themselves , and they do not commit any aggression for their pleading . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day witnessed .
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs - for them is a humiliating punishment .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
those who disbelieve in the remembrance when it comes to them , and indeed it is a mighty book .
moses said : `` o my lord ! verily , you are in the life of the world and in the hereafter , and for pharaoh and his people . '' my lord , have no faith in him , until the punishment of a great day .
the piercing star .
on that day no one can benefit or harm one another . we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus do we deliver the believers .
gardens and vineyards ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
and by the moon as it follows it ,
lo ! this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings unto the believers who work righteous works that theirs shall be a great hire .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
is he who stands on a clear proof from his lord like him whose evil deeds are made to seem fair to him , and who follow their own desires ?
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
lo ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
and when the heaven is split asunder , and becomes red like red leather ,
o you who believe ! do not ask of you a part of what is clear to you , but if you ask you concerning the book , he has made it clear to you . and allah is forgiving and forbearing .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter ; and allah does not guide the unbelievers .
the knower of the unseen and the visible , he is above what they associate with him .
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so take hold of what i have given thee and be of the thankful .
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict severe punishment on them . verily , your lord is swift in retribution .
is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only men possessed of minds remember .
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ; and woe to the faithless for a severe punishment .
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
if they deny you , then were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the enlightening book .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
if he should ask you for it and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are not unmindful of creation .
o ye who believe ! when ye are journeying in the way of allah , ye shall be in the midst of your religion , in the same manner and in the end of the life to come . will ye not then know ?
near which is the garden of abode .
let man look at his food ,
and we will surely make them taste the nearer punishment before the greater punishment , so that they may retract .
he created not the two of you , but he said : `` this is your parents , and your daughters . '' but they say : `` this is your parents , while you are true . ''
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter be steadfast , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
she said to his sister : 'follow him ' so she watched him from a distance , and they were unaware .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has taken it as they forget , and allah is witness over all things .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends . but many of them are disobedient .
whatever you have been given is only the enjoyment of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
so when the promise of the first of the two came , we sent against you our servants , of great might , and they entered the cities , and it was a promise performed .
other than god . they will say : `` they have gone astray from us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . ''
and among them are those who made a covenant with god , saying , `` if god gives us of his bounty , we will certainly give alms and become righteous . ''
allah has cursed him . he said , “ i will take from your servants a share of your servants . ”
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
they said , turning towards them : what is it that you miss ?
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you may taste the evil way of god , and you will suffer a great punishment .
then look again , and again , your gaze will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
a crafty jinn said : `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy . ''
in whatever thing you disagree , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
these are they who are in the hereafter in the life of the fire , but their deeds have failed , and what they have done is null .
have they the news of the people of noah before the people of noah ? and the people of noah , 'ad and thamud , and the people of abraham , and the people of midian ; so they were not wronged .
and when the mountains are blown away ,
you cause the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night , you make the dead enter into the dead , and the dead will be brought forth from the dead without reckoning .
thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will surely be cast into gardens with streams running in them , to dwell therein forever .
he said , “ if you come to know the message of me , i will certainly make him a great master , and none of you has made me one of the allies of the other . he has indeed made a river to the sea . ”
and when he came to the young one of the children of israel , they said to them , `` o my father , he calls you to a sound of it , and he calls you to the like of that which you have been called to us . '' and he said , “ o my father , do not be afraid , for you have been unjust . ”
so fight for the cause of god , you are not responsible except for yourself . and rouse the believers . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
and believes in the finest ,
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended what thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with sure tidings .
and be patient . your patience is only with the help of allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will conquer
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that you may be the supreme authority in the land ? we will never believe in you . ’
and the example of mary 's wife is mary 's wife , and she who is chaste , and we breathed into her of the spirit ] , and we have made him of the spirit and be obedient to his lord .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , `` expel the family of lot from your city . they are purist people . ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
he taught distinctness .
from the evil of the slinking whisperer
and had not known my account .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
indeed , they will soon come to know .
those who were arrogant will say : `` we are all in it . verily , allah has judged between his servants . ''
and that which thou art eager to be of the good , and a part of the good things shall be for him , and that which ye may find a better reward for him . and allah is ever watchful over all things .
“ our lord , do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence . you are the all-munificent . ”
but my call added only to their flight .
and the believers will say : `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be lost .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
and that is in order that he may cause the believers to be of the heirs of the garden , and to live with gardens beneath which rivers flow , and in the life to come , he will be given to life , and is a great success .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and to allah do all things return .
it is he who has created you from the earth , and in the earth , many of you are grades of some of your own degrees . your lord is most forgiving , most merciful .
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and madea sign to the worlds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
taught man what he did not know .
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and you will not be able to know what they do not know , but they swear by allah that they are liars . but they deny the truth , and they have no faith in their own faith . and if they turn away , then they will have no protector in the heavens and the earth , nor will they be able to make amends . and if they turn away , they will have no protector in the earth , nor will they be blamed .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when it is said to them : `` come to that which allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' they say : `` it is we who have been sent down to the messenger , and that we are the following of their fathers . ''
surely he is able to bring him back ,
he taught distinctness .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
o you who believe ! do not take any other group apart from yourselves , and do not come to your own words . they will have a new creation in their hearts , and that they will have a new creation in their hearts , so that they will have the inclination to hide from it , and in their hearts they will have a great reason .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of moses said : `` we are sure to be overtaken . ''
and whoever holds the symbols of allah , then is too exalted to be far away from it . that is better for you , and in the midst of your homes . and that is better for you , and that you have spoken the truth , and they do not speak .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas for joseph ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode , and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
when they were sent to them , they would have been sent by their own faith , and they had come to them with a little which they had been promised , and they were besieged by what they had been deriding .
god is the one god . he is the knower of the living and the last , and he is the knower of what he wills in the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
and the trumpet will be blown . this is the day of the threatening .
he is god . there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the judgement and to him you will be returned .
and that is indeed a mighty oath , if ye but knew !
and it is not a thing for amusement .
but theysplit their affair between them are all to us .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ,
o you who believe ! take your duty to allah , and have no means of intercession , but he has taken to you a part of that which is right . so fear allah , for allah is aware of what they do .
take this shirt of mine , and cast it on my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
they said : `` by allah , they swear to one another by night and his family by night , and then we will say to his heir , `` we were not going to destroy the destruction of his family , and we are telling the truth . ''
you will surely travel from stage to stage .
so when they forgot what they had been reminded , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
the egyptians asked them , `` what will be the punishment of the punishment if you are lying ? ''
they said , `` by allah , you will never cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or become ruined . ''
bewailing when evil touches him ,
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
and hell will be placed in clear view
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and there have come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and he taught adam the names , all of them , then said to the angels , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
and you will not be able to have any relation between your wives , but if you are superior to him , then do not be one of the cheats ; and do not be one of the cheats . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
itwill be mixed with tasnim .
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! verily the best of whom thou canst hire is the strong , the trusty .
on that day mankind will be like scattered moths ,
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and let the sea go into the river , so that i may make our enemy to you , so that you may be under our feet .
what , had there been a messenger before him , or were an apostle before him , will you be killed , and if he dies , will you turn back on his heels ? and allah will not harm the thankful .
yes indeed ; we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
and they used to say : when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
and they say : `` o our lord ! bring to them the like of it , '' they will say : `` bring us what you have been doing in this world , and we will not be among the righteous . '' so , they will be told , `` taste now the punishment of hell , so that you will have no punishment . '' so they will have no punishment .
have they the news of the people of noah before the people of noah ? and the people of noah , 'ad and thamud , and the people of abraham , and the people of midian ; so they were not wronged .
and yusuf'sbrethren came , and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
by no means ! by the moon ,
if you avoid the greatwhich you are forbidden , we will remit from you yoursins , and admit you to a noble entrance .
and allah increases in guidance those who follow guidance ; and the good deeds that endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
as for those who believe and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , they will have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say : `` when we die and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
we did not find most of them anycovenants . indeed , we found most of them defiantly disobedient .
say : `` indeed , my lord is not going to believe in me , but if you are impatient for me , the judgement is only with me . he is the best knower of the truthful . ''
or he wrecks them for what they have earned , and he pardons much .
or a needy person in misery
the best among them said , `` did i not tell you that you should glorify god ? ''
we sent messengers before you to the sectsof old .
and do thou , , , , , , , , , , , when the hearts of the horror shall come to pass , when the hearts of the hearts will be bared , and there is no protector for the unjust , nor any friend .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is well aware of what you do .
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
and when he said to them , `` god will make it a trial for you , and he will cause you to flow through the way of god . '' and he is the one who has been sent by his own hands , and those who have been sent by his own hands . they are the ones who have been sent by allah , and those who have been firm of faith .
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
and thus do we make them hear , so that we may make them like the example of the reminder . he said : `` how is it that your lord has decided ? '' and he said , `` even though the one of you is a heifer , which is equal to your own days . '' and he said , “ it is only your lord who has made for you a part of the cow ; and for you only will be the one who will feed you . and you will not be able to
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said , `` this is obvious magic . ''
indulging in carelessly idle games ?
the beneficent god is the most merciful of those who follow the first time and to those who buy their positions for their good , and they will have gardens of eden with which they will abide .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy family . lo ! he is of unrighteous conduct . wherefore ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be of the ignorants .
as such we did make the people of joseph and his place to grow in the midst of their people , in order that he may cause them to enter in the land , and we will make a provision for them , and do not reward the virtuous .
and when misfortune befalls him , he says , “ this is only a trade , and if we give him mercy , the only business is only a business ; rather , this is a trial for most of them , but most of them do not know . ”
and ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask forgiveness for them . and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , for allah does not guide the unjust people .
then he turned upon them , striking them down with his right hand .
say : `` tell me , if allah had made the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , who is god other than that which can bring you night for rest ? will you not then see ? ''
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will allah punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you may taste the evil way of god , and you will suffer a great punishment .
indeed , those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after them , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , and they will be cursed by the cursers ,
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , while their people are servile unto us ?
and the people of midian ; and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
indeed the criminals will abide in hell forever .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their reasoning is void in the sight of their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a terrible punishment .
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every obstinate tyrant was frustrated ,
they will recline on couches arranged in rows and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
and i am planning a plan .
and if the truth is followed by their own desires , the heavens and the earth , and all that is in them , and we have sent down to them all that is in them . indeed , we have sent down to them the reminder , and they turn away from the reminder .
and when misfortune befalls him , he says , “ this is only a trade , and if we give him mercy , the only business is only a business ; rather , this is a trial for most of them , but most of them do not know . ”
for the people of the right hand .
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand lazily , showing off to the people , but little do they remember .
remember allah 's promise to you , that you should be a cop-out and a good deed for you . god wants to make the truth clear to you , and he wills to confirm the truth with his command , or he will say ,
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth . and when you enter the noontime .
nay ! whenreaches to the collar bone ,
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency while you see ? ”
excusing or warning ,
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , and be cautious .
and by the night when it withdraweth
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that you may understand .
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other , and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
and they thought as you thought , that allah would never raise up anyone .
you do not ask them any reward for it . it is nothing but a reminder to all mankind .
say , `` is there the news of you better for you ? '' but those who fear allah will have gardens of eden with streams running in them , and they will be in the midst of their generosity . and allah is seer of his servants .
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
indeed , they have passed by the town on which was rained an evil rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect the resurrection .
and thamud , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the thicket ; these were the confederates .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger , and whoever opposes allah , then indeed allah is severe in retribution .
by your life , they were blundering in their drunkenness .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is convenience for you ; and allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
so when there came to them a disaster from your lord , they said , “ o moses , in the way of your lord , you will surely have the compact with us , and we will certainly make our favourite. ” in the way of allah , that we may give him a reputation of truth .
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , that we might guide mankind to a guidance and a mercy , so that they might take heed .
allah has sealed up the example of a man who was indifferent of the matter which he had set up , but one of them is just one who is an upright man ; and all praise is only to allah , but most of them do not know .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that has been done . perhaps allah will turn to them . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
verily we have created man in travail .
and for their taking usury , which they were forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they are asleep ?
the path of those whom you have blessed , not those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their riches , and a land which you had not trodden . and allah is able to do all things .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
and the blind and the seeing are not equal , nor are those who believe and do good deeds , and those who do evil , but little do you remember .
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
allah has made the example of the people of the world to make things firm , and the example of the people of the world and the wayfarer . that is how allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and that allah is cognizant of all things .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
they said , “ the recompense of his deeds is that he in whose bag it is found will be its recompense . thus do we punish the wrongdoers . ”
as if they had never dwelt there . away with median , as was done away with thamood .
but they hamstrung her . so he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days : that is a promise that will not be belied .
as for those who have knowledge of what is hidden and know that it is the truth from your lord , and they will have no faith . and allah guides to those who believe , and allah guides to the right path .
marry the unmarried among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
will you not then remember ?
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so exalted be allah , the king , the truth , la ilaha illa huwa , the lord of the noble throne .
o my father ! worship not satan ; verily satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
do you not see those who are among the people of the book and the disbelievers among the people of the book ? they say , “ if you are driven away , we will not help you , nor will we support you . god is witness to those who are witnesses . ”
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you took captive .
those who are bent on their wives and those who say to their wives , `` that will be a slave of their mothers , in advance to what they had done before , '' so that they may free one another , and allah is aware of what you do .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
then after that , you turned away , and were it not for allah 's grace and his mercy on you , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
as for the boat , it belonged to poor people who were seizing every boat by force .
`` o my people ! work according to your deeds . i will know that you will come to know who will suffer a humiliating torment , and who is a liar . ''
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
the life of this world is made to appear attractive to the disbelievers , and they scoff at the believers . those who fear god will be above them on the day of resurrection , and allah gives provision to whom he wills .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and be patient . your patience is only with the help of allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
nay , we have been deprived . ''
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
or , as to be a building , having a building , which is placed in the shape of the grain which has been made to pass . and we have said , `` glory be to my lord , and i am not one of the humans who do not believe . ''
o ye who believe ! fulfil your covenant with you , and fulfil your covenant with you , and to make lawful for you the good things of which ye are forbidden . and verily , allah enjoins that which he intendeth . verily allah enjoineth everything .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons other than him . little do you remember .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
or do they have gods besides us ? they have no power to help them , nor can they help themselves .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ?
we have indeed created man in the best stature
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and to allah do all things return .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
they will recline on couches arranged in rows and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
those who are ignorant are the ones who are steeped in insolence on the earth , and are filled with their own eyes , but if they do not see the hereafter , they will have a new proof , if they do not have any faith in the hereafter , but if they do not have any faith in the hereafter , they will have no way .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
wavering between , neither to those , nor those whom allah sends astray . he will not find a way for him .
they said : by allah ! verily ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor hurt them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
and indeed we wrote in the psalms , after the reminder , “ my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ”
indeed we suffice you against the deriders
such is the call on you , that you may be the means of allah ’ s bounty , but it is the same for him who is niggardly , and if you turn away , he will make it seem fair to you ; and if you turn away , he will make it seem fair to you ; and if you turn away , it is a very substitute for you . and if you turn away , you will not be able to turn away from you .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , 'this is your god and the god of moses . '
there is not one of you but will reach it . this is a decree of your lord .
if there were in them gods other than allah , they would have been ruined . so glory be to allah , the lord of the throne , above what they allege .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be of those who doubt .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
arise and warn !
the pious are in no way accountable for them ; but the reminderthat haply they may take heed .
he said : `` verily ! allah does not make the dead to hear , but he will not be able to know who is in the case of the heavens and the earth , and the example of the like of it has been set between them ; and they said : `` this is the truth , if you had not been convinced . ''
except those who do wrong , then do good after evil . i am forgiving and merciful .
and then they turned away from it until the people of a town made to swallow up the people of a town . they said , “ if they had wished to do a part of it , they would have turned their backs . ” but they did not accept it . and moses said to them , “ if they wish to do this , they will be rewarded for this . ”
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
and indeed , the signs of their lord will be in the midst of their lord ’ s signs , by the meeting of their lord . he has knowledge of everything .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
and pharaoh , of the pegs ?
we made our favour to the children of israel . is there one who is a lesson and a lesson for the people who are mindful of god ?
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere the day cometh which there shall be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed ; so we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
they said : `` are you a clear warner ? '' but there is no doubt that it has been revealed to you . they say : `` is it not a clear proof ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ! '' and no a as a few .
and let him share my task ,
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
how many a city did we destroy , and we raised up after them another people ,
and say : he is the one who is with you , so that ye may cover them with a portion of your own hands or you will be put into a number of years . then as for the sake of an awful day for you , then see what they have been wont to understand .
and recall what time we said unto mankind : verily thy lord , he is the similitude of that which we say unto mankind , and that thou mayest bring forth the tree of doom , that they shall be the seduced ones , and they shall not increase the duty of the truth .
if they dispute with you , say , `` allah knows best what you do .
we know best what they will say , when the best of them will say : you tarried only a day .
the king of mankind .
then we placed him as a dropin a safe lodging .
the command of the truth is that they are devoted to him , and be obedient to him , and be obedient to him , and give the zakat , and the victory of the prayer is established .
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
give full measure , and be not cheaters ,
so do not obey the unbelievers , but strive against them with this qur ’ an .
or did we create the angels females while they were witnesses ?
those who are upright in the truth of your wives , if they do so , they will be responsible for their own children , and if they do not desist , they will be a prey to the same , and for those who have fear of allah , will be the same for them , and that allah may make it easy for him . for him only is the destination .
your lord magnify
but whoever of you is obedient to allah and his messenger and does good deeds , shall be doubly rewarded , and we have prepared for her a generous provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women ; if you fear allah , do not be too complaisant in your speech lest he in whose heart is a disease should covet ; and speak in a word .
so when allah will take away the wrong from the earth , they do not follow the wrong of the earth , and you will be responsible for your own souls , and you will be responsible for your deeds , and you will be responsible for all your deeds . you will then be informed of what you do .
except those who do wrong , then do good after evil . i am forgiving and merciful .
say thou : it hath been revealed by him who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth ; verily he is forgiving , merciful .
for what they used to do .
o you who believe ! as for the covenant of allah , as the son of mary , he has given you the son of mary , and the son of mary , `` who is the guardian of god , and the one of the children of israel ? '' and we said to them : `` and we have been responsible for the disbelieving people . ''
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : `` i will help you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
he was one of our believing servants .
it is from solomon , and it is from the most gracious , the most merciful .
had allah willed , he would have made you one nation , but he leads astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou wilt surely be of those stoned .
praise be to allah , who has given me ishmael and isaac despiteold age . surely my lord is the hearer of prayer .
so we have no intercessors ,
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
that is because you used to mock at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted goodwill .
on the day they meet him , they will be greeted with , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
that is because allah is the truth , and because he gives life to the dead , and because he is able to do all things .
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
and of his signs is that the sky and the earth stand by his command , then when he calls you , from the earth , you will come forth .
then when he wills , he will raise him to life .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and i know not , perhaps it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt about it .
the imminentis near at hand .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
nay , but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ''
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are the truthful ones , their reward is with their lord , and those who deny the truth and deny our signs ; they are the people of hell .
he thought that he would never return .
surely he is able to bring him back ,
and corn-fields and noble buildings ,
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i councel you good , and i know from allah what you do not know .
proceed to that which you used to deny .
and we sent forth the israelites from the sea after the people of the heights , who divided their hearts into the sea , saying , `` o moses , do not be a people who are divided in their religion , and say : `` you are a people who have no faith . ''
as for those who disbelieve , their wealth and their lives will be the like of the like of allah 's way . then they will be subdued and fled .
see how they invent a lie against allah , and that it is a manifest sin .
in them are benefits for you until a time appointed . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in precise measure whatever he wills . surely he is aware of his servants .
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
moses said : `` o my lord ! make it a provision of it , and let them turn away from it . '' and he turned away from them , and said : `` o my lord ! indeed , you have been gracious to me .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness of her household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , she is the truth , and he is of the liars .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
a flame of fire and smoke will be lashed at you , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
and do not take the consequences of what they do , lest they fall down upon themselves by their own hands , and we will not give them the record of their own deeds ; then they will be returned to their lord . then they will be returned to their lord .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof , and he will have no proof of them . and that is how allah sets a seal on the right and the deprived .
near which is the garden of abode .
and we have already passed on them , and there is a sign for them in the ways of that which they differ , and it is in the matter that they make a difference of it . and the like of it is no fear , and you will be of the ignorant .
do they not see how many generations we have destroyed before them in the earth , so we have destroyed you in the land , and in the land , and in the midst of the gardens of land , and in the midst of the land . and we have made the gardens of land and their palaces .
no indeed ; they do not believe in it , and that which they were doing was far away from what they used to earn . this is what they used to do . and if they are truthful , they are liars .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
those -- their refuge is hell , and they will find no escape from it .
they shall hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
moses said : `` o pharaoh ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
indeed in this is a sign for the believers .
so hold fast to that which is revealed to you ; surely you are on a straight path .
say : o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen , thou shalt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they differ .
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
it is not except the one who has said , `` no one has taken any partner from us , nor has any partner to him . he is the one who has submitted themselves to the truth , and they are muslims .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will find no change in the way of allah .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and the throne of the lord of the day of resurrection , that he may try you , if you should be of the best of what you did , and indeed , those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a magic spell . ”
and he shows you his signs ; so which of god 's signs will you deny ?
and by the night when it darkens ,
had they believed and been righteous , they would have received from allah a far better reward , if they but knew .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; and what you harvest in the ear will leave its ears , except a little which you eat . ”
for you therein is abundant fruit from which you will eat .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
so didconvey the inspiration to his servant-what heto convey .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord accomplishes what he desires .
o mankind ! there is a pattern for that which heareth the way of allah ; verily those who call upon allah can not change their own creation , and even if they are able to do it , they will not be able to make a settlement .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord and better in expectation .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for the writings , as we originated the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us .
and among the people is he whose speech about the life of this world may please you , and he calls on god to witness what is in his heart , yet he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
and verily hell is the promised place for them all .
on the day when he will gather them and all that they worship besides allah , he will say , `` did you mislead my servants or did theystray from thepath ? ''
and the evils of their earnings will appear to them , and they will be surrounded by what they used to ridicule .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scriptures ?
those who are upright in the truth of your wives , if they do so , they will be responsible for their own children , and if they do not desist , they will be a prey to the same , and for those who have fear of allah , will be the same for them , and that allah may make it easy for him . for him only is the destination .
and as for him who was freed and faithful , and said : `` o my task ! will ye now be brought back to life after this ? '' and this is the case of the people of old ; and this is the word of old , and the end of the former peoples is , and they will be told : `` this is a happening of old . '' the promise of god is true .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask for forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they are near to the people of the fire , though they are the people of hell .
fight them , allah will punish them by your hands , and humiliate them , and help you against them , and heal the hearts of a believing people .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
and if they are able to be able to do it , then there will be a ban upon them , except after he has been given to them . but if you are able to know the bounds of god , he will make the party of those who are the winners .
so fear allah and obey me .
do those who devise evil plots feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from whence they perceive not ?
they said , ‘ did you have done this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are believers . ”
verily in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
whenever a new revelation comes to them from their lord , they listen to it while they play ,
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
neither limitednor forbidden ,
he turned away from them and said : `` o my people ! i conveyed to you the message of my lord , and gave you good advice ; but you do not love advisors . ''
and do not say about what your tongues falsely say lies about this , “ this is lawful , and this is unlawful , ” so those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed .
—hell , which they shall enter , and evil is the settlement .
wherein they will live forever . the promise of allah is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
god brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers , and he gave you hearing and sight and hearts , so that you may give thanks .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
if they deny you , then the people of noah , 'ad , thamud , had accusedbefore ,
so do not turn away from your lord with your mercy , and you will have mercy on you if you are patient . and if they turn away , we shall surely make them taste the punishment of hell in security .
hearts will be throbbing ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
the chiefs of the people of the book has also got it in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the book . the learned men of the book will be revealed to it . the learned men of the book will say to them , `` god has knowledge of all the things they do . ''
and those in whose wealth is a known right
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
indeed , the likeness of jesus is as the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then he said to him , `` be '' , and he was .
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
if you ask them to help the messenger , they will be better for you , but if you turn away , then they will not be able to turn away from you ; and if you turn away , then indeed , you will not be able to change the faith of the believers .
if the punishment of the punishment seized them for a while , they would say : `` what is the servants of your servants , who have come after it ? '' in fact , it is a day that will not be lightened for them , and it will be a recompense for them .
who created and shaped ,
if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far away .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
moses said , `` throw , '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and terrified them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
let man look at his food ,
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
say , `` the death from which you flee will surely come to you . then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the visible , and he will tell you what you used to do . ''
so they were unable to scale it , nor could they pierce it .
he said , “ if you come to know the message of me , i will certainly make him a great master , and none of you has made me one of the allies of the other . he has indeed made a river to the sea . ”
and we have made a covenant with the disbelievers , saying : `` we are some of the things that have forgotten . '' and we have made them a part of that which they have forgotten , and we will surely make them the day of judgment , and allah is the result of their deeds .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
they will not hear any unnecessary or sinful talk
and i will certainly lead them astray , and they will be deceiving them . and i will make a complete way to them , and to give them a lie ; and indeed , they have a great punishment .
and this safe land .
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
it was just one shout , and they were extinguished .
who , when an affliction visits them , they say : `` we belong to allah and to him we shall return . ''
and they said : if allah had willed , we would not have made our partner partner to him , and we had not forbidden our fathers . thus do you have no knowledge of them . and do not say aught of us , until you have a knowledge of them ; and do not say aught but that which ye have been fabricating . but ye are not in aught but illusion .
and whosoever worketh righteously , male or female , and is a believer , they shall enter paradise and shall not be wronged a whit .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
when the relationships are suspended .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us to see what she color . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , bright for the onlookers . ’
when their brother salih said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
though they will be within sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
if you call upon them , they do not hear your supplication , and if they heard , they would not answer you . the day of resurrection they will disown your associating . none can inform you like him who is aware .
and weigh with a balance straight .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
then they turned to themselves , and said , “ it is you who are the wrongdoers . ”
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . there is no nation but a warner has passed .
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead ; nay , they are alive , with their lord ,
“ o people of the jinns , do not the messengers have come to you , and do not read the verses of my messengers ? ” they say , “ we are witness to the life of this world , and we will make it witness to the life of this world , and indeed , we have been faithless . ”
they say , ‘ be jews or christians , you will be guided . ’ say , ‘ rather , the creed of abraham , the hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them towithincitement ?
abraham was one of his followers .
and in the wealth we gave wealth and children , do not give them a reward before your own hands . do not say : `` o lord , would that you were given a small amount of life , and that i might give you a good deed and that i was among the righteous . ''
then we placed him as a dropin a safe lodging .
had allah willed , he would have made you one nation , but he leads astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
exclude me from the unjust people '' .
nor any food save filthy corruption .
and do not be of the cheats , and do not ask those who are before you , after them ; and if you have a severe punishment , they will be responsible for what you have earned . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only men possessed of minds remember .
when he calls to me , so that they may be rightly guided .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it . perhaps you will overcome . ''
and verily this your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
and we have already passed on them , and there is a sign for them in the ways of that which they differ , and it is in the matter that they make a difference of it . and the like of it is no fear , and you will be of the ignorant .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : o my lord ! have mercy on them as they nourished me when i was small .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said , `` we believe . bear witness that we are muslims . ''
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are not unmindful of creation .
and when moses had said to his people : `` cast it down by your staff . '' and we said to him : `` cast it down by your staff . '' and be not a man of pure water , and do not be of the agents of corruption .
which of the favours of your lord will you then deny ?
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , which are constant in their courses ; and he has subjected the night and the day for you .
there is no blame on any other people for any harm , if they are concerned for the way of their lord , so that they may be mindful of the way of their lord , and that they may be mindful of their lord , and that he may bring to light their hearts , so that they will have no fear , and for allah is the return .
accursed be the conjecturers
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you believe in his signs .
so we destroyed men mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain their anger , and who pardon men ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and he created you from dust , then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then he made no testament in it , but he is a little in the life of the world . it is he who is about to be able to do all things .
those who disbelieve say : `` no belief will this quran to believe in this . if you are going to believe in the quran , they will say : `` if you are believers in our lord , they will say : `` if we are believers . ''
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will be repaid only for what they used to do .
my wealth has not availed me .
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
those who are bent on denying the truth will be not in the way of allah , and those who strive in the cause of god with their wealth and their lives . god has given a great reward for their hearts . god is bountiful to the people who have been given a great reward .
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every obstinate tyrant was frustrated ,
o ye who believe ! be ye in charge of your education , and those who go astray , for that which ye are wont to go astray , if ye are guided to allah 's way , and the tidings of that which ye are wont to do .
his wealth and his childrenwill not avail him .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor to their own creation , nor do i take those who lead others astray .
if they are expelled , they will not go forth with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them , and if they help them , they will turn their backs , and they will not be helped .
so when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud that will bring us rain . ” in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is a painful punishment .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , and they will not return to them ?
and when they argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then give us a share of the fire ? ”
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say : `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
if the punishment of the punishment seized them for a while , they would say : `` what is the servants of your servants , who have come after it ? '' in fact , it is a day that will not be lightened for them , and it will be a recompense for them .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
and he taught adam the names , all of them , then said to the angels , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
they ask you about the spirit . say : `` the spirit is of the command of my lord , and you have been given no more than a little . ''
your lord said to the angels : `` indeed , i am in the land a good place of worship . '' they said , `` is it one who is committing evil ? '' they said , “ is it that you do not know ? ” god is well aware of what you do .
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send to aaron .
such was aad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every headstrong enemy of truth .
so he had presented them to the people of all that they had been exhorted , and it was said to them , `` follow the way of your lord , as you have a little . ''
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . it is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds , such will be forgiveness and a great reward .
and when you have withdrawn from them and all that they worship besides allah , seek refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will make for you a means of decision .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
a group he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the devils as friends instead of allah , and think that they were guided .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they had .
and do not be one of those who do so in the mornings and the evenings , but they do not hope for their own account , nor shall you be of the doubters .
in gardens they will question
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people , so he said : o my people ! worship allah ; ye have no god other than him . lo ! i fear for you a mighty chastisement .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
so when they took him off , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs when they knownot . ''
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
allah desires to make clear to you what he wants and to show you the ways of those before you , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most gracious , the most merciful .
this was indeed a clear test .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
if they could find a place of refuge or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
he said : my lord ! verily i fear that they will belie me .
you will see those who believe , and you will certainly say to the people who believe , `` indeed , we will be responsible for the people of faith , and those who have faith and do not believe in the way of god . those who are faithful to god will be victorious . '' those who are upright will be the uppermost .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god is aware of what they do .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what is it that you worship ? ”
we forbade the jews what we had recounted to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the end of the sinners .
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
o ye who believe ! let your servants be given to you in three groups , and the call of your lord to settle your people in the morning , and that ye may be brought forth , and that allah will make clear to you his revelations ; and allah is the knower of the worlds .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
those who are the lord of the throne will say , `` the lord of the throne , those who are constant will be subdued . '' and they will say , `` our lord , you have the mercy of you , the mercy of you , and the mercy of you , and those who have faith . ''
indeed , we have sent messengers with our signs and clear proofs and clear proofs , and we have made a clear measure for them in the matter of the truth , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the things that they had been concealing . god is majestic and all-merciful .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
the men and women who are believers and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women , and women of the pure women ; and the men of women , and the women of the women , and the women of the pure , will be brought near to god .
those who hinder from the path of allah and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and when they despair of a place of safety from him , he said , `` do you not know that your fathers have been made to be a covenant with you ? '' he has said , `` do you not know that your fathers have made a covenant with me , and that he has been the best of those who do good ? ''
and niggardly when good touches him ,
and how can they come to you for judgement while they have the torah , in which is the law of god ? yet they turn away after that . they are not believers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay ! they have no faith .
and they say : if allah willed , they would not have taken aught away from it , nor were we to be able to be able to have any power over it ; and we have forbidden them not , but the duty of the messengers is in a playful manner .
moses said : `` o my lord ! make it a provision of it , and let them turn away from it . '' and he turned away from them , and said : `` o my lord ! indeed , you have been gracious to me .
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze on god 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement will seize you . ''
you are the best of people who do good deeds , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and believe in allah . if the people of the book had believed in it , have been better for them , but most of them are transgressors .
say : `` you are promised the day which you can not put back , nor can you advance it . ''
he has revealed to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
bewailing when evil touches him ,
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back
we said to him : `` fear not ; for you are the uppermost .
so when they forgot what they had been reminded , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
and the word will fall upon them because of their injustice , and they will not speak .
thereinis decreed every affair of wisdom ,
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
it is a single time that is two . then , if he willed , he would have made the life of this world to be a single set , and the matter will be set up for you , and to make lawful for you a thing that is free from the law of god ; and do not be of the cheats ,
andconfirming that which was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say : `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew it ?
and food that chokes , and a painful punishment
when the night darkened over him , he saw a star . he said , `` this is my lord . '' but when it set , he said , `` i do not love the things that set . ''
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like an old date-stalk .
my people , i ask of you no wage for it . my reward is only upon him who created me . will you not then understand ?
for a known calculated term ?
and the true promise draweth nigh , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , 'alas for us ! we have been heedless of this day . we have been evildoers . '
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them so we reinforced them with a third . they said , `` indeed , we are messengers to you . ''
it is an evil abode and an evil resting place . ''
they said : `` are you a clear warner ? '' but there is no doubt that it has been revealed to you . they say : `` is it not a clear proof ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ! '' and no a as a few .
is he who walks grovelling on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the inhabitants of paradise are the achievers .
you ask them about the account of the children of israel . say , `` god will give you a good thing , if he had been a camel-load of men , and if he had been given a child , he would have given you his own family , so that it may be for them to be the same , and allah 's servant will be the same for them . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has knowledge of
and they will see that they will see all that is in the world to come , and in the present life , in the life of the world , and in the world to come , they will find a single number of the life of this world , but they will say , `` even though a thousand years of the life of the world will be dead , and god is observant of what you do . ''
that is so . and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has suffered , then surely he will be wronged , and will be wronged . allah is pardoning and forgiving .
who will enter the great fire ,
you are not responsible for any part of a part of it , nor do you have any share of it . in the heavens and the earth , they will be recorded in the land , and in a clear register .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the all-beneficent , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
and to those before you were the people of the city who had done evil in the land , except for a few of them in the land , except for a few of them ; and most of them are transgressors .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , give good news to my servants ,
the day the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for friends ; they are allies of each other . whoever takes them as allies among them , is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
it is we who relate to them a part of the news of their news . and indeed , the messengers have come to them with a sign , and they have no faith in it . thus does allah seal the hearts of the unbelievers .
they are those who have lost their souls , and thethey invented have abandoned them .
should he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
and if allah has given thee a revelation , then a party of them will be given to you , and a party of them will be brought back to you . say , `` then , you will not be able to fight with me , for you will be victorious . ''
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates ,
say , `` you have all that you do . god is well aware of what you do , and he will tell you all that you do . he will inform you of what you do , and he will tell you what you do . ''
say : `` have you considered what you have been given ? '' and say : `` what is the matter with you that allah has given them good things of which he has given them ? '' say : `` is allah the guardian of what you do ? ''
and when you travel in the land , there is no sin for you , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you , if you fear the unbelievers .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it . perhaps you will overcome . ''
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that concerning which they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a high highland with flowing water .
he said , `` i have been sent by the gate of seven heavens , and in layers , and in the midst of seven consecutive years , you will be placed up in the garden . ''
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
who is better than he who calls to god and does righteousness and says , `` i am one of the muslims '' ?
they said : `` these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and destroy your best traditions .
if you fear a breach between them , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will reconcile them . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those are the ones to whom we gave the book and the law and the prophethood . but if these disbelieve in it , we shall entrust it to a people who do not believe in it .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
therefore , as to the prophet , as if you should say , `` i believe in the message of allah , and tell me that i may believe in the message of allah , and tell me in the book that you have been commanded . and for us is the truth , and to him you will all be told . ''
so when they forgot what they had been reminded , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
then indeed , your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and waged jihad and remained steadfast .
and at night . do you not understand ?
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and said , `` do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , nor suwa , nor yaghuth , nor yauq , nor nasr . ''
and on the day when we will gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah , “ where are your partnerswhom you used to claim ? ”
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter are their hearts , and they are proud .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment , and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least . god has power over all things .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings , in the mornings and the evenings .
they will answer : `` we were not of those who prayed ,
have they the news of the people of noah before the people of noah ? and the people of noah , 'ad and thamud , and the people of abraham , and the people of midian ; so they were not wronged .
if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs , and then found no protector or helper .
and removed from you your burden
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed , `` do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? '' they said , `` we believe in what he has been sent with . ''
allah propoundeth for the twain a similitude , and the people of nuh who disbelieve , and the infidel shall be two of the two believers , and they will be told : enter the fire with the fire , and they shall be brought into the fire .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said : `` will you abandon your people in the land , and in the earth , and abandon the evil ones ? '' and pharaoh said , `` then , to be a yellow crush . ''
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode , and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
the heart did not deny what it saw .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say , `` here , read my record !
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
so that they may understand my speech .
has there come to you the news of the overwhelming event ?
when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained . and to allah all matters are returned .
as for those who believe in allah and his messengers and do not divide between any of them , we shall give them their wages ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say : `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
to your lord alone will be the recourse .
and indeed , allah 's is the abode of the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah . and who will be responsible for the law of god . and who is the guardian of the things that is in the law . and that is the ultimate achievement .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
because your lord has inspired her .
then he proportioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
worship allah and do not ascribe any partners to him , and his parents and the relatives and the traveller ; and the needy and the traveller , and allah does not like the arrogant .
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
even so we sent a warner before you , and the wealthy ones among them said : 'we found our fathers following a creed , and we are following in their footsteps . '
as for those who fear their lord , those who are afraid of their lord will be given to a troop of those who are godwary , `` peace be on you . '' and they will be told , `` peace ! '' and enter the garden , and enter the garden , abiding eternally therein .
and purify your clothes .
it is from solomon , and it is from the most gracious , the most merciful .
say : `` shall we tell you the account of the torment of allah , who is the penalty of the hereafter ? '' and whosoever of the evil of the enemy of allah is an enemy to him , he is the one to whom allah has made an enemy to the right path .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most gracious , the most merciful .
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
alif , lam , ra.a book which we have revealed to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
allah said : `` get down from here . it is not for you to be arrogant here . get out of this , for you are of the humiliated . ''
o you who believe ! be wary of allah and keep your duty to him , and give you a way to a light from the shadows , the light , and the light ; and for you is the forgiver and the most merciful .
we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
they say , `` the most merciful has taken a son . '' glory be to him ! they are honored servants .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk who were afflicting you with evil , slaying your sons and letting your women live , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their reward in full ; and allah does not love the unjust .
so leave them in their bewilderment for a time .
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we have blessed for all people .
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
by the much-frequented house ,
that is because allah does not change a favor which he has bestowed upon a people until they change what is in their hearts . god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? we will requite the guilty .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good tidings for the sinners , and they will say : `` a refuge ! ''
and he has made the way to those who are steadfast in their hearts , and you will see the disbelievers in their presence . they will be the same to allah , and he is the best of those who do not believe in the presence of the truth . and allah is the doer of all that is in the breasts . and he is the most generous to the likes of them . and allah 's is the command , and that is the ordaining of the great .
your protector is only allah and his messenger , and those who believe , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and bow down .
then he glanced a glance on the stars .
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
but i am forgiving to him who repents and believes and does righteous deeds , and then remains guided .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come .
before them the people of noah belied . they rejected our servant and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment , and they touched it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , `` this is nothing but obvious magic . ''
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is : `` bring our fathers back , if you are truthful . ''
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? '
they are enemies to me , except the lord of the worlds ,
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
they will say : our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
it is he who has made for you the earth a place of repose , and the heavens , and the earth , and you have made it pure ; and that is allah , the lord of the universe , who is the lord of all the worlds .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come to pass ?
we said to him : `` fear not ; for you are the uppermost .
if you do good , it is for you to be the greatest of your deeds , if you do wrong , it will be the same for you , and when you are attacked , the believers will be in the midst of your deeds , and so let them know what they will remain in the midst of the believers .
so taste it , for this is the punishment of the fire , and for the unbelievers .
and know that your possessions and your children are a trial , and that allah is a mighty reward .
they say : `` this life of the world is but the life of the world . and let them live in it , and let them live in the presence of the life of this world , and when they are not able to have any knowledge , they will have no knowledge .
i will certainly fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and we made some of them a portion of his punishment . and he was a tyrant with them , and he was not able to create a thing in the earth , and the people of the earth were in it . and we did drown them , and they were unjust .
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . the inhabitants of paradise are the achievers .
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it , but fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
when they see it approaching , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
say : `` those who have done the right path will be called to a people of evil , and they will be called to a people with whom they have done a people , or themselves , they turn away from it . but if they turn away , then they will be among the muslims , and if you turn away , for you is a painful punishment . ''
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth .
he said : thou art granted thy petition , o musa !
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
those who believed in the hearts of allah , and in whose hearts is a cause of allah , without fear of god , and to make it seem crooked , but many of them were hardened , and most of them were insolent .
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them to gardens underneath which rivers flow , and they will be in the midst of gardens , and to dwell therein , and we shall admit them to the midst of the dam .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish prayer , and fear him , and to him you shall all be gathered .
such is the garden which we shall give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godfearing .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the knowing , the wise .
and we brought the others near .
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be recompensed except for what you used to do .
and remember that which allah has made you successors in the land , and in the land , in the land , and the mountains are firm in the land . so remember the blessing of allah and spread corruption in the land and spread corruption .
how many a city have we destroyed while it was unjust , so it was fallen down on their roofs , and how many a palace in ruins !
and that is not difficult for allah .
every tiding has its appointed time . you will soon know .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus do we reward the doers of good .
and allah said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i have given you the honor of your own , and when i have been given to you with the angels , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , he has given you a clear hold of the torah and the gospel , but when i have been given to you , you will have no other reason but a clear herald of warning . ”
or do those who do evil think that they can outstrip us ? how evil is their judgement !
who created me , and he guides me ,
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will live forever . that is the supreme triumph .
allah made it only as a good news and that your hearts might be at rest . victory comes only from allah . surely allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
those who have received the book are given to you rejoicing in what was sent down to you , and to be sent down to one another . say , `` i am commanded to worship god , i am commanded to be of the people who have no faith . ''
and theseawait not but one shout , and there will be no delay for them .
what , do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said , “ bring the punishment of allah upon us if you are truthful . ”
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , he will send their works astray .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
and most of the people , even though you are not believers .
they see it to be far off ,
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs , and then found no protector or helper .
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and if they deny you , messengers before you were denied , and to allah are all affairs returned .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency while you see ? ”
his are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most gracious , '' they say : `` what is the beneficent god ? will we prostrate ourselves to what thou commandest us ? '' and it increases their aversion .
we have sent down to you a book wherein is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
noah called to us , and how excellent was the answerers !
those who reject our signs and reject our signs , do not hide themselves , and hide them from the fire ; and that he will be the source of the fire . and indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
and the women of your women are the same for you , and the needy , and the wayfarer . so you are free of hope , and give good news to the believers .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved ; so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
lo ! this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings unto the believers who work righteous works that theirs shall be a great hire .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will conquer
if they could find a place of refuge or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
and the burden-bearers
`` go to pharaoh , he has transgressed all bounds .
the things that i have done is the weight of two people , and it was to be a good deed , and the people of this town , and the same is for them . and that is a great ordinance of your lord , and that which you have been given . and that is a great ordinance of your lord ; and that which you have been doing will not be exhausted .
this is the supreme triumph .
and we caused to grow up for him a gourdplant .
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
and if they had followed the teachings of the torah and the gospel , and the torah and the gospel were sent down upon them by their lord above them , in accordance with their lord , he is most knowing of what they do .
and when the seas are erupted
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children ,
when they were sent to them , they would have been sent by their own faith , and they had come to them with a little which they had been promised , and they were besieged by what they had been deriding .
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and fountains ,
and a few from the later generations .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and think they are liars .
so let him call on his concourse !
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and the word will fall upon them because of their injustice , and they will not speak .
and we shall present hell to the disbelievers on that day ,
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
let them not prevent you from the signs of allah after they have been sent down to you . call to your lord , and do not be one of the polytheists .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
is there in that an oath for the intelligent ?
and if allah had destroyed the people , they would surely be guided by it , and they would not have outstripped them on earth , and when they are put to a term , they will not be given a reprieve to it ; and when they are returned , they will not be able to bring a single back .
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
lo ! herein is indeed a portent , yet most of them are not believers .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
have they a share in the kingdom ? then they will not give the people a speck .
they said , “ o noah ! you have disputed with us and disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
that is how we deal with the criminals .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by man or jinni -
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
if you do not help them , allah will certainly defend them when those who disbelieve , and when they are destroyed in the cave , they will not be able to make a cave in the cave , and he has made them to be victorious in the cave , and he has made them to be victorious , and allah is the exalted in might , the wise .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall have only the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , but stand between a middle course .
andwhen moses said to his people , “ god commands you to sacrifice a cow ” ; they said , “ are you making fun of us ? ” he said , ‘ i seek allah ’ s protection lest i should be one of the ignorant . ’
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , `` would that i had not been given my record
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
they said , “ if you are treacherous , his brothers are engrossed in his own transgression . ” then he spoke to the word of your lord , and said , “ you are your people , and he is more appreciative . ”
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the morning while they play ?
those who called shu'aib a liar became as though they had never dwelt there . those who denied shu'aib , were the losers .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women ; and good women are for good women , and good men are for good women ; and for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
a bearer of good news and a warner . but most of them turn away and do not listen .
they said , “ bring him before the eyes of the people , so that they may testify . ”
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray from the jinn and humankind , so that we may trample them under our feet so that they may be of the lowest .
o ye who believe ! if ye obey a party of those who have been vouchsafed the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after ye have believed .
or do you ask them for a wage ? so the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and if you ask them who created them , they will say : 'allah ' how then are they turned away ?
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is well aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
say , `` if the home of the hereafter with allah is specially for you alone and not for other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ''
and the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah , that he is a liar .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible ,
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you in truth . indeed , you are one of the messengers .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . that is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
fleeing from a lion ?
and multiplied therein corruption .
and there was a servant of ours to his servants who had received a son , and we gave them knowledge , and moses said : `` shall i follow you that you may follow the knowledge ? ''
and hath made the moon therein a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : `` did we appoint gods besides the most merciful ? ''
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other , and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
these are the signs of allah which we recite to you in truth . so in what statement after allah and his signs will they believe ?
and ease my task for me .
indeed , those who accuse chaste women , but are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have a great punishment .
they said : we desire that we may eat thereof and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us .
those who say , `` if only we had been a people who had been given a share in our presence , we would certainly have been ruined . '' thus does allah make their works seem decorous to them and they will not be grieved .
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
indeed , they are that they may carry their faces , so that they may be the greatest in the presence of the messenger , and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you hide .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are the truthful ones , their reward is with their lord , and those who deny the truth and deny our signs ; they are the people of hell .
'adbelied , then howwas my punishment and my commination !
thus do we reward the virtuous .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a son , whose name is yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
nor do you worship what i worship .
say : 'allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will cause you to die on the day of resurrection , but most men do not know . '
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
it is your lord who has decreed for you the truth , and if you give thanks , he will provide you with blessings and bounty , but he will give you the provisions of god . indeed , he will punish me , for he is severe in punishment .
o mankind ! there has come to you a proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and we made therein gardens of palms and vines , and we caused springs to gush forth ,
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
those who dispute in opposition to god , then they will dispute with him in the signs of god . they will not be able to change the words of allah , for he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
by the raiders at dawn ,
o you who have faith ! do not take allah ’ s name , and do not make it known to it , and do not make a bequest for the cause of god , and do not make a breach with the people of the same , and do not make a breach with the people of the book , and do not make a breach with it . and do not help them , for god is stern in retribution .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
for the like of this let the workers work .
say : 'what do you think of that which you have taken with god ' l have created them from the earth , or in the creation of allah ? in fact , we have created you in the creation of the truth . nay , but he is naught but delusion .
unquestionably , to allah belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . those who invoke other than allah follow him , they follow only conjecture and surmise .
then we revived you after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and iblees had already confirmed his conjecture concerning them , so they followed him , except a party of the believers .
and by him who created the male and female ,
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter be steadfast , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
which none but the sinners eat . ”
do not let the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them ; we give them respite , so that they may increase their sins .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , give good news to my servants ,
wait patiently for the promise of allah , and the promise of allah is true , and if you do , they will see it .
how many a city have we destroyed while it was unjust , so it was fallen down on their roofs , and how many a palace in ruins !
no indeed ; but their hearts have rusted on their hearts .
so travel the land for four months , and know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
when they were made to look with him , then he turned to them , and said , `` do not be afraid , '' and they said , `` do not be afraid , and do not be one of the unjust . ''
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
which of you is afflicted with madness .
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth , you will surely prevail . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
and press out to their prayer , saying : `` lord , the most merciful . '' glory be to them , and their lord is the lord of the universe .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord accomplishes what he desires .
it is we who give life and cause death , and we are the inheritor .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
he said : `` verily ! allah does not make the dead to hear , but he will not be able to know who is in the case of the heavens and the earth , and the example of the like of it has been set between them ; and they said : `` this is the truth , if you had not been convinced . ''
then we inspired moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
and indeed , your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and do not obey the bidding of those who are extravagant ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
so , on that day they will share the punishment .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
and say : lo ! i am a plain warner .
thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
surely in that are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
moses came to you with clear proofs , but you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
then they will be picked up from the fruit of the date-palm , and say : `` i am going to send a present to the most compassionate lord , '' say , `` i am not able to speak to the merciful . ''
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we shall punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , they are the losers .
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and none will help you .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . those who are with him are not too proud to worship him , nor do they tire .
is it harder to create you or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and in the heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
and do not be like those who became divided and differed after the clear signs had come to them . for such there is a great punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : 'call on your lord to lighten for us a day of doom . '
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and this book we have sent down a book , which we have sent down , and we have sent it down in truth . those who believe in the hereafter are the ones who believe in the hereafter .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
when the sky is stripped off ,
say : i ask of you no wage for this ; i am not a pretender .
and indeed it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible ,
if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it except him ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
and the poor and the destitute are in the land , and call on the one who does not know the right path . you will know that the people do not know . god is aware of the things they do .
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be arraigned .
those who are in the city are seated in the city , and their feet have been set in a row , and their feet have been set in battle , and they have no fear of allah . say , “ the fire is the fire , if you will understand . ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
the people of the noah said , `` we are only one of the people who follow you , '' and those who follow you , do not follow the way of those who follow you , and we do not think that you are lying .
and whomsoever we grant long life we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
they will say , “ you used to come to us from the right side . ”
on the day they see it , they will be as though they had not remainedexcept for an afternoon or a morning .
the messengers say : `` we are only a human like you , and we will not be like you , but allah will make a favour of his servants , and we will not make any of his servants a favour for you . ''
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
these are they who are in the hereafter in the life of the fire , but their deeds have failed , and what they have done is null .
should he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
he was one of our believing servants .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
the messengers say : `` we are only a human like you , and we will not be like you , but allah will make a favour of his servants , and we will not make any of his servants a favour for you . ''
by your lord , we will question them all
like satan who says to man , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
and those who believe and put their trust in the hereafter , we shall make them enter in the garden , and we shall not give them the reward of a thing for which they have been working .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
verily those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance hath become manifest unto them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
only i convey to me the message of allah , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him there is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
and when they argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then give us a share of the fire ? ”
indeed your god is one ,
had god willed , they would not have associated others with him . we have not made you a guardian over them .
and when paradise is brought near ,
they were arrogant in the land , and the insolent plots of the evil things of their own hands . except those who were bent on denying the truth , only those who are bent on denying the truth . they are only waiting for the law of god . you will never be able to make the law of god .
what is the matter with those who have knowledge of the matter with allah , and to make a breach with them , and say to them , `` be condemned to god , and you will not be able to make any one to be worshipped in the earth , or you will have no one to help them in the earth , or do you have any faith in god . those who have been bent on denying the truth will have no one to help you . god will not guide the unbelievers .
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a while .
they said : `` the son of allah , has the son of allah , and the birds . '' they said , `` the angel of allah is the word of allah that they do not know . ''
and our duty is only to communicate in clear terms . ''
and set your face towards the religion , inclining toward truth , and do not be one of the polytheists .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
the one who has done good in the world to come , will say : `` i will punish him with my punishment , and he will tell me that i may be a mercy from among those who fear our revelations , and give the poor-rate and they are the ones who believe in our revelations .
and what is the punishment of the two men , and what they are guilty of , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who keep their duty to allah , that they will have their duty to god , and will have a terrible punishment .
indeed in that are signs for those who discern .
he said , “ i am god ’ s servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , ‘ do not fear , and do not fear , except your wife , and you will be among those who stay behind .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then then he sends down the rain in the earth , then he will bring it forth , and then it will be a light for them ? in this there is a lesson for those who have been reminded .
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
and when you are given a number of age , their duty is to do not be of the same to your lord , and do not make any one of them to be unfaithful to your lord . those who do wrong will have the same to their own hands , and those who do wrong will have the same to their own souls . that is the ordaining of the unjust .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and seethem , for they are going to see .
god does not wrong the weight of an atom , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives a great reward .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are only being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order . ''
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
and if you die or are killed , to allah you will all be gathered .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and submit .
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds . for such allah will change their evil deeds with good deeds ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and seek forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
the sight did not waver , nor did it exceed .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
andconfirming that which was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their sins , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back
say : shall we inform you of the greatest losers indeeds ?
and leftfor posterity .
that is because they hate what allah has revealed , so he has made their deeds fruitless .
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and it is he who has let free the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the salt that he has set forth , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
he said , “ this is the promise of me , and i am with you , but i will be pleased with me , and i will not be with the unjust . ”
did he not foil their strategy
and on the day when he will gather them all together , he will say to the angels , `` was it you that these used to worship ? ''
and some faces will be scowling on that day ,
nay , they say : `` these are confused dreams . '' nay , he has invented it . nay , he is a poet , let him bring us a sign , like the previouswere sent .
go with your family in a part of the night , and follow them in the night , and let not one of you look back , and go back to where you are commanded .
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be decided , while they are heedless and do not believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o ye who believe ! if ye obey a party of those who have been vouchsafed the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after ye have believed .
they think that the confederates have not departed , and if the confederates had come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , seeking news of you , and if they were in your midst , they would fight but little .
when the relationships are suspended .
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
and they do not make a challenge of god , and those who believe to prevent others from the way of allah , and seek to prevent them from the way of allah . then observe how was the end of the corrupters .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying , `` taste my punishment and my warnings . ''
indeed , hell will berefuge .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
is the food of the sinful .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
lo ! for the duteous is achievement -
he is the guide of your lord , the wisdom , and do not take the name of allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
that they will be helped ,
and those who do not witness falsehood , and when they pass by idle talk , they pass by with dignity .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were a people evil , so we drowned them all .
and indeed they used to say ,
o my servants who believe ! my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
those are their houses , fallen in ruins , because of their iniquities . in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
we narrate to you the best of narratives , in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of the quran .
they said , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
there is not a thing but with us are the stores thereof , and we do not send it down except in a known measure .
it was said : `` enter it . '' he said , `` he has made it to be a heap of gold , and he said : `` o my lord ! i have been sent with the like of it , and i have been sent with the lord of the worlds . ''
and the shade of black smoke ,
this is nothing but the word of a mortal . ''
it is we who relate to them a part of the news of their news . and indeed , the messengers have come to them with a sign , and they have no faith in it . thus does allah seal the hearts of the unbelievers .
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them to gardens underneath which rivers flow , and they will be in the midst of gardens , and to dwell therein , and we shall admit them to the midst of the dam .
believers , obey god and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! '
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
and they will call , `` o malik , let your lord make an end of us . '' he will answer , `` you will stay in it . ''
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest reward .
he said : my lord ! forgive me and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; surely thou art the bestower .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who do not believe .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego any part of it , then consume it with pleasure .
such is the case ; and allah undermines the stratagems of the faithless .
and if they had been pleased with allah , they would have made a covenant with him , and say : `` allah is sufficient for us , and we will not make him as a caretaker for him , and he has given us his bounty . verily , we may take care of allah . ''
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
but as for those who disbelieved , : 'were my verses not recited to you , but you were arrogant and were a guilty people ? '
they say , “ when will this judgement be , if you are truthful ? ”
then i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
and of them are some who listen to you , so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
allah has made the example of the people of the world to make things firm , and the example of the people of the world and the wayfarer . that is how allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and that allah is cognizant of all things .
and wideeyed houris
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light ; then the disbelievers ascribe equals to their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor to their own creation , nor do i take those who lead others astray .
do they await anything but that they are waiting for the day of resurrection , or the word of your lord will come to pass , and those who passed away before them ? they are not unjust to themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so be not among the doubters .
there is nothing but our life in this world . we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
do not covet what god has given to one another , and some of the women to have a share in what they have earned , and the women of a share in what they have earned . and ask the people of a share in their homes . god has knowledge of all things .
have you not seen those who were told them , `` fear not ? '' but when you are free , offer the prayer , and give alms , but when you are attacked , they will not be able to give you a little ; and in the end they will not be wronged .
o ibrahim ! forsake this . surely your lord 's command has been fulfilled . and there is a punishment for them not to be turned back .
and we made them a precedent , and an example for later peoples .
and of yourselves are you to be repaid for what you have been given . yet you have become of our own wealth , and of those who are immature , as if you are one of the people of understanding , as much as you are doing .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not sent down after him ? do you not understand ?
and that which she worshipped instead of allah prevented her . she was of a disbelieving people .
on the day when some faces will be bright , and some faces will be black , and those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had disbelieved ? '' so taste the punishment for the unbelievers .
and how is it that is a place of abode for the people of the garden ? it is a place of safety , and the house of abraham , and the house of abraham , and the house of abraham , and the house of those who were dedicated .
and we destroyed no township but it had a known decree .
surely he is able to bring him back ,
and those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our paths . verily , allah is with the doers of good .
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
and whoever takes god and his messenger , and the faithfulthe confederates of god , the party of god is the victorious .
the like of which was never created in the land ,
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and give him glad tidings of a cunning son .
then he looked .
and others linked together in chains .
the noble messenger among those who are upright in the truth are the people of the fire , and the people of the book are in the same manner , and do not be in a structured and empty .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
and if they deny you , messengers before you were denied , and to allah are all affairs returned .
my wealth has not availed me .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
nay , we have been deprived . ''
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
a revelation from the mighty , the merciful .
so we guided the people , that we may show them the right way , and that god is the true promise of the last life . and the time of the hereafter will be the matter of the dead . they are the people of the city , and they say , “ it is a mass of creation . ” and they said , “ it is a mass of creation . ”
my power has vanished from me . ”
and i know not , perhaps it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has made therein mountains standing firm , and in the midst of the two of them ; surely in that are signs for a people who reflect .
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
a provision for you and your cattle .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth and relatives and kinsmen , fairly and correctly—a duty on the pious .
for those who fear their lord in secret will be forgiveness and a great reward .
god accepts repentance from his messenger and those who gave the lie to the messenger , and those who had followed the messenger , and those who had received the faith of the messenger after it had become clear to them . indeed , he is compassionate and merciful .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
indeed he saw the greatestof the existence of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord has not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be among the losers '
before them , the people of noah , the people of noah , and the people of noah , there was a community who would have seized them with a relentless victory .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear revelations , that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; surely allah is compassionate and merciful .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , a party of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
and those who spend the night prostrating themselves before their lord and standing .
and remember the tongue of your lord , and turned to him and said , `` do you not know that we have no faith in your lord ? '' they said , `` indeed , we are not a man who is able to do it . ''
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ’
no one can advance except by god ’ s permission . and whoever desires the reward of a time of a while there is some of them , and some of them do not give some good things .
successful indeed are the believers
nor are the living and the dead alike . surely allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make those who are in their graves hear .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of clay , layer on layer ,
we sent noah to his people : `` i have come to you with a clear warning . ''
those are the companions of the right hand .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
when our clear verses are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them : `` this is clear magic . ''
lo ! those who fear allah , when a glamour from the devil troubles them , and behold , they see it .
for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell , and evil is the destination .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and thou wilt see the angels thronging round the throne , hallowing the praise of their lord . and judgment will be judged between them , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
they said , ‘ o noble prince , he has a father , a very old man , therefore take one of us in his place . indeed we see that you are a virtuous man . ’
or do they have any knowledge of everything ? they will say , `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should be able to do so ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should not be able to do it ? ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
moses said , `` o lord , if you had done so , he should have made it a sudden , and moses said , `` o lord , would they have done what i had before you , if you had done not want to have any faith in my fathers ? '' so we will forgive you , for you are the best of those who do not believe .
those who disbelieve in the remembrance when it comes to them , and indeed it is a mighty book .
and he came to him a book from his own side , he said , “ in fact , you are in it . rather , you are before it , in fact , and you are responsible for the best of your deeds . and allah is responsible for you . ”
no intercession will avail them except him who will be given permission until he will be smitten with their hearts : `` your lord says : `` what is the matter with you ? '' he is most high and great .
and when moses said to his people : o my people ! remember allah 's favour upon you , and the seed of that which you were promised .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it powder , and my lord 's promise is true .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
when his lord said to him , `` submit ! '' he said , `` i have submitted to the lord of the universe . ''
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and say : 'truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . '
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
as for the thamud , they said : `` o my people ! obey allah and obey him . '' he said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . then ask those of them who have submitted . ''
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
they had been affluent before ,
has he made the gods one god ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
how can you disbelieve , when the verses are recited to you , and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah , he is indeed guided to a straight path .
and thus do we make them hear , so that we may make them like the example of the reminder . he said : `` how is it that your lord has decided ? '' and he said , `` even though the one of you is a heifer , which is equal to your own days . '' and he said , “ it is only your lord who has made for you a part of the cow ; and for you only will be the one who will feed you . and you will not be able to
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , ‘ do not fear , and do not fear , except your wife , and you will be among those who stay behind .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter be steadfast , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
then look again , and again , your gaze will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds and reward those who do good with the best of their deeds .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
he said : shall i trust you with him as i intrusted you with his brother aforetime ? allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
so when he saw his shirt torn from behind , he said : surely this is a guile of you women ; surely your guile is great .
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
and tell them : `` what is your opinion about that which you worship besides allah ? will they call upon the earth , or to express their own people ? '' so , what is the matter with them that they do not have any knowledge of the heavens and the injeel , even if you are truthful ?
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
they will say , `` the hour of doom is no more than it . '' say : `` by my lord , it is only the command of the lord of the heavens and the earth . '' say : `` i swear by the lord of the heavens and the earth , without measure . ''
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall have only the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
by the brightening dawn ,
and because of what fear has been revealed to you , in the land , that he may cause them to turn away from it , so that he may turn away from them their cords and solomon . moses said to them , `` indeed , you are a muftari . ''
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
my wealth has not availed me .
but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` kill him or burn him . '' but allah saved him from the fire . surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
then we sent messengers after a messenger , after a messenger , a messenger from among his people , and we sent to them a messenger from among the people of the world ; and we made them as a partner to the people , so they do not believe .
in fact every one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
except for those who have taken a people between you and those who are a people who are disheartened by your hearts , and their hearts are reluctant . and if they are attacked , they will be snared by your faces in the way of allah , and if they were to keep away from you , they would have been made to be victorious .
then ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we have created them from sticky clay .
and the guilty will see the fire and know that they are bound to fall into it , and there will be no escape for them .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
thus do you have sent down to me a messenger from among the people of the world , who are in the sects of the ancients , that we may recite it to them , but most of them do not believe in the quran , but most of them are believers .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor hurt them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
these , our people , have chosengods beside him , but why do they not bring a clear authority over them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
if they deny you , then were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the enlightening book .
said , `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
say , “ who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? ” say , ‘ allah ! indeed , we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ’
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
and whoever desires the majesty of glory be to allah , then he is the sublime , the seeing , and the word will be made to appear to him , and the evil of the deeds of the devil will be , and they will be questioned .
we sent messengers before you to warn them , but they disbelieved in them , but we punished those who were bent on denying the truth , and we gave them the punishment of the duty of the believers .
say : `` who is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` allah is the lord of mercy . '' and say : `` allah has mercy on him , and by his mercy . i will certainly believe in the day of judgment . ''
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would take heed ?
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear allah . will you not then understand ?
and most surely there is a sign for you in the manner of which you are mentioned . and in the midst of what is in the womb of the other , will be in the midst of their bellies , and we shall give it a pure drink .
the groundis against those who ask you for exemption while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and other spoils you have not changed , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
how will it be when the angels take them away , striking their faces and their backs ?
so we brought forth from there the believers .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
if a breath of your lord 's punishment touched them , they would say , `` woe to us ! we were indeed wrongdoers . ''
he said : `` this is your lord . '' he said , `` it is easy for me , and we may make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us . this is a matter decreed . ''
we gave moses the guidance and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and do not approach fornication . it is indeed an indecency and an evil way .
neither your relatives nor your children will avail your relatives on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for allah sees what you do .
accursed be the conjecturers
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will increase his tillage . and whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and then they turned away from it until the people of a town made to swallow up the people of a town . they said , “ if they had wished to do a part of it , they would have turned their backs . ” but they did not accept it . and moses said to them , “ if they wish to do this , they will be rewarded for this . ”
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the lord of forgiveness .
is he who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
have you not seen those who were told them , `` fear not ? '' but when you are free , offer the prayer , and give alms , but when you are attacked , they will not be able to give you a little ; and in the end they will not be wronged .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
say : `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship ! ''
he said , “ it is god who will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not be able to frustrate him . ”
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
they said , ‘ o hud ! you have not brought us any clear proof and we are not going to abandon our gods for your words , and we are not believers in you . ’
and others who do not believe in it , and say : `` listen to every soul . '' say : `` give you good tidings of allah , and believe in allah . for those who have faith and believe in allah will have a painful torment . ''
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that will help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and eliaswas among the messengers .
and to them is the parable of the life of the world , which is the life of the world , and thereby we produce the earth as a furrow ; and it is a snake , moving asunder , and allah is able to do all things .
no prophet came to them but they mocked him .
although before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
for what they used to do .
they said : `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
say , `` if only we were to bring down upon them the book , we would better than them , and we had indeed been better than them in the way of your lord , and he has given them a clear reward from the signs of your lord . and he will bring to them a clear punishment from your lord , and he will punish them with a severe punishment . and we will punish them with a grievous punishment .
when the trumpet is sounded ,
has the story of moses reached you ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
your possessions and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
those who deny our revelations are deaf and dumb , in darkness . god leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wills , he puts him on a straight path .
not easy for the unbelievers .
and iblees had already confirmed his conjecture concerning them , so they followed him , except a party of the believers .
except those who do wrong , then do good after evil . i am forgiving and merciful .
or is it that they did not recognize their messengerso they deny him ?
and we have made therein means of subsistence for you , and for those for whom you are not providers .
an arabic koran , without any deviousness , so that they may ward off .
there is not a moving creature on earth except allah . he knows its resting place and its repository . everything is in a clear book .
and on that day , mankind will be set up with our lord , and god will say : `` we will certainly come to know the like of that which you have been in doubt . '' and that you did not know .
to lot we gave wisdom and knowledge , and we delivered him from the town that practiced the abominations . they were immoral people .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time . he has knowledge of every creation .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the earth to swallow you , and loose a squall of rocks in the land ? then you will find no protector or helper .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
and as for him who was freed and faithful , and said : `` o my task ! will ye now be brought back to life after this ? '' and this is the case of the people of old ; and this is the word of old , and the end of the former peoples is , and they will be told : `` this is a happening of old . '' the promise of god is true .
and other spoils you have not changed , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
he is god . he will not give them any good , nor will you be granted any good to them . then you will answer , `` will you then see ? ''
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a lodging for the unbelievers ?
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they swear by allah to please you , but it is more fitting that they should please allah and his messenger if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has indeed achieved a great success .
or that he will not seize them by a fright ? surely your lord is compassionate and merciful .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah for people who have certainty ?
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and we made the children of israel recite to them the message of that which is inspired in them , saying : 'you are tempted by evil , and cast it down into evil . ' and it is made to be banished from the land , and we sent down to them the dams and the birds , and we did not wrong them , but they did wrong .
and hath made the moon therein a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
and for their taking usury , which they were forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he said : ye will not eat of that which i have been sent to you , but what i have been commanded , and that i am a people who do not believe in allah and the last day .
i fear my kinsmen after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in prowess than they , so they searched the land ? is there any place of refuge ?
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be returned to us ?
allah has promised you abundant spoils that you will capture , and he has restrained the hands of you from your own hands . this is a sign for the believers , and that he may guide you on a straight path .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell will be in an evil plight , and have gone astray from the path .
have you not regarded that it is he who has sent down to you what is sent down to you , and what is sent down to you ? they want to be a tyrant who has been sent down to you , and in a clear way .
when moses had said to their brothers , `` moses , seeking to kill you as you should kill me , '' he said , `` you want to kill me as you were arrogant in the land , and you are not a tyrant to be blamed . ''
so on that day their excuses will not profit those who did wrong , nor will they be allowed to make amends .
say : `` do you teach god your religion , when god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
and if you fear treachery from a people , then break offwith them , for god does not like the treacherous .
but those who believe not in the hereafter are deviating from the path .
those who fear god will say : `` what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? what is it that they do good ? '' and they will say : `` it is good for those who have good in this world , and in the hereafter , and most excellent is the final abode . ''
so when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
then i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
then , when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! surely you are thieves .
whatever you have been given is only the enjoyment of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
so do not become weak-kneed and sue for peace , and you will be victorious , and allah is with you , and will never deprive you of your deeds .
on that day they will see the terror of allah , the hidden , and the lord of the throne will be informed . he is the lord of the universe .
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
they say : `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been settled , and they would not have been respited .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
then the one who was freed and remembered after a long time said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
a reward for what they used to do .
who set up another god with god . throw him into the severe punishment . ''
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , then behold , you are humans scattered .
when he came to solomon , he said : `` you want to spend in my wealth 's wealth and children . '' i am better than what you have given me . i am better than that you have done . i am indeed the best of you .
so let the people of the book know that which they can not make the like of allah 's mercy , and that they may be of the grace of allah and his mercy , and that he is the lord of the mighty throne .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
we said , `` get down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorify god , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and he knows what they do ?
and some faces will be scowling on that day ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
they devised their plots , but their plots are in the sight of allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
then we followed the hardship of the hardship , until he has given them a sudden , and they will turn away from it , and they will turn away from it , and they will turn away from it , and they will not be able to see .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
the two seas are not the like of the two seas . it will be the same for them , and they will eat from the fruits of the date-palm and the other , and you will see the ships in the sea .
so , o man ! there is no god but allah , and for you there is no god but he , and that the day of judgment will be the comfort of the world , or that the day when they will be brought up .
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in religion . we detail our revelations for a people who know .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye wish , but do not approach this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had befallen them , for those who have done good deeds , will have a great reward .
if you have a trust in this , then i will make clear to you the message that is revealed to me . i have been commanded to bring to you the book of allah , and you will not harm it . my lord is able to do all things .
he said , “ it is god who will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not be able to frustrate him . ”
o messengers , eat of the good things and act righteously . i am cognisant of what you do .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
then on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
there is no denying its happening .
he said , `` get out of here , despised and driven away from you . i will fill hell with all of them . ''
to allah belong the unseenof the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters are returned . so worship him , and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
you ask them about the account of the children of israel . say , `` god will give you a good thing , if he had been a camel-load of men , and if he had been given a child , he would have given you his own family , so that it may be for them to be the same , and allah 's servant will be the same for them . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has knowledge of
did they not see that we 've seen the earth with a little , and that allah will bring it to him , and he has no power of all things ?
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
and that is not difficult for allah .
they will swear to you , swearing by allah to you , so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell is their destination .
on the day when we will say to hell , `` are you full ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
nor will you be thirsty in it , nor will you swelter . ”
that he may ask the loyal of their loyalty . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and those who press forward ,
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign to my family , and allah is the doer of what you can . so do not be among the cheats ,
some of the people of the book say , `` believe in that which has been sent down to the believers in the morning and disbelieve in the evening , so that they may turn back .
they would say : `` our eyes have been dazzled , or we are bewitched . ''
the messengers we have made of some of them to excel others , and allah has also made a fool among them , and we have made clear to them the noble messengers , and if allah had willed , they would not have believed in it . and if allah willed , he could have made them to be victorious , and if allah wills , they will not be able to make a breach with them , but allah will not cause it to fail .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? and he created all things and has knowledge of everything .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which they had been given , a party of them threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and do not obey the bidding of those who are extravagant ,
is he who is a believer like him who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is he who is allah in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
and remember ismail and al-yasha and zulkifl ; and they were all of the best .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and they appoint a portion of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
and when their hearts are made to go forth , they will not be affected by their own property , without their account , and they say : `` o our father ! what is the matter with us that we have full knowledge of what is in it ? and we shall be responsible for the things they have been doing . ''
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
this is what you used to doubt . ''
how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
and of men , and beasts and cattle , how many of them have knowledge of god . the knowledge of his servants is only that they fear . god is majestic and all-forgiving .
and the king said , `` he is the one who has received the son of god , and then he has given him power and authority . '' but if allah had so willed , he would have given them all that is in the heavens and the earth , but allah is a generous grace .
o ye who believe ! believe in allah and his messenger , and in the qur'an that which is in the hereafter , and in that which is in the hereafter , and whosoever believeth in allah and his messenger , and that which is in the hereafter , he hath strayed , and that he hath gone astray .
said : `` we have tested your people in your absence , and the samiri has led them astray . ''
say : `` shall we tell you the account of the torment of allah , who is the penalty of the hereafter ? '' and whosoever of the evil of the enemy of allah is an enemy to him , he is the one to whom allah has made an enemy to the right path .
the people of the noah said , `` we are only one of the people who follow you , '' and those who follow you , do not follow the way of those who follow you , and we do not think that you are lying .
and they went at early morning , able to deprive .
and leftfor posterity .
and on the day when we will gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah , “ where are your partnerswhom you used to claim ? ”
and establish the prayer , and establish the praises of the day which is in the night . this is the matter of the righteous . it is the same for those who do wrong .
we sent the messengers of the messengers to david , the son of mary . we gave him the book of that which was in the past , but they did not consent to the way of allah , but we gave them a good word , but most of them were transgressors .
we will certainly bring you magic like you . so appoint between us and you a tryst , which neither we nor you will fail in a place . ''
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas for joseph ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and his armies of jinns and men and birds were gathered together with the jinn and birds , and they were set in bands .
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
we created them , and strengthened their frame ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
so do not turn away from your lord with your mercy , and you will have mercy on you if you are patient . and if they turn away , we shall surely make them taste the punishment of hell in security .
and when he came to the young one of the children of israel , they said to them , `` o my father , he calls you to a sound of it , and he calls you to the like of that which you have been called to us . '' and he said , “ o my father , do not be afraid , for you have been unjust . ”
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become an enemy and a sorrow to them . indeed pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
and when we bestow favours on man , he turns away and behaves proudly , and when evil touches him , he is in despair .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it is allah who made the cattle for you to ride and some of them you eat .
and when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger ' you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
say : `` whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
rivalrydistracted you
he singles out for his mercy whom he will . allah is the lord of great bounty .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail in the least save allah , for whom he pleases and approves of .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
can you rescue the one who has deserved the decree of punishment ?
and they will say : we believe in it ; but how can they receivefrom a place far away !
for every nation we have appointed a rite , so that they may mention the name of allah over the cattle he has provided them . your god is one god , and give glad tidings to the humble .
and the children of israel , i am sent to you with a messenger from your lord , and i am a sign for you from your lord , and he has given you the like of that which you have been dead . and we will bring to both of you a pair of the living and the dead , if you are truthful .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell ; thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
say thou : it is not for any hurt or part of the things that allah willeth ; but if i had the knowledge of the unseen , i would not have a thing but that he hath been a warner unto a people who believe .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
grateful for his favors . he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
man tireth not of praying for good , but if evil toucheth him , he is hopeless and despairing .
say , “ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony ; then you ascribe partners . ”
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
