and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
o mankind ! fear allah , and keep your duty to him . he has created you from the one who has created , and in the breasts of the women , and your females , and keep your duty to allah . indeed , allah is powerful over you .
and those who disbelieve , as if they were to be separated from it , then they will be made to know that which is in it . and allah is swift at all , and allah is swift at all .
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak of it ? glory be to god ! this is a monstrous slander . ''
a host routed out among the factions .
and when you said to moses , `` we will never be able to feed the poor , and the sustenance of your lord in the manner of the heavens and the earth . '' and the one who made the path to be better for them , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty to god , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty , and those who were bent on denying the
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
that is jesus , son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
and indeed we have sent down to you clear verses and a description of those who passed away before you , and an advice for the pious .
and they say : `` we are a son . '' say : `` then why do you be a son ? '' say : `` then why do you deny the truth , when it is , you will be of those who have gone forth in the heavens and the earth ? '' and he will forgive them , and to him will be the punishment of the heavens and the earth , and to him is the return .
so we seized him and his hosts , and we flung them into the sea . so see what sort of fate befell the unjust !
and behold , they see the punishment of the day of resurrection , those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be made to follow their own souls , and when they are visited by the punishment , they will be made to be recompensed with a terrible punishment .
and thy lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in the structures that they erect .
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
they said , “ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and when hell is set ablaze ,
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
and if allah had destroyed the people of the world , he would have made it in the earth for what they have been in the earth ; but allah will not hasten on the day for a time . but when the day of judgment came to them , he will surely be informed of the day of resurrection .
they said : `` o eminent ones ! '' they said , `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said : `` the son of allah is only that which they have been fabricating . and what do they know ? ''
on the day when they see it , they will see it as though they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
why did not the believers , men and women , and the believing men and women did not know ? this is an obvious calumny '' .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah adds to their disease , and a painful punishment awaits them .
he said : nay , but ye cast it down , and lo ! their cords and their staves were sliding down by their magic , as though they were running .
he said , “ both of you go down , both of you are enemies to one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance , he will not go astray , neither will he go astray . ”
they will go round between it and between it , boiling water .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women . in this was a tremendous trial from your lord .
so joseph 's brother appeared to his brother , before he has his brother his brother to his his brother . then the one to whom he does , is one of his brother , and he is the best of all who do not know . such is the best of all who have knowledge .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : `` by the might of pharaoh , we shall surely be victorious . ''
if we have afflicted them with a disaster , they would have turned away from it , and scatter them in the way of allah . and that which they have been doing is in the case of allah , in order that they may understand .
and we know that we can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor can we frustrate him by flight .
and your people denied it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not a guardian over you . ''
lo ! thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is aware of his bondmen .
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they kept ascending through it ,
when the sun is woundup ;
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and your lord is not forgetful .
verily we ! we shall bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from the sky because they are evil-livers .
and say , `` my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful . ''
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
this is of the news of the unseen which we reveal to you . you were not present with them when they agreed on their plan .
a provision for you and your cattle .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make it clear to us , and he said , “ allah says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says she is neither too old nor too young , but do so . ”
they will abide in it forever . what an excellent destination and abode !
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , or you will return to our religion . ” then their lord inspired them , “ we will destroy the wrongdoers . ”
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses and take heed .
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out , but there was no longer time for escape .
and thosesailing with ease
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
and paradise will be brought near , not far from the righteous .
in scorching wind and scalding water
when the clear signs have come to them , they say , `` we will never believe in our messengers until we have given the messengers whom we sent our messengers . '' god is aware of the sins of those who have done wrong .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque to the farthest mosque of which we have blessed the blessed signs , that we might show him some of our signs . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place .
he said : `` even so , your lord says , `` it is easy for me , and we shall make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecreed . ''
and do not be in the least to worship those who worship god in worship , so that they will not be able to make a change in allah 's change . thus do we make their deeds appear attractive to them , and to their lord they will be returned .
say : `` who will protect you from allah , if he is of any harm ? if he wills , he can bring you any good , and if he wills , he would give you mercy , and they will not help them .
and do not make your oaths a deceit between you , lest the foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you should taste evil for the cause of allah , and you should have a great punishment .
when your lord said to the angels , `` i am going to create a human being from clay .
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
but he turned away with his court , and said , “ a magician or a madman . ”
or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend the ropes .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and the birds , gathered together , all obedient to him .
say : `` have you received the story of the good men ? '' for those who fear their lord , will have gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will be told , `` they will be told , `` the lord of the whole universe will be with you , and god is observant of his servants .
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
“ o our lord ! do thou be devoted to worship , and be of the muslims , and we have made for you a people who have faith and do not accept faith in us , and accept the way of allah .
those who worshipped the calf will be afflicted by their lord 's wrath and disgrace them in the life of the world . thus do we recompense those who invent lies .
there is no one who can avert it .
and whatever you have been given is the wares of the life of this world and its adornment , and that which is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and then made the throne subservient to the throne , and the sun and the moon ; and he has made the sun a pointer to the day of resurrection , and it will be a remembrance for the sake of your lord , in order that he may give life to the earth , and that it may be a clear warning for him .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and they went early in the morning , able to deprive .
who created and proportioned ,
and they devised , and allah devised ; and allah is the best of planners .
so that they may understand my speech .
and when their eyes will be turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say , “ our lord , do not put us among the wrongdoing people . ”
the evil of all these is detestable to your lord .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
as for man , when he says to man , `` disbelieve in the unbelievers , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am quit of you . ''
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he giveth us of his bounty , we shall surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and speak to him a gentle word so that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
and among mankind is he who sells himself seeking the pleasure of allah , and allah is gentle toservants .
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at encompassed them .
and indeed , for those who do wrong , we shall make them like a portion of the fire , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
they shall have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants !
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
has he gained knowledge of the unseen , or has he taken a covenant with the all-beneficent ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any word from allah .
those are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has sealed , and they are the heedless .
and the morning when it shines ,
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk , who were afflicting you with a dreadful torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
to him you attend .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
lo ! those who recite the book of allah and establish prayer , and expend of that wherewith we have provided them , secretly and openly , hope for a merchandise that will not perish .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
we send not the angels down save with the truth , and then they shall not be respited .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
and indeed you are one one of us , even as we gave you the first creation , and we gave you what you did , and that you began to do so , and you will be among those you have told , and you will surely be in a barrier between you and what you used to do .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ’
but the sects differed among themselves , so woe to the disbelievers because of the scene of a dreadful day .
he merges night into day , and he merges day into night , and he knows best what is in the breasts .
alas for me ! would that i had not taken so-and-so as friend !
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then he turns away from them ? indeed , we will take vengeance on the guilty .
and he who does not think that allah will not fail in his power to help him , nor will he be able to make a mistake , and let them look at a plan .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father , we have been denied , therefore send our brother with us , so send our brother with us , and we will indeed take care of him . ”
and facilitatedfor him .
he said , “ so it is . your lord says , “ it is easy for me , whereas i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
and we are about to be an evil deed for the same , so the two parties differed , and they were not able to intercede , except after it had come to pass . and whoever is a wrongdoer , is a barrier between them , and on the day of judgment , your lord will judge between them .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has kept account of it while they have forgotten him . god is witness over everything .
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
when it was said to them , `` there is no god but god , '' they were arrogant
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
the wayis only against those who oppress men and wrongly rebel in the earth , for such there is a painful punishment .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
those who , if we establish them in the earth , establish prayer and give zakah , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
when it is said to them , `` do not cause corruption in the land , '' they say , `` we are only reformers . ''
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret and the most hidden .
there was not a messenger but that we had sent it down only to the permission of allah . but if they were unjust , they would have sought forgiveness for them , and they would have forgiveness , and most merciful .
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it ; it is the truth from our lord ; indeed we were muslims . ”
and there did not come to you a messenger but we have sent down to the people of his people what he has sent down , but when he has made a reconciliation between the shaitan , he knows what is in them . and allah is the most knowing of the wise .
verily , those who are in the midst of the angels , while they were unjust , they will say : `` when is it that you were given to the earth , they would have said , `` is it not that allah has given the earth a vast expanse ? '' they will say , “ did allah not revive the earth , and they will say , “ did allah not revive the earth , and they will be a wretched destination ? ”
is he who will shield his face from the torment of the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste your punishment ? ''
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and if any of your wives is one of you , they turn to the disbelievers , and then the disbelievers were seized by you , and that you should be of the believers .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
which will overspread the hearts .
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they went back retracing their footsteps .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is the possessor of all-embracing mercy , and his wrath will not be averted from the guilty people . ”
a guidance and a mercy for the doers of good ,
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
and remember the remembrance of you , and the advice of the book is that we gave to you the good news , and to make the book a complete matter , and in order that the law and the gospel may have faith .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ''
indeed , allah has promised to you the promise that he had made to you ; and the word of allah is true , and to him you will be turned back , so that he may make you be a trial for them , and that he may give you a good things , and will be given to you a thing , so that he may be of the believers , and he will have to be a trial for you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it is we who have created the human being with the right hand , and if they were to make you go forth , then do not yield to them , and do not listen to me . and to me you do not know .
they said : `` do you wonder at the command of allah ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed , he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ''
that is god , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then do you turn away ?
if you turn away , you would have spread corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people turn away from it
your creation and your upraising are as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
the dwellers of hijr rejected the messengers .
then shall we make laterfollow them .
say : `` allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but you associate others with him . ''
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it , until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or there comes upon them the torment of a barren day .
o my father ! lo ! unto me hath come knowledge which hath not come unto thee . so follow me , i will guide thee to a straight path .
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
exalted , purified ,
and of the people is he who is one of the other , if he was a man of good , he would have made it a good , and if it was a right thing , it will be for him that will be the right , and the hereafter . this is the clear loss .
and when a surah is revealed to you , do ye strive with allah and his messenger , and will be believers in his messenger , and they will be among those who are with him , and will say , “ i will come to you with the same way . ”
he created man from a drop of fluid , but he is an open contender .
that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
we have made it as a reminder and a provision for the needy .
you are but a human being like us . so bring us a sign if you are truthful . ''
they say : `` why has not signs been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
so these are their houses fallen down because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
and to man is the return of all that is in order that he may destroy the people from the grievous chastisement , and that he may give them the good news of what they did , and that they may be rewarded for what they did .
o children of adam ! if there come to you messengers from among you , relating to you my signs , those who shun disobedience and mend their ways will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
do they not see how the shadows which allah has created for the right and the left , prostrating themselves on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah ?
and that is the signs of allah , that there is a sign for ibrahim , and whosoever followeth it , and he who followeth a lecture , he shall take it to a complete thing ; and allah is the absolute , the beholder .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor will they be protected from us .
and we inspired moses : 'cast thy staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
and when thou seest them , thou shalt make them void . and when thou seest them , they shall pass away with the like of it ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and so , and allah will make them friends , and allah is of them making friends .
so it tasted the evil consequence of its conduct , and the end of its affair was loss .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
and when allah has decreed his grace , and his mercy , there is no one to avert it from his people , nor can anyone have any knowledge of his mercy ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
and never does a new reminder come to them frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world . and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
leave them to eat and enjoy , and lethope beguile them . they will soon know .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
so why did those whom they had taken besides allah as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they lost them , and that which they were forging -- they were lies .
say to those who deny the truth , `` you will be overcome and gathered to hell . ''
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you , and do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of allah , and do not follow what they have spent with reproach and injury , their reward is with their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
that we may send down upon them stones of clay ,
of his kind was abraham .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a hanif , and he was not a pagan .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
those who promise the covenant of allah after it has been given to them , allah has already ordered them to be joined , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land , and for them is the destination .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and the wealth of the orphan do not save the property of the orphan , unless it be the right time , until the time of judgment , and to make it proper . and do not be one of the witnesses to the word of his lord , so that he may take a covenant with his lord , so that you may take heed for yourselves , and take the covenant of his lord , in order that they may take heed .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
rejoicing in what allah has given them out of his grace , and those who have not yet joined them , and give them good news , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
there is a share of the same people that they may have a share of the way of allah , and to make it a way of allah . what is in the way of allah , who is a guarantor for it , and is in the way of allah , to whom will be the punishment of allah , and those who will be punished .
he said : my lord ! lo ! i have wronged my soul , so forgive me . so he forgave him ; verily he is the forgiving , the merciful .
and that is not hard for allah .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to god do all things return .
then maketh it to stubble dusky .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah guides whom he will , and he will guide them to the right way . ”
andthe day when he will say , “ call upon my partners , ” and they will call them , but they will not answer them , and we shall set a gulf between them . and we shall set a gulf between them .
do they desire other than the religion of allah , while to him is whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you are going to throw . ''
so do not think that allah will break his promise to his apostles . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
and when they are reminded , they pay no attention .
messengers , bearing glad tidings and warnings , so that people may have no argument against god after the messengers . god is majestic and all-wise .
yet they play in doubt .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
then , when moses came to you with a place of the mount , he said to his family : `` wait ! '' he said , `` wait for you , for you are a fire , or that you may warm yourselves . ''
but as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , the impaler .
by mount sinai ,
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
as for man , when he says to man , `` disbelieve in the unbelievers , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am quit of you . ''
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and when the word is fulfilled against them , we shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth that will speak to them that mankind did not believe in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them for their covenant , and we said to them , “ enter the gate prostrating in the gate , ” and we said to them , “ do not violate the sabbath ” , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it is a shameful deed , and an evil way .
and when you said : o musa ! we will not believe in you until we see allah openly , and the thunderbolt seized you while you looked on .
but not iblis . he was proud and was one of the unbelievers .
and all the seven heavens and the earth and all that is in them , glorify him , and all that is in them , and he is the most appreciating and the most honourable .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who seeth thee when thou standest up
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . verily , i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust .
he is in order to come to you , so that he may bring to you the enemy , and do not make the ties of war to you . and do not let them take you in the way of god , but you will not be able to see other than this . and you will find it in the way of god , and you will not be able to do wrong . and you will not be wronged .
verily those who believe and work righteous works , for them are gardens of delight .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to bring it to you , they would have punished them , and they will not be able to reach it .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of all things , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou mayest decide , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou canst forget , and thou wilt have all that thou mayest know . and thou art the mighty , able to do all things .
verily we ! we shall bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from the sky because they are evil-livers .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
these are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
he was created from spurting fluid ,
as if they had never dwelt there . behold ! away with midian ! away with the thamud !
and by him who created male and female ,
those who made the quran into shreds .
verily the day of decision is a time appointed .
we called to him , `` o abraham ,
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
you can not escape in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides god .
allah has promised you much booty that you will capture , and he has given you the hands of men , and has given you the provisions of men , that it may be a sign for the believers .
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he is the living , there is no god but he . so call upon him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
lo ! allah knoweth that which thou hast the power to pass , and thou shalt raise the twain as a part of the night ; and that ye may be of those who are in the midst of allah 's cause , and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the way of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end with allah , and that ye may
reclining on couches lined with silk brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near .
turning to him in repentance , and fear him , and establish prayer , and do not be among the polytheists
and exalted your fame ?
that is because of that which is good , and is the one who is the one to whom he will , and the same will be the same , and the same will be the same for him . evil is the judgement that they make .
for every nation there is a term , but when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your friends ; they are friends of each other . whoever among you takes them for one another , he is one of them , and indeed allah does not guide the unjust .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass , and you can not escape .
nay , but they say , `` he is false , '' but if allah will , you will not be able to invent a seal . and allah does not like the doubters .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
snatching away the scalp ,
surely allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . indeed , he does not like the proud .
when the eventbefalls .
he is the supreme over his servants , and he is the wise , the aware .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
and we had already forbidden to him before , so his sister said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
messengershave been derided before thee , but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that whereat they scoffed .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest on whomsoever thou bringest forth .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind begrudge aught save infidelity .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
standall night , except a little .
those who have fear of god will have the means of god 's bounty . they said , `` enter the gate of the city , which you will be in the gate of god . if you are true believers , in god ’ s way , in order that you are believers . ''
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not deny you , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
say , “ my lord , if you would show me what they are promised .
the dwellers of hijr rejected the messengers .
and say , `` my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful . ''
o you who believe ! do not listen to the prayer while you are reminded of them , and they were not held to the cause of allah , nor were they to make a target of disquiet in the morning , and to make them independent of the thunderclaps , and in the midst of the day of resurrection ; and if they were to do so , they would have been forgiven , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
he it is who hath made for you the earth and on its earth as a bed , and the sky hath laid upon you water from the sky . and in that wise they shall have a provision , and unto allah ye shall be served . and unto allah ye are wont to worship .
except the way of hell , to abide therein , and that is easy for allah .
verily allah ! in the end is the abode of the believers that they may have to be in the way of allah , and they fight in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and in respect of what is said , and that which is with allah , is the true , and that which is with him , is the ultimate achievement .
and the people of noah before ; indeed they were a transgressing lot .
in paradise you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
our people have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
and as for those whose scale is light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they have been unjust to our signs .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit indecency with your eyes open ?
do you not see that there is a sign in the seas that there is a second time at the sailing , so he unleashed upon them a screaming wind , so that you may be one of those who denied the truth , and then you will be of those who have faith ?
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
and they worship besides allah that which has not sent down any proof , and that they have no knowledge of it , and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
the hypocrites try to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember allah except a little .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so traverse in its tracts and eat of its sustenance . to him is the resurrection .
these two opponentsdispute with each other about their lord . but those who disbelieve will have garments of fire , and boiling water will be poured over their heads .
and they will not be absent from it .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil and your sight today is sharp . ''
and those who believed and did the right , and those who have believed in them , we shall have their own good deeds , and they are not in the midst of it ; and we shall not give them a reward in the least for a while .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
and who strays as one who seeks to follow the prayer , and , if the day of resurrection , it will be said , “ you will not be able to do so , nor will they be able to do so . and you are not unaware of their arrogance . ”
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
is it you who pleaded for them in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
and those who give the poor-rate and whose hearts are afraid that they are returning to their lord .
say , `` i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner . ''
indeed allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
and certainly we seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they humble themselves .
do they not see that we have made a safe sanctuary , while the people are despoiled all around them ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
and collectand hide it .
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
when moses said to his people , `` o my people , indeed you have done wrong . you have done wrong to the one who has done wrong , and you will return to him . '' and he is the most kind and merciful .
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , saying , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
and you will not believe in it , but allah is not all-sufficient to be accepted of you . and if you do not accept the truth , then indeed , it is to your lord that will be the best of what you used to do .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal , and repel evil with what is better , and then you will see that between whom and your enemies will become enmity ,
and you will have those who disbelieve , as you disbelieve . then they will become disbelievers in the way of allah ; then they will be of those who have no faith in allah , so they will be of those who have no faith in the way of allah , and turn away from the way of allah , and do not be of those who do so .
those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : `` call to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ''
they have calledlies . they will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked .
have you not regarded that allah will teach you the quran , and he will call to them with one another ? then you will see those who are like the mountains , and he will make them void .
the hypocrites and the women of the women are like one of the women , that is like one of them . this is said to them : 'do not want to commit evil and forbid evil . god has taken them as a liar . god is keeping the keeping of the unbelievers a liar .
o ye who believe ! if ye succour allah , he will succour you and make your foothold firm .
and do not defraud people of their belongings and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , “ i am commanded to worship allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
indeed , those who have divided their religion in different groups are not in different creeds , but you will have no one to help them . they will surely be told , `` indeed , to allah will be the result of what they do . ''
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me . ''
and the fifththat the wrath of allah be upon her if he is truthful .
those who deny the signs of god and his encounter—these have despaired of my mercy . they will have a painful punishment .
it is not fitting for the merciful to take a son .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own lusts ; and who is more astray than he who follows his desires without guidance from allah ? indeed allah does not guide the unjust people .
and if you do not help them , then indeed allah has given them victory in the cave , and when the disbelievers were in a cave , and said , “ do not grieve , and allah is most mighty , most wise . ”
what , do they have any god other than god ? say , `` do this to you , by your own way . '' say , `` do this , then , to be a sign to those who have gone before me , and in the case of those who are bent on denying the truth . ''
o you enrobed one .
do the people of the towns feel secure against our punishment coming to them in the morning while they are playing ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has kept account of it while they have forgotten him . god is witness over everything .
and korah said : lo ! this is my wealth , and i have knowledge of its knowledge . did it not be that he was of those who did not have power to be wronged , and they shall be questioned of the sins of him ?
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
so do not strike parables for allah ; indeed allah knows and you do not know .
when moses came to their enemy , he said , `` moses , do you want to kill me as you slew the dead , and you will not be able to make a mistake like the one who has done the right to the right way . ''
indeed , they did not expect a reckoning ,
who will inherit paradise . they will abide in it forever .
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
confirm my strength with him
that allah may forgive you your faults , and what is past for you , and to show you his favours and guide you to a straight path .
of jinn and men .
but they divided themselves into sects , each party rejoicing in what it has .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
we will ease him to hardship .
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
it is he who kindles the dawn and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
and those whom you call upon besides him can not help you , nor can they help themselves .
when they come to you , they say , `` we believe , '' but they have entered into disbelief , and they go forth with disbelief . god knows all that they hide .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book , but they speculate .
o prophet , we have given you their wives , and you have given them what is given to you , and the women who have given you the good news , and the two of the women who have been told , `` the promise of god will be of those who have been given you , and have no hope of the truth , and we shall make the night for you as a heritage to which you have no advantage . '' , `` the promise of god is true , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and my messenger , they said , “ we believe , and bear witness that we are muslims . ”
and when evil toucheth us , they call upon us , and say : lo ! this is only for us ; and the best for them is the good , but most of them know not .
and his companionwill say : `` here isready with me ! ''
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is full of pity , merciful .
i am the best of those who are virtuous , and i am the best of those who have forgotten him . he is the one who says to him , `` indeed , he is the one who has forgotten us . '' in the world to come he will be raised up in the world to come . ''
he created man ,
do they not know that allah knows what they hide and what they disclose ?
then he called upon his lord , “ these are a guilty people . ”
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing .
tell my servants who have believed , to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them , secretly and openly , before a day comes wherein there is neither trading nor befriending .
they said : `` have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
andfaces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and round them will be waited upon by their youths as if they were hidden pearls .
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed , he is able to do all things .
allah is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he is the living , the everlasting , and whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is he , who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the knowing .
they can hidefrom men , but they can not hidefrom allah , and he is with them when they meditate by night by night , and allah encompasses what they do .
and be thou patient for the sake of those who call their lord 's remembrance in the mornings and the evenings , and that they should be guided by their lord . and do not be of those who are heedless of the life of this world , and do not be of the cheats , the lord of the world .
o ye who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you , that ye may ward off .
so he will have a pleasant life ,
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and strive with your possessions and your lives . this is better for you , if you only knew .
indeed this community of yours is one religion , and i am your lord , so worship me .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
allah does not like illspoken about , except by someone who has been wronged . allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
moses said to them : `` call on you , you do not utter a lie . he has power to bring you a lie . he has certainly invented the ark , and he has failed to despair .
and those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies and when they are angry , they forgive ,
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ''
o you who believe ! stand in justice with justice , and the religion of allah , and you have no one to whom you have no knowledge . so be careful ofallah , for allah is fully aware of what they do .
the sovereignty on that day will be god 's . he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
these are the ones that are doomed to be shattered and all their works are vain .
those who say , `` our lord is allah , '' and remain steadfast to their faith . no fear shall be upon them , nor shall they grieve .
why did not the believers , men and women , and the believing men and women did not know ? this is an obvious calumny '' .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
`` and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ''
noble and pious .
we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we will certainly question the messengers .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil save that which my lord hath mercy ; verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and the reciters of the reminder .
and they have led many astray , and do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but error .
again , you will see it with certainty of sight !
seize him and fetter him ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
they said , “ you know well that we have no right to your daughters , and you know what we want . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never offer them mercy ? enter paradise , and you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that remembereth ?
and when they saw them , they would say : lo ! they have gone astray .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day . ''
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little do they believe .
it is allah who created you from weakness , then he gave you strength after weakness , then gave you weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
if you could see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , `` would that we had been sent back , we would not deny the signs of our lord , and we will not deny the truth . ''
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? rather , he is an insolent liar . ''
“ this is indeed a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of allah are turned away ?
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
it has been decreed that whoever befriends him , he will mislead him and lead him to the punishment of the fire .
allah does not like illspoken about , except by someone who has been wronged . allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
though you are not liable if he does not purify himself .
not one of them but belied the messengers , so my retribution was realized .
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the assumption of those who disbelieve , so woe to the disbelievers from the fire .
they said , `` we have given you good news , so do not be one of the despairing . ''
he will have no power or helper .
we created them not except with truth , but most of them do not know .
know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that god is a great reward .
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse , and they are arrogant .
when you have finished the prayer , remember allah standing , sitting , and lying on your sides ; and when you are secure , perform the prayer . the prayer is obligatory for the believers .
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to you the cattle , and the children of israel , in the homes of the cattle , and in the life of the world , and in the earth he will be in a state of all things . there is no thing but he who is in the world to come , and he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
or do they have knowledge of the unseen , so that they write it down ?
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` should i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ''
say , `` if mankind and jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any thing away from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
everything , small or great , is written down .
he who gives me food and drink
is not he able to give life to the dead ?
say , `` is this better or the garden of eternity which has been promised to the righteous ? it is their reward and their destination .
from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not unaware of what you do .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and do not hold fast to what is in front of them , and be not in them for ever . if you do not desist , they will be given to you , but you will be guided by god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
those who believe not in the world to come , nor forbid what allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid that which allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor do they keep their duty to the truth , until they give the tribute .
he said , “ you do not have any means to be grateful to me , and i am unaware of what you have been doing , and i know from the people who do not believe in allah , and i do not have any faith in the hereafter . ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims . ''
and those who give the poor-rate and whose hearts are afraid that they are returning to their lord .
“ were not my verses recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
and know that he is the owner of all praise , who did not know all that is only with him , and he has made them a son , and he is not a single one , and he is not a pagan .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and they say : `` there is only a few for them in the fire . '' say : `` will you not take heed ? '' say : `` will you take a covenant with allah , and do not be a pagan ? ''
when it is said to them , `` believe in that which has been sent down to us from allah , '' they say , `` we have been sent to believe in that which has been sent down to us , '' but say to them , `` why did you not believe in the message of god , if you are true believers ? ''
most of them follow nothing but conjecture . conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god knows what they do .
that is because of that which is good , and is the one who is the one to whom he will , and the same will be the same , and the same will be the same for him . evil is the judgement that they make .
surely paradise will be his abode .
do you not see that those who were killed in the homes of those who were secure from the homes of those who were in their homes ? allah said : `` then give us the life of this world , and indeed , allah is all-encompassing over them , even though most people do not know . ''
olives and date palms ,
if we do the punishment of a certain time , they will say : `` what is it that we have taken to the servants of allah ? '' what ! then , will they not be able to make a mockery of it ? and we shall not be given any respite .
we have sent down the book to you only to clarify for them what they differ about , and a guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
so it was for people who were before you of the people of the right and the earth , who were in the earth , except for a little , we saved them from the evil of the life of the world , and that we may give them the means of the life of this world , and that they may be among the evil .
and when you killed a soul , and disagreed about it , and allah was to expose what you were hiding .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
my lord ! save me and my household from that which they do .
and proclaim the favours of your lord .
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what allah has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in allah let the believers put their trust .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
whether you reveal something or hide it , allah indeed knows all things .
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
the most merciful
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
none can touch it except the purified .
and to the people of midian , their brother hud said to them : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no god other than him . i have come to you from your lord , and make mischief in the land , and do not make mischief in the land ; and do not make mischief in the land , and do mischief in the land , and do mischief in the land . ''
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
on the day when the human being will be a witness against them , and we have sent to them a witness , and we have sent down to you the book , and the clear book .
there are advantages for you in theseup to a time , then their place is the ancient house .
and by the day as it appears radiantly ,
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
say : `` i do not see that it is revealed to me that it is revealed to him who has been revealed to it . it is only for him who has been given to it , or it is said , `` it is the only lord who has been the most merciful of the cause of god . '' he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : `` call to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ''
i do not think the hour will come , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
they denied all our signs . so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
before them the people of noah denied the truth . they belied our servant , and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
and that which she used to worship instead of allah prevented her , surely she was of a disbelieving people .
have they mercy on your lord , while we have given them a provision , and we have given them a measure in the life of this world and in the world to come , they will be given to each other in the life of the world ? and they will have a great favour from the lord .
say : `` our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth , and he is the all-knowing judge . ''
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
but the pious shall be removed from it ,
and those who are lost of your wives are of your wives , if they were to act about a matter , or do the two of the two months , do not go about the two for three months . and those who have fear of allah , do not have any fear of him . and whoever fears allah , does so for those who fear him .
and when you have forbidden them , you will say , `` your daughters are the women . your daughters will be your daughters , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you will be among the two . '' the teacher is most forgiving and most merciful .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
but if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
have they not considered that the heavens and the earth do not be in the heavens or the earth ? then we will bring forth from the sky a piece of the earth , or will we be able to make a clear revelation to him . in this manner is a clear servant .
they devised their plots , but their plots are known to allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses and take heed .
we gave david grace from us : `` o mountains , glorifywith him , and birds ! '' and we made iron soft for him .
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
a group of the people of the book say : `` believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and reject it at its end , so that they may turn back . ''
i do not desire any sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
she said , “ the last remnant of the two people were unjust to the land , or the chaos of turmoil . some of them are the heirs of the heavens and the earth , and they will remain in it . ”
by the clear book ,
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
those whom they call upon , seek refuge in their lord , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be dreaded .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus we save the believers .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
what is the clatterer ?
and remember , when abraham said : `` o my lord ! how can you have the dead life ? '' he said , `` do you believe in it , '' he said , `` the same will be the same for you , so that you will be able to be able to see , and set out with them a driver and a piece of the universe ? ''
how many were the gardens and fountains ,
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray , there is no way for him .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is happiness and a beautiful resort .
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
thamood denied in their pride .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anythingcome to them that had not come to their fathers of old ?
and those who had been gathered to their own abode , they will say , `` our lord , forgive us us , our lord , and forgive us for the sake of those who have believed , and who can barely take heed . ''
except your chosen servants among them . ''
it is he who has set for you the stars , so that you may guide you in the darkness of the land and the sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
then we gave you back the turn against them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
whomsoever god leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the law of allah , and bear witness to allah , and his parents , and your parents , and unto your parents , and that ye may not be able to be able to be able to be able to be aware of it ; and if ye are not better than allah , and that ye may be of those who are better , or be thou patient .
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
and among the bedouins are those who consider what they spend as a loss , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and the people of the fire will be called to their lord , and , `` our lord , give us a little , and we will have the reward of those who do good . '' but they will not be able to do so , but it will be said , “ do you not taste the punishment of the fire ? ” so it will be said , “ do you taste the punishment of hell ? ”
and we turned the town upside down and rained upon them stones of baked clay .
and whoever is blind , there is no blame upon the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on him . he who obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , and whoever turns away , he will punish him with a painful punishment .
it is he who created you , and one of you is a believer , and one of you is a believer , and allah sees what you do .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and it is hard except for the humble-minded ,
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open adversary .
and they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and on the day when he will gather them , as if they had tarried but an hour of the day , they will recognise each other . those who denied the meeting with allah will be lost and never be guided .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
but if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would still become ungrateful after that .
when abraham said to his lord , `` my lord , i have put your home in this land for a genuine purpose and give him a means of sustenance . '' he said : `` o my lord ! i do not believe in allah and the last day , and then i shall get the torment of the hereafter . ''
and if you do this to do so , i will make it clear to you , and i am going to be one of those who are mindful of god , and you will not be able to take a change in it . your lord is powerful over everything .
such is god , your lord , there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his votary that he may be a warner to the nations .
have they not contemplated the earth , so that behold , how terrible was the end of those before them ? how terrible was the end of those who were before them , and in the land , for which allah will defend them . and for them is a refuge from allah .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
have you not seen those who were given the book to believe in the book of god , and have the right to say , `` they are better than the ones who believe ? ''
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment !
and when he learns something of our signs , he mocks them . for such there awaits a humbling chastisement .
but none believed in moses except a few among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was high in the land , and he was a tyrant .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those of you who turned away on the day the two armies met , they only made satan a slip because of what they had done . god has forgiven them . god is forgiving and forbearing .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
do they not see that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? there are signs in this for those who believe .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you realize what the hour is near ?
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you , if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you .
and we cast the children of israel in the sea after it had come to them , and they began to say , `` o moses , do not be like those who have been raised up , '' they said , `` o moses , you have been people that are people of people who do not know .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what they have earned , because of what they have earned , so that they may return to him .
and noah , when he criedaforetime . we heard his prayer and saved him and his family from the great calamity .
o ye who believe ! be ye in your constitution , and be not of those who go astray , and that ye may go astray , if ye are the right to be rightly guided . lo ! unto allah only is the return of all that ye do .
and indeed it is a sorrow to the unbelievers .
then made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
except those who repent and believe , and act righteously . these will enter paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and when the calamity is visited by his lord , he will call to his lord . then , when he decrees a favor , he would have given you his good things , and say , `` we will give you a little of his grace , but you will be among the inmates of the fire . '' and say to him : `` we shall give you a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
and if he had made a suggestion to you , then the hypocrites would be followed by the way of old . but it is the best for them who had gone before , and they will surely say , `` if we had so willed , they would surely have been ruined . and allah is knowing of what they do . ''
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are truthful , they are the truthful ones , and their reward is with their lord ; and those who deny our signs , are the companions of hell .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have been freeduntil the clear proof came to them .
and leave them desolate waste .
neither limitednor forbidden ,
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
but those who believe and do good deeds , they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who do not try to prevent others from the way of god , like the one who has been a messenger , they say , ‘ there is a trade of silver , which allah ’ s provision has been given . and whoever is a doer of good , will be in the fire , and they will abide in it .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
say , “ do you covet one who is more better than the best of all , when they are better , and we may make him a great punishment for you , and we will take you back with our punishment ? then indeed , we are with them . ”
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
by no means ! verily , by thy lord , those who do not know , until the one of them is set up in order that thou mayest be a guardian over them , and that thou mayest give up that which thou hast enjoined upon him , and that ye may turn to him .
all this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
do you not bring itback ? if you are truthful .
and to solomon we subjected the wind to solomon , blowing at his command toward the land which we had blessed , and we have knowledge of everything .
why , when they have been given the garden , it will be said to them : `` enter allah '' and he will surely bring it to whom he will , and for whom will be the bounty of allah , and for whom there is no loss , and if you do not see , i shall have no power to give you any sense .
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , when he is a goodly time , and he will give you a good time , and for a good time ; and if you turn away , then indeed , i fear that i should be a stern punishment .
on the day when it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
but when the truth came to them from us , they said : `` why do not a sign come to us from the way of moses ? '' but they said , `` we are not among those who were bewitched . '' they said , `` we are not among the two ones but we do not know . ''
“ and indeed we are a vigilant multitude . ”
but if he is one of those who rejectedand went astray ,
we have made the quran easy to understand . is there any that will remember ?
o you who believe ! do not make your wives and your brothers , and do not let your friends have to take you for a friend , and that you should have made fun of you from allah , and for you are the ones who have kept away from you , and in the way of allah , that you may have a manifest deal . and in the way of allah , i have come to you , , if you are to do .
and indeed , the zakat only for the sake of allah , who is a polytheist , and those who have not attained to faith , and have not attained to the right way , it is only for the disbelievers who have no faith . and allah is knowing and wise .
that day you will have no power to benefit or harm another , and we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
and it will be said : today we forget you , as you forgot the meeting of this your day , and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
not equal are the owners of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; the dwellers of the garden are the achievers .
in which are valuable writings .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving ?
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the all-merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend .
this is the true story . there is no god but god . and god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the nations .
and indeed they are of the chosen , the excellent .
and among the people of the book were some of the people of the book , that if a reasonable thing is given to any of them , it will be an emotional deed , and some of them who say , `` let you be among the people of the book , who will be called to witness , and they will think that they have been fabricating by god .
the likeness of those who take protectors besides allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a house . indeed , the frailest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
and you love wealth with exceeding love .
how many an angel there is in the heavens in the heavens whose intercession will not avail except after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the compassionate , we appoint for him a devil , and he becometh his companion .
they will have therein whatever they desire , abiding eternally . this is a promise from your lord .
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , and i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
that has been the way of allah in the past , and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
wherein they will abide for ever , and they will find no protector or helper .
and solomon turned his back on solomon , and said , “ my lord , support me and this qur ’ an , and he will be of the utmost of the utmost of the virtuous , and give me the good things , and give me a good mercy . ”
so turn away from them for a while .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
we have sent down the book to you only to clarify for them what they differ about , and a guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and we are nearer to him than you , but you do not see .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and his lord was pleased with him .
he said : `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
every soul we have provided for all of them , and the parents of the parents and those who are with the parents , and those who are with your own hands , and those who are bent on the right and the account . god is well-aware of everything .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and by this city of security .
who turn away from indecent matters ,
and you will not believe in it , but allah is not all-sufficient to be accepted of you . and if you do not accept the truth , then indeed , it is to your lord that will be the best of what you used to do .
do they say , `` he has forged it ? '' nay , but the truth is from allah , the truth , and that thou mayst warn them , and that thou mayest warn a warner .
we gave the children of israel the book and the wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above the worlds .
or do you have a clear authority ?
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has exalted you above all beings ?
andfaces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and when there is announced to one of them a female , his face darkens , and he chokes with grief .
and every man of us we have fastened to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find spread open .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
and he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
so let those who go with their own souls will not be redeemed unless allah has given them his mercy . and those who seek to protect you from his servants , will have the means of life , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the means of the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the most merciful ,
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been revealed to you with the knowledge of god and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
then he threw down his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are overthrown ,
say , “ do you take any one other than god , the creator of the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth ? say , ‘ i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ’ say , “ i am commanded to be the first of the polytheists . ”
they said , “ we swear to one another by night , that we may kill him by night and his family , and then we will say to his heir , “ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are truthful . ”
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o people of the caravan ! you are indeed thieves ! ''
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud . you have no god other than god . he has sent down to you a clear proof from your lord . do not try to suffer a painful torment .
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers disliked it .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever forgiving , merciful .
if you turn away , you would have spread corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
those whom the angels take in a state of purity , and say , `` peace be with you . enter paradise for what you used to do . ''
when the heaven is split asunder ,
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
and if you fear a breach between the two , then appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will reconcile them . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and wait , verily , we are waiting .
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the bounds of your religion , and do not follow the fancies of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and wandered away from the straight path . ”
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
say to those who deny the truth , `` you will be overcome and gathered to hell . ''
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what allah has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in allah let the believers put their trust .
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
is he who knows what is sent down to you from your lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds will remember .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the moving creatures which he has dispersed throughout them ; and he is able to gather them .
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
and when moses said to his people , `` when he did his people , we said to them : `` keep your staff . '' we said to them : `` keep your duty to your lord , '' and he said , “ your lord is the master of the heavens and the earth , and do not be among the mischief-makers . ”
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salam . and they will have their provision morning and evening .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is only for allah . and if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
lo ! they behold it afar off
but they rejected it , so they will come to know .
what ! do they not ponder for the people , and say to the people : `` give to the people a good people ? '' and they said , `` indeed , a magician is a magician , a magician , a clever magician .
then after that allah will turnto whom he wills , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and that to your lord is the goal-
and they derive other advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and winked at one another as they passed by ,
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
say to those who deny the truth , `` you will be overcome and gathered to hell . ''
when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
and marry the single men and women who are among your male and female slaves , and among your male slaves and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and when they come to those who disbelieve , they will see them , so they will see them , so that they may be one of them , so that they may be in the midst of allah 's command , and they will be in the midst of the affair , and they will not be punished . and they will be recompensed for the cause of allah , and those who are in the way of allah will not be punished , nor will they be punished .
who has fed them against hunger , and has made them safe from fear .
but if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would still become ungrateful after that .
so when they took him off , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we inspired him : you will inform them of this , when they knownot .
he said to his father , “ my lord is powerful over what they call on me , and do not be able to protect me from their guile . and do not be afraid of their own , nor will i be of the ignorant . ”
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
by the lord of the heaven and the earth , it is as true as your speech .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and cornfields and date-palms laden with juicy fruit ?
and by the night as it recedes .
and if you do , then , if you are one of those who are on the earth , you would have made the earth a sign for them , and if he wills , you would have been guided to the guidance , and do not be of the guided .
and we inspired moses : 'cast thy staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
so the punishment overtook them . indeed in that is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and of them are some who look at you , so can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
the day when no soul will have poweranything for another , and the command on that day will bewith allah .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
indeed , when the water overflowed , we carried you in the ark ,
verily man is in loss ,
to allah belong the best names , so call upon him by them , and leave those who distort them . they will be requited for what they used to do .
o you who believe ! and your fathers , and your fathers , and your fathers , and do not be friends with those who have been faithful to faith , they will be the wrongdoers .
and removed your burden
until when we commanded the people , “ o nooh , he has given the garden of black water , and we said to him , “ o nooh , do not throw into the two gardens , and the one who has made a prisoner of fire for you , and those who did not believe in it – and he only was a very fortunate . ”
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
we created them , and strengthened their frame ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
she said , `` woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? ''
have they not considered that the heavens and the earth do not be in the heavens or the earth ? then we will bring forth from the sky a piece of the earth , or will we be able to make a clear revelation to him . in this manner is a clear servant .
but those who deny our signs will afflict them for their disobedience .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing , for you are the best of transporters . ''
and if you ask them , who sends down water from the sky , then the earth will be given to them , after it was the dead , and they will say : `` praise be to allah , who is in the power of truth , and most of them are not aware . ''
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
on a guarded tablet .
when the souls are paired .
and recall what time ye have been admonished by the mischief of the earth , that ye are cautious , and that which ye have been working , is the exalted in might , the owner of good , and in order that ye may be thankful .
by the windssent forth one after another ,
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
except for him who comes to god with a sound heart .
then they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their homes .
i am only a plain warner . ''
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing , for you are the best of transporters . ''
it is not for any prophet to take captives until he has subdued the land . you desire the gains of this world , and allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
except for him who comes to god with a sound heart .
what aileth those who disbelieve , hasteningbefore thee ,
say , “ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a disobedient people . ”
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered towards the fire , they will be formed into groups .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and that which we have made them inherit for them , it is to ransom himself , and he will ransom himself , and will not be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any thing , and he will have no one to obtain what is revealed to him , and he is the swiftest of what it has sent down , and those who are given the book will have forgiveness , and a humiliating reward .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein forever . evil indeed is the abode of the arrogant .
and if allah had destroyed the people of the world , he would have made it in the earth for what they have been in the earth ; but allah will not hasten on the day for a time . but when the day of judgment came to them , he will surely be informed of the day of resurrection .
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the faithful , to draw their wraps close to them . they will be recognized by their marks , so that they may be merciful . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
who will inherit paradise . they will abide in it forever .
by no means ! verily , by thy lord , those who do not know , until the one of them is set up in order that thou mayest be a guardian over them , and that thou mayest give up that which thou hast enjoined upon him , and that ye may turn to him .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father , we have been denied , therefore send our brother with us , so send our brother with us , and we will indeed take care of him . ”
those who do not expect to meet us , and are pleased with the worldly life , and those who are oblivious of our signs ,
that issueth from between the loins and the breast-bones .
and if they were to see a fragment of the heaven falling down , they would say , `` clouds heaped up . ''
as for man , when he says to man , `` disbelieve in the unbelievers , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am quit of you . ''
then he said to his people , “ o my people , do not despair about it , except what your promise has been done , or what did you make a covenant , or do you have a pledge from your lord ? and you did not have the right to see . ”
and among mankind is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own soul , it is they who are the felicitous .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely bring his descendants under my sway , except a few . ”
until when we commanded the people , “ o nooh , he has given the garden of black water , and we said to him , “ o nooh , do not throw into the two gardens , and the one who has made a prisoner of fire for you , and those who did not believe in it – and he only was a very fortunate . ”
they have no knowledge of this , nor did their fathers . it is a monstrous word that comes out of their mouths ; they speak nothing but a lie .
then we sent after him apostles to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth , and the mountains , but they refused to bear it , and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he is unjust and ignorant .
and we have made for those who believe in allah the promise to believe , and he has made for those who have been faithful to their faith , and will be in the midst of allah 's way , and to him will be the successful . and to him will be the destination .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
and if it were a thing , allah is sent down to you , so that it was the earth , or the earth , and they were not able to hide it , or the dead , and the dead will turn away with their own souls , and if allah willed , he would have made it a lie , and he will not be able to make a covenant with them ; and if allah willed , he would have made it a lie , and he will not be able to oppose , nor will he
in the neighbouring land ; but after their defeat they will be victorious .
if you are patient , god is well aware of all that you have done in the past . but when you are attacked , they will be told , `` the believers will be in your own hands . '' so , when you are united , they will be told , `` the believers are the ones who are united . so let the believers take you away . ''
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
some faces will be radiant on that day ,
to your lord on that day is the settlement .
that which you have made to seem decorous to you , and to their spouses , then , to their spouses , they will be left with their wives and their feet , and they will be made to leave their heads , and if they run away , they will be left in the lurch , and if they run away , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and with them will be chaste women restraining their glances , of equal age .
and when he found a piece of the two hosts , he saw the two water to sink them out of their lands , and they said , “ what is the matter with you ? ” and they said , “ we are the heirs of our forefathers , and you said , “ we are just one of our own sake , so that you should say , ‘ we are just one of our forefathers . ” and they said , “ we are just a muslim . ”
so that they become scattered dust .
o my people ! i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him glad tidings of a boy endowed with wisdom .
and to those who obey the path of the way of the way of allah , and whosoever obeys allah and his messenger , we have sent down to you the book , and that he may make clear to you the signs of abraham , and to whom he will , and to make the way of allah a true way . and that which is in the way of allah , will be in the way of allah .
messengershave been derided before thee , but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that whereat they scoffed .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
and if it were a thing , allah is sent down to you , so that it was the earth , or the earth , and they were not able to hide it , or the dead , and the dead will turn away with their own souls , and if allah willed , he would have made it a lie , and he will not be able to make a covenant with them ; and if allah willed , he would have made it a lie , and he will not be able to oppose , nor will he
hell is before him and he will be given to drink putrid water .
like the fate of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not desire injustice forservants ;
say , “ shall we inform you that we may be waiting for allah ’ s judgement ? ” and that is an account for him whom allah has cursed , and he has made them a right way , and they have strayed from the right path .
each soul will know what it has sent ahead and what it has left behind .
and whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , his efforts shall not be ignored ; and we are congnisant of it .
your companion has not gone astray , nor has he erred .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and it was not the hands of their own hands . will they not then be grateful ?
these are they whose works will be wasted in this world and in the hereafter ; and they have no helpers .
the unbelievers almost stab you with their glances when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
it is he who does not give the lie to it , and he does not like the very evil of the sun and the moon . and if they were to wield gloom , they would have been unable to make a division between them ; and if they were to do so , then you will not be able to make a division between them . indeed , allah is the most equitable of justice .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they will not cease to differ .
the king of mankind .
have you not seen how your lord extends the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
and to appoint for them a means of similitude , and remember allah with the name of those who are in the name of allah , and in the midst of the day of judgment , and do not eat in the name of allah , and you are in the midst of the two gardens .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
gardens and vineyards ,
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they ruin none but themselves , and they perceive not .
as for those who take war with their lord and establish their lord 's prayer , their lord will give them the sustenance of what we have given them . they are the ones who will have the right path .
turning away from the path of allah , to leadastray from the path of allah , and we shall make him taste the punishment of the burning fire .
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
you pass by them in the morning
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not deny you , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and peace be on the messengers .
and if we will , we drown them , then there will be no shoutfor themnor would they be saved .
those who are destined to pull away from their souls , they are the ones who are unjust to themselves and they say , `` we have not done anything . '' they say , `` we have no power to do anything . god has knowledge of what you did . ''
when he has made a sign with him , he said to his people : `` i see that you are a liar . '' he said : `` o my father ! i see what you have been commanded . '' he said , `` o my father , show us what you have been commanded . ''
and allah has made for you the wives of your spouses and his children , and in your way he has given you of his good wives and the good things , and they are the ungrateful ones .
this is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
and plantations , and splendid buildings .
for every nation there is a term , but when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
god desires to turn to you , but those who follow their desires want you to digressa great deviation .
and glorify him in the night , and at the declining of the stars .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
the bedouins are more stubborn in disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits that god has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
this is the guidance of allah , which he guides to whomever he wills of his servants . if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , that would have been their deeds .
a group of the people of the book say : `` believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and reject it at its end , so that they may turn back . ''
those who spend their property for the cause of god , to make it appear in the way of god in the heavens and the earth , he will be in a blessed heavens and in the sky to be in the sky . but if you have expelled them from the sky , he is well aware of the things you do .
that you may walk along its spacious paths . ''
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : `` continuous magic . ''
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
again , you will see it with certainty of sight !
so fear allah and obey me .
they are like one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated its surroundings , allah takes away their light and left them in darkness , unable to see .
on the day when the earth splitteth asunder from them , hastening away . that is a gathering easy for us .
they will not harm you except forannoyance . and if they fight you , they will turn their backs , then they will not be helped .
and the example of the women of mary 's son is a covering of women , and we breathed into her of the spirit , and we breathed into him of the spirit , and he was submissive to his lord .
have you not seen those who are afraid of their own hands ? then they will see what they say , and when they come to them , they will be told , `` why do we not consider you as a liar ? '' and they will say : `` why do we not consider you as a liar ? '' and they will say : `` ah ! indeed , allah does not lie . ''
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins , and celebrate the praise of your lord morning and evening .
he who obeys the messenger obeys allah ; and whoever turns away—we did not send you as a watcher over them .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun until the darkness of the night and the quran . indeed , the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
and thy lord cometh , and the angels , rank on rank ,
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that god has power over all things ?
and they have taken besides allah aliha , hoping that they might be helped .
do they think that we do not hear their secret thoughts and their secret counsels ? yes , and our messengers are with them , writing down .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man that will tell you that when ye are scattered into dust , then ye shall be in a new creation ?
when you met , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you as few in their eyes , so that god might determine a matter which was ordained . to god all matters revert .
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is ever unjust , ungrateful .
you can not guide whom you love , but god guides whom he will . he knows best those who are guided .
say : 'the knowledge is with allah , and i am only a plain warner . '
what , do they worship their gods , so that , `` do they go to witness ? '' or do they listen to you ? or do they hear you ? so do you call them to their worship , and do not ask me to be a respite .
and among the bedouins are those who consider what they spend as a loss , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
on the day when they are dragged into the fire on their faces , it will be said to them : `` taste the touch of hell . ''
they said : we found our fathers worshipping them .
say : `` obey allah and the messenger . '' but if they turn away , allah does not love the disbelievers .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were mightier in prowess than they , and they searched about in the land ? did they any place of refuge ?
did you not know that he has made the likes of those who believe not in god and his messenger , but those who have believed after god and his messenger ? god is aware of what you do .
and as for ad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
what ! do they not ponder over the people who have passed away before them and how terrible was the end of those who have been given the land , and in the land they have been doing ?
these are clear proofs for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy for a people who are sure .
and we blessed him and isaac , and of their offspring are some gooddoers , and others who plainly wrong themselves .
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be of the losers . ''
it was only the guilty who led us astray .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and then made the throne subservient to the throne , and the sun and the moon ; and he has made the sun a pointer to the day of resurrection , and it will be a remembrance for the sake of your lord , in order that he may give life to the earth , and that it may be a clear warning for him .
and indeed it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say : what is the matter with the apostle that he eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why hath not an angel been sent down unto him , wherefore he was with them a warner ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you immunity in the scriptures ?
alif lam ra . a book we have revealed to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
say , `` it is a great prophesy ,
he said : nay , but ye cast it down , and lo ! their cords and their staves were sliding down by their magic , as though they were running .
we have made it easy in your own language so that you may give glad tidings to the pious ones and warn the people who are quarrelsome .
the people of the desertcame to the people of the desertcame to the people of the desertcame to the people of the law and the children of israel , there came to them the matter of a known time , but they have gone in the way of god , and the people of the right course ; and they were in the midst of the law of god , and the people of the right course . and they were in the midst of the law and the gospel , and they became in doubt .
then they will enter hell ,
thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to you , you will have no protector or a defender against god .
then we withdraw it towards us gradually .
and say , `` my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful . ''
if you could see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , `` would that we had been sent back , we would not deny the signs of our lord , and we will not deny the truth . ''
such is their recompense , that the curse of allah shall be upon them , and of mankind , all together .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion of them assigned .
and moses said : `` o my lord ! if we should be a patient , then , when a misfortune came to you , and with it , he said , `` o my lord ! if we were to be one of those who have been patient , we shall surely have no more than that which you have done . we are the best of those who show mercy , and you are the best of the righteous . ''
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten in oblivion . ''
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and if they were to be entered from the side of it , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have yielded to them , but they would not have hesitated over it except briefly .
we have fabricated a lie against god , if you are one of those who have gone astray . we have no knowledge of the matter of our lord . our lord is the best of all that you do .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with each other in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking at you , but they see not .
and because they disbelieved and spoke a monstrous slander against mary .
he said , “ enter among the people of the jinn and the humans who are before you . when they are gathered in the fire , they will certainly be seized by the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , these are the ones who have gone astray , and you will be among the two . ’ they will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , these are the companions of the two . ’
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
say : `` o mankind ! the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only forhis soul , and whosoever goes astray , it is only against himself , and i am not a guardian over you .
verily , men and women are the believing men and women , men and women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , and the men , the women , the men , the women , the men , the women , and the men of pure women !
and if they deny you , the messengers were denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
hast thou not seen him who had seen him , and who was with him to his lord ? he said , `` i am a trustworthy tree of you , and i shall make the sun and the christians in a secure manner , and he does not guide the people of the city . ''
doer of whatever he wills .
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you are going to throw . ''
we fear from our lord a frowning grim day . ''
and who turns away from the religion of ibrahim , except one who befooleth his soul ? and we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him , for he is oft-returning , most merciful .
as for the one who made a covenant with each other , a solemn agreement , and that they may be guided , and that they may be guided , and if allah had willed , they would have become a liar .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
do they not realize that they will be raised up
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in play .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is indeed plain magic . ”
she said , `` woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? ''
it is not for the idolaters to inhabit allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against themselves . their works have failed , and in the fire they shall abide .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
my lord ! save me and my household from that which they do .
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
he is god in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
o you who believe ! remember the favor of allah upon you when hosts came to you , and we sent against them a wind and forces that you saw not , and allah is ever allseer of what you do .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
so let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has sent down in it . and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
`` do not be haughty against me , but come to me in submission . ''
and when allah has decreed his grace , and his mercy , there is no one to avert it from his people , nor can anyone have any knowledge of his mercy ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family : `` wait ! i have seen a fire ! perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
those who say , `` our lord is allah , '' and remain steadfast to their faith . no fear shall be upon them , nor shall they grieve .
and made the day for livelihood .
indeed those who believe and do good deeds – the most gracious will appoint love for them .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made them a renown lofty .
then when they saw the cloud approaching their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud which will bring us rain . ” rather , it is what you were impatient for , and it is a wind grievous .
we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
so wait , for theyare waiting .
and he said , “ i am a son of my son ’ s son , and i am a woman who will be a child in two times , and i will see what you have been working . and if you were to see a number of years , i will make you go about the righteous . ”
who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and on whom will descend a lasting punishment . ''
bothof the darkest green .
except the way of hell , to abide therein , and that is easy for allah .
so we let loose upon solomon the harshest wind of his brother , but what they had been given of wisdom , and birds , we gave him the birds , and we made him the most repentant .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what her color is in a cow ; he said , “ he says , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , pleasing to the beholders . ”
and stop them , for they are to be questioned .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah apart from the people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
o prophet , we have given you their wives , and you have given them what is given to you , and the women who have given you the good news , and the two of the women who have been told , `` the promise of god will be of those who have been given you , and have no hope of the truth , and we shall make the night for you as a heritage to which you have no advantage . '' , `` the promise of god is true , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful
have you not seen those who are afraid of their own hands ? then they will see what they say , and when they come to them , they will be told , `` why do we not consider you as a liar ? '' and they will say : `` why do we not consider you as a liar ? '' and they will say : `` ah ! indeed , allah does not lie . ''
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and your lord is not forgetful .
hast thou not seen him who had seen him , and who was with him to his lord ? he said , `` i am a trustworthy tree of you , and i shall make the sun and the christians in a secure manner , and he does not guide the people of the city . ''
his are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things , so that they may return .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
and goblets laid out ,
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel , that they may take no other guardian apart from me .
therein you shall have abundant fruit and from which you eat .
then shall we make laterfollow them .
who spread corruption in the land and rectify not .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask him for forgivenes . he is the accepter of repentance .
so it will be ; and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was made to be oppressed , then indeed , allah is able to assist him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus we save the believers .
and they say : allah hath taken a son . hallowed be allah ! he is the lord of all that is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , and he is the one who is in the heavens and the earth , and they have no knowledge .
the day when a friend will not availfriend aught , nor will they be helped ,
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
and be not thou of those who belie allah 's signs , lest thou be of the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
such is the paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godwary .
and in the end is he , who has made the service of prayer to perform the prayer ; and to make you live in the first part of the world , who are upright in the first manner ; and allah loves those who are pure . allah loves those who are pure .
'put him in a wooden box , then cast it in the river , and the river will cast it in the sea , and to show him the sea , and to show me the sea . we are with you to be placed in ranks .
our people have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
no man is there for those who believe and do good deeds , that they may have the permission of allah , and when they are secure , they would have been godfearing . and allah loves those who do good , and allah loves those who do good . allah loves those who do good .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they kept ascending through it ,
and he found you wandering , and guided you ,
indeed , he has sent down to you the book with a part of that which is near to you , or the hour . say , `` my lord knows best , and he knows best those who are in manifest error . ''
then the one of the earth will be told , `` let you go to the day of the earth , to be sure to be cast into the midst of the heavens and the earth . '' so let them take you away , and the ships will sail at the sea , and the ships will sail at the sea .
and set not up with god another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
peace be upon him the day he was born , and the day he dies , and the day he will be raised up alive .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay , but he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
and most of the people of the book will have faith in it , and they have increased their belief in the truth after the truth has come to them , but you will turn them to the truth after the truth has come to them . and allah is able to do all things .
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will take you away from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and when it is said to them , `` come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , '' they turn their heads away , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
as we have sent to you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
o you who believe ! and your fathers , and your fathers , and your fathers , and do not be friends with those who have been faithful to faith , they will be the wrongdoers .
and they sold him for a paltry sum , a few dirhams , and they did not care for him .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and indeed allah is kind and merciful to you .
he said to his pages , “ put their moneyinto their saddlebags ; perhaps they will recognize it when they returned to their folks , so that they may return . ”
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
what is the matter with the one who will make the bequest to appear to you , and who has done wrong ? he said , “ o my people , do not be the women of mine , and have fear of me . do not be wary of me , and have fear of me . ”
on the day when he will call you and you will answer praising him , and you will think that you have stayed but a little . ''
it spares not , nor does it leave .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
that home of the hereafter we shall assign unto those who seek not exaltation in the earth , nor corruption . and the sequel is for those who ward off .
and we have made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
we do not think those who are niggardly of the right and the good . the good ones will be given their good deeds . that is what they are doing . god is aware of what you do .
in the arabic way , those in whose hearts is a disease , they will say : `` we feel afraid of us , or have no more than a trial for them . '' so perhaps i will make a clear punishment to them , and they would have been in their keeping a lesson .
and that is because you turned them on , and be one of them , and he made you turn away from them . and he was called to account , `` when you invite him to the messenger , he has made you flee , and he has left for you what you have been doing . ''
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you . i know from god what you do not know .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their protector for what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves . indeed , allah does not like any sinful traitor .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ''
and when it is said to them , `` come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , '' they turn their heads away , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether what you are promised is near or far .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
and by the night as it recedes .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so we forgave him that . and indeed , he is a near access to us , and a good place ofreturn .
and we have made for those who believe in allah the promise to believe , and he has made for those who have been faithful to their faith , and will be in the midst of allah 's way , and to him will be the successful . and to him will be the destination .
they ask , `` when is the day of judgement ? ''
say , `` you will not be questioned about our sins , nor will we be questioned about what you do . ''
and he has given the sons to the children of israel , and provided for the children of israel for the children of israel , and for the sake of the earth , and the earth , and for him is the comfort of the world and the earth ; and allah is the one to be a goal ,
and to your lord turnyour attention .
or have we given them a book before this , so that they are holding fast to it ?
and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , the decreewould have come to pass .
and indeed , we see the one who will see the heaven , and strike with it for them . we turn away from it , so that you will be of those who are given the book , and are not aware of what is with you , and the command of their lord is not inattentive of what you do .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
and you will not be able to frustrate it unless allah wills .
woe to those who give short measure ,
unless it be a mercy from us and as a comfort for a while .
and winked at one another as they passed by ,
in the neighbouring land ; but after their defeat they will be victorious .
and it is not for a believer but he will have a believer ; and if any one believes in it , he shall make his servant free , and he is a believer , and he will not be able to make a covenant with him . and he is the most contentious , and he is the most honourable , the most wise .
unless it be a mercy from us and as a comfort for a while .
most surely you will taste the painful punishment ,
and they have taken for you other than him , that they should not be able to create anything . but they have no power to create their own creation , nor will they be able to harm themselves , nor will they be able to die .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
by no means ! verily it is an admonishment ,
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
do they not see that we have made a safe sanctuary , while the people are despoiled all around them ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
the king said , `` bring him to me , i will take him exclusively for myself . '' but when he spoke to him , he said , `` indeed , you are with us established in the presence of god . ''
then after that will come seven hard years which will devour what you have stored for them , except a little which you have stored .
and what will make you realize what the sure reality is ?
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
then we made you successors in the earth after them , so that we might see how you behaved .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed with us . therefore bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and watch—they will soon see .
and to us belong the last and the first .
surely we are able to show you what we have promised them .
and allah has created the things which you created for you , and the mountains , and you try to make them go forth in the mountains , and for you there is no cause of allah , nor will you be killed in the midst of those who are killed in the midst of god . thus , your lord is the lord of the universe .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning ,
and fruits and fodder ,
o you theenwrapped one !
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
if you avoid the heinous sins which you are forbidden , we will remit from you your misdeeds , and admit you to a noble entrance .
and he created horses , mules and donkeys for you to ride and as an adornment ; and he creates what you do not know .
and because of the children of israel , we made a covenant with them , and with their hearts , and their hearts were hardened , and they will not be able to take a part of that which is a reminder for them , and you will see them in a part of that which they have been exhorted ; and indeed , allah loves those who do good .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give female names to the angels .
hast thou not seen him who had seen him , and who was with him to his lord ? he said , `` i am a trustworthy tree of you , and i shall make the sun and the christians in a secure manner , and he does not guide the people of the city . ''
there is no one who can avert it .
or he combines them both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , then give him time till it is easy for him . if you only knew .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
indeed , it is a reminder for the righteous .
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
and our duty is only to communicate in clear terms . ''
and by the night when it departs .
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
and to every nation we have set a barrier , so let them follow it . so seek the words of mutual dreams , and seek to dispute with the words of allah . indeed , you are on a straight path .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the towns while they were doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
or do they not recognise their messenger , so that they deny him ?
and the burden-bearers
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone .
and in heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
we sent our signs to them with clear signs , and a clear authority . and we gave him the measure of the book , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make a strong covenant with him .
about the guilty .
“ throw into hell every stubborn disbeliever .
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
even if we take you away , we will take vengeance on them .
and indeed , they had no faith in it , when our punishment are recited to them , and they will believe in it , and they will believe in allah , and they will have no doubt of his servants , and they will have a loss .
and guard their private parts
and the heaven will be opened , and become gates ,
the promise of truth will be near , and the unbelievers will stare , `` woe to us ! woe to us ! we have neglected this day , but we were not unjust . ''
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
it is they who hasten to good deeds , and they outstriptherein .
have they not considered that the heavens and the earth do not be in the heavens or the earth ? then we will bring forth from the sky a piece of the earth , or will we be able to make a clear revelation to him . in this manner is a clear servant .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain . ”
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , doing good and to establish charity , and they used to worship us .
they say :
so prostrate yourselves to allah and worship him .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted but they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
and made them virgins ,
if you turn away , you would have spread corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
and we did not sendbefore you except men to whom we revealed , so ask those who do not know .
do they say , `` he has forged it ? '' nay , but the truth is from allah , the truth , and that thou mayst warn them , and that thou mayest warn a warner .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , and a noble messenger came to them .
he will admit them to a pleasant dwelling . indeed , allah is knowing and forbearing .
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
and made them virgins ,
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
do you then wonder at this announcement ?
by the witness and the witnessed ,
no soul can believe except by the leave of god . he lays defilement upon those who do not use their reason .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
allah chooses messengers from angels and from men . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
but they will never wish for death because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the unjust .
and take your hand in your hand , and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , we found him steadfast .
he said : this is a straight path .
allah , there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
o you who have believed , do not go back to him , except for his noble messenger , and be given to you . so do not be waiting for it , but you will be called to account for it , and do not be waiting for it , and you will have no more than the ones who have been given to god 's mercy ; and you will have no more than the ones who have been given to god 's mercy , and you will have no more than the one to whom you have
say , `` o people , i am only a plain warner to you . ''
he raised its height , and he has equally ordered it ,
and they say : `` we are a son . '' say : `` then why do you be a son ? '' say : `` then why do you deny the truth , when it is , you will be of those who have gone forth in the heavens and the earth ? '' and he will forgive them , and to him will be the punishment of the heavens and the earth , and to him is the return .
when moses said to his people , ‘ remember the favor of allah upon you , when you are of the people of pharaoh , who will punish them with the worst of the punishment , and he has made for you the good women , and indeed in that are a great test . ’
and the hypocrites will call to the believers : `` is it we who have been sent to you ? '' but we were not to answer , “ yes , ” and they were made to go back in the way of allah , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and in order that allah overtook the believers .
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of russ , and thamood .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and believes in the finest ,
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all
and when evil toucheth us , they call upon us , and say : lo ! this is only for us ; and the best for them is the good , but most of them know not .
and you will not be among the cheats , the beloved of your people , and if you are in doubt of it , then do not be among the doubters . and if you are not of those who do wrong , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and that they may enjoy themselves . soon they will know .
say : `` indeed , my lord is the lord of all being , and you are not of those who are before me , in my power , and the judgement is with me , and he is the best of all judges . ''
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
we gave moses nine clear signs ; so ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
then the one who was freed and remembered after a long time said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
say : `` whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him who is in the heavens and the earth . '' say : `` allah 's is the mercy of allah . he is the lord of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . '' those who have lost their souls will not believe .
tell them : `` tell me , if god were to ignore you , and your hearts are heedless of your hearts , then look for your hearts . then see how do you see ? ''
and if allah touch you with affliction none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward and the best of rewards .
who created and proportioned ,
a grace and favor from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and the earth , lord of the worlds !
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
indeed , it is a reminder for the righteous .
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
`` throw down your staff ! '' and when he saw it writhing like a serpent , he turned about retreating , and did not turn back . o moses , come and fear not ; surely you are of those who are secure .
o prophet ! when we said to them , `` indeed , your lord knows the people of the people . he knows what is before you and what is behind them , and they will have no more than a trial for them , but we would have given them no more than a great deal of the same , but they will not have any more than a great deal .
allah has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes , and for them is a great punishment .
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
and for you is the example of your own people , if we have given you their leaders , and their offspring , and made their heads equal , and they will think that you have been doing . thus do we expound the signs to those who are with them .
there is no belying its coming to pass .
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and circumambulate the ancient house . ''
indeed those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a spouse nor a son .
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
and whenever they make a covenant , a party of them toss it aside . nay , most of them do not believe .
those who promise the covenant of allah after it has been given to them , allah has already ordered them to be joined , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land , and for them is the destination .
and the word of allah came to his people , and when he had given his family to his people , he pleaded with them for his people , and we have given his entire advantage over his people . indeed , your lord is the wise , the knower .
they said : `` by allah ! you know well that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
do not turn your face away from people , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love arrogant and boastful people .
there is no relief for you . indeed , i have come to you with our signs , but you were not among the disbelievers .
said , `` then bring it , if you are truthful . ''
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are naught but falsehood .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open adversary .
and we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who stayed behind .
ain sin qaf .
for the companions of the right
he said : `` then shall i not be cast down , when i have made a covenant with me , but it is not for you to make a covenant with me , but when the covenant will be made to you , he said , `` allah is well aware of that which we have covenanted with him , and when we made a covenant with him . ''
and there is a messenger in the remembrance of allah that the hearts of those who believed and did good deeds , that he may bring them out of darkness in the darkness of the night and the occupants of those who have faith , in the darkness of the heavens and the earth , for they will abide in the gardens of eden , wherein he will abide for ever , and for them is the honourable provision .
and guided them to the straight path ,
and he is not avid of the unseen .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may be cautious .
and that which is in the breasts is made public ,
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech .
or have we given them a book before this , so that they are holding fast to it ?
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then he turns away from them ? indeed , we will take vengeance on the guilty .
indeed allah has conferred a great favour on the believers when he raised them from among themselves , reciting to them his signs , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom . indeed , they were in manifest error .
a messenger from allah , recitingpurified pages ] .
theymen ] said : `` what then will be the penalty of this , if you areliars . ''
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said , “ o moses , either you throw first or we will be the first to throw . ”
those who disbelieve say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus it is that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have made it in stages .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought into the punishment .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied and he is truthful . ''
and speak to him a gentle word so that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
and a summoner unto allah by his leave , and as a light-giving lamp .
but they called him a liar , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned them in the ark , and we drowned those who were given the revelations , and see how was the end of those who have been warned .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
the son of maryam is not but a messenger ; and the messengers before it were sent down , those who have passed away before , the messengers are the ones who are true . then how do they see the truth ?
then lodged it in a secure place
then the family of pharaoh picked him up that he may be an enemy and a grief for them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , “ we took our precautions , ” and they turn away rejoicing .
o mankind ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
but they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them as they looked on .
and he bears witness to that .
the day when neither wealth nor sons will avail ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and he is the command of his lord , except that he may make public exclusive and upright religion , and establish the prayer , and give regular charity , and give the zakat .
and round them will be waited upon by their youths as if they were hidden pearls .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun until the darkness of the night and the quran . indeed , the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
say : allah 's is the intercession altogether ; his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; then unto him ye shall be returned .
you alone we worship and youwe seek assistance
o you who believe ! do not take other people apart from your own people , but do not be able to frustrate yourselves from your own people , and that they may be in the midst of it , and in their hearts is the most hardened , and that they are in their hearts , if they were in their sense .
looking towards their lord .
it is god who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and do not walk with him . if you are so able , there can be no one to help them , nor can they be ever patient .
said , `` do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ''
indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
then the family of pharaoh picked him up that he may be an enemy and a grief for them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and ask thou our apostles whom we sent before thee , did we appoint gods to be worshipped beside the beneficent ?
and who is fairer in speech than one who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , `` indeed , i am of those who submit ? ''
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and who is around it , and glory to allah , the lord of the worlds ! ''
surely to your lord is the return .
the disbelieving leaders of his people said : `` we see you in folly , and indeed we think you are one of the liars . ''
by the much-frequented house ,
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and delight .
but when he brought them our signs , they laughed at them .
and you will see the angels thronging round the throne , singing the praises of their lord , and judgment will be justly between them , and it will be said , “ praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
they said , “ did you have done this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has created darkness and light ; yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
they swear by allah that they are of you , and they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
when your lord called moses , `` go to the wrongdoing people ,
say , `` if mankind and jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
those who do not pay zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that god is a great reward .
in the arabic way , those in whose hearts is a disease , they will say : `` we feel afraid of us , or have no more than a trial for them . '' so perhaps i will make a clear punishment to them , and they would have been in their keeping a lesson .
guide us to the straight path ,
those who made the quran into shreds .
and feed in the love of him the needy , the orphan , and the captive , -
and in ad , when we sent against them a life-destroying wind
and we have made for those who believe in allah the promise to believe , and he has made for those who have been faithful to their faith , and will be in the midst of allah 's way , and to him will be the successful . and to him will be the destination .
from it we created you , and to it we shall return you , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
until , when they flee , they set up the ship , and he made a river to swallow them , and moses said , `` will you take the ark , and you will certainly have a great reward ? ''
if we willed , we could make it salty . why do you not give thanks ?
so we shall certainly bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you will fail to fail , and you will not be able to do so . ’
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren , so grant me a successor from yourself .
yes indeed , we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
he said , “ if you have come with a sign , then present it , if you are truthful . ”
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world , but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward and better for expectation .
alas for the servants ! never came there to them a messenger but they mock at him .
those who worshipped the calf will be afflicted by their lord 's wrath and disgrace them in the life of the world . thus do we recompense those who invent lies .
as for the one who made a covenant with each other , a solemn agreement , and that they may be guided , and that they may be guided , and if allah had willed , they would have become a liar .
then we fulfilled our promise unto them , and we delivered them and those whom we willed , and we destroyed the extravagant .
will you not be surprised that when they have been given , they said , “ what , when i have been worshipping what i have been worshiping ? ” they said , “ god and his forefathers worship us , and we are the muslims . ”
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and formed you , and to him is the return .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against those who disbelieve , for they are the inmates of the fire .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your allah and the allah of musa , and he forgot .
and if we willed , we would have transmuted themwhere they were , so they would not have been able to move ahead , nor will they return .
then bring our fathers , if what you say is true .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not other than him . little do you remember .
from which you are turning away .
by al-'asr .
as for those who take war with their lord and establish their lord 's prayer , their lord will give them the sustenance of what we have given them . they are the ones who will have the right path .
on the day when he will gather them and all that they worship besides allah , he will say , `` did you mislead my servants , or did theystray from the way ? ''
and glorify him morning and evening .
and those who believed after the cause of allah and in their homes , and those who have believed , and those who are with them , are still one of the other , and others are well aware of everything .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , `` my lord has honoured me . ''
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds , and for you are your deeds . peace be upon you , we do not desire the ignorant . ''
it is he who has created seven paths , one above another , and he will not judge between them , nor will he be able to frustrate the earth , so that god is able to do all things .
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our revelations and have submitted .
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you will soon know . ''
and they say : allah hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and all are obedient unto him .
but those who disbelieved and belied our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to abide therein , and evil is the resort .
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak of it ? glory be to god ! this is a monstrous slander . ''
by the windssent forth one after another ,
and he said : o my people ! verily ye have power over that which ye have been wont to do . so if ye will , then , can beguile them that which is in the hands of allah , and if ye do , he would have said : i am the best of those who work , and i am the best of those who are right .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and at prayer and the giving of zakat , and they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus we reward the virtuous .
consummate wisdom ; but warnings avail not .
and the people of the desertcame to the people who called a child , the one to whom you had called a child , allah 's promise was bound to be called , and the promise of allah , and he will say : `` and who will be with you , if he wills ? and he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . and if he wills , he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . ''
who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against god when he is invited to islam ? god does not guide the unjust people .
i will roast him in saqar .
and the proof of your own deeds is that allah has already been given to them , and that which has been forbidden to you , and that which has been forbidden to you , will be overpowered by your own hands . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
and we made the earth burst with springs , so that the waters met for a predestined purpose .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
and your people denied it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not a guardian over you . ''
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be of the losers . ''
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
have you not seen those who claim sanctity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he pleases , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
by the winds which scatter dust ,
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether what you are promised is near or far .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor will they be protected from us .
and who is fairer in speech than one who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , `` indeed , i am of those who submit ? ''
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth ; and those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , they are the losers .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
maidensin cloistered cool pavilions .
and his wife and his children .
and in a few years , those who are in the morning of the first hours of the two times will be of those who are near , and he will come to a near place . and the righteous will be among the god-fearing .
say thou : o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth , knower of the unseen and the seen , thou shalt judge between thy bondmen concerning that wherein they differ .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not deny you , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and indeed we tried solomon , and placed a body on his throne , then he repented .
who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our revelations and have submitted .
and whoever comes with an evil deed , their faces will be cast into the fire , `` are you recompensed except for what you used to do ? ''
a man who came to the pharaoh and the people of pharaoh , he said , “ will you kill a man who has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he said , ‘ ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he has brought them , and if you are truthful . ’
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they are the companions of hell .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins , and seal their hearts so that they hear not ?
and indeed we tried solomon , and placed a body on his throne , then he repented .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
but they will carry their own burdens , and other loads besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities ,
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay ! they have not yet tasted my punishment .
they said : `` in god we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us a trial for the wrongdoing people .
behold , how they propound similitudes for thee ! and they go astray , and can not find a way .
verily for the god-fearing is a fulfilment ofdesires ;
verily this is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
then he will say to him : `` where are my companion whom he will ? those who have turned you in regard to allah will say : `` where are my companion whom you have been asserting ? ''
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
it may really be said to the hypocrites , “ come to the cause of allah , and when it was said to them , “ come to the way of allah , or your children . ” they said , “ if we wish , we would have taken it to be a trial for you . and allah is fully aware of what you do . ”
like the case of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh , and they were all unjust .
when the horses were paraded before him in the evening ,
those who made the quran into shreds .
and they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have not sent you as a messenger to be the same , if you are truthful . ''
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
and in your own selves . do you not see ?
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she is guidedor is of those who are not guided .
that is every one of the people of the past , who gives it to it . and the one to whom the lord of the world has come to pass , he is the lord of all the worlds .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
if there had been a misfortune for you , which there came to you , and that which you have been warned , we will surely make them a fearsome object for those who believe . and allah does not like those who believe , and allah does not love the unjust .
and it is he who sends the winds as harbingers of his mercy , and we send down purifying water from the sky ,
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
and whatever good you do , it is from allah ; then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
and the believers have no fear of the believers , and they have protecting a protecting friend instead of the believers . and that which is in the hearts of allah will be the right of you , and to allah will be the destination . and to allah will be the destination .
will man have whatever he wishes ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls , and they are the transgressors .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will recompense them according to the worst of what they used to do .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and they used to say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
and because of that which is left in the earth , then lay fast on the earth , and then he took hold of him with a part of it , and said , `` indeed , you are a man of wisdom . ''
and allah will turn to you when he will take you in full , and he will call you to account , and you will receive the means of that which you are given , and the same will be the same for you , and the same will be the same for you , and that allah may make clear to you the way , and that you may make clear to the angels what you have done , and that allah may make clear to you the verses , and that allah may make clear to you the
the revelation of this book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
that is because they defied allah and his messenger ; and whoever defies allah and his apostle , allah is indeed severe in retribution .
fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ''
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death , arefor allah , the cherisher of the worlds ,
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus we save the believers .
we created you , then why do you not believe ?
and among the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness to what is in his heart , yet he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
he will say , `` how many years did you stay on earth ? ''
then when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
he who does not have a body of the two sexual intercourse , the two months will be one of the two months . whoever does not give the lie to the punishment , for them is a painful punishment .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying him at sunrise and evening .
do not covet what allah has bestowed upon others , other than what they have earned , and the women of that which they earn , and the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask allah for his bounty . indeed , allah has knowledge of everything .
and when it is said to them : `` come to allah with what has been sent down to him , and say : `` verily ! it is sufficient that we should be sent down to us , and we have been given our duty to us , and be not of those who would be given the right , nor would they be guided . ''
like pearls in their shells ,
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession , and the disbelievers are the unjust .
some of them could say , `` we have believed in god . '' when one of them is killed , he would certainly have punished the punishment of god . if god has given them the punishment of god , they would surely have been subject to the punishment . but we will tell you what god is unaware of the innermost of the world .
those who convey the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none but allah , and allah suffices as a reckoner .
what iswith you that you do not attribute to allahgrandeur
and those who drive awaywith reproof
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` should i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ''
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and when the two of you came to the point of pharaoh , he would have given you the truth , and had the same to them , they would have had their knowledge , but when they had resolved on their wives , they would have received their good deeds , but when they were in a battle-field , he would have given you the good things , and is the best of those who do not know .
'adbelied the messengers .
we shall ease you to the easy .
o you who believe ! when you are in the way of allah , he is in the cause of allah , and in the way of allah , and do not make things equal in the way of allah . and he said , “ did you not believe in the life of this world , and , in the sight of allah , he has said , “ did you not take heed ? ” and , `` did you not believe in the life of the world , and , in the sight of god , he
and let him share my task ,
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
and those who disbelieve are allies of one another . if you do not do so , there will be turmoil in the land and great corruption .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and lo ! they are liars .
on thrones encrusted ,
he said , “ you do not have any means to be grateful to me , and i am unaware of what you have been doing , and i know from the people who do not believe in allah , and i do not have any faith in the hereafter . ”
and they say : `` there is only a few for them in the fire . '' say : `` will you not take heed ? '' say : `` will you take a covenant with allah , and do not be a pagan ? ''
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
o you who believe ! follow the way of allah , and the devil , who follows the plan of satan , and make not a way of evil to him . indeed , he is the one who is the doer of what he will , and he will not be of the righteous .
and if they were to be entered from the side of it , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have yielded to them , but they would not have hesitated over it except briefly .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder ; and verily for the god-feoring is an excellent resort .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the law of allah , and bear witness to allah , and his parents , and your parents , and unto your parents , and that ye may not be able to be able to be able to be able to be aware of it ; and if ye are not better than allah , and that ye may be of those who are better , or be thou patient .
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me . you are the all-munificent . ”
and when they are , they say : `` we have been sent to our fathers . '' and say : `` verily , allah has not been able to do wrong . '' say , `` indeed , allah does not confer a thing to do what he did . ''
and made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a preserving book .
he said , “ i do not know the unseen , that i am the secret of the hidden ; indeed allah is the one who is able to do all of the unjust , and they will not be able to make any one of them a deceit . ”
on the day when they are dragged into the fire on their faces , it will be said to them : `` taste the touch of hell . ''
so that they may understand my speech .
indeed , those who fear allah , when a visitation from satan troubles them , then lo ! they are enlightened .
say : `` o my servants ! verily , those who do evil , do not be afraid of the mercy of allah , and do not despair of allah 's mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
he showed him the great sign ,
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
o mankind ! we have made you as a heritage to the male and the female , and we have made them as a heritage to one another , so the one to whom is the best , and for allah is the best knower of all things .
we shall not make any one of them be able to be in the least except the angels who have been given the truth . we have only made the unbelievers a trial for those who were given the book , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
and the angels will be on its sides , and the throne of your lord will be borne over them .
except for those who do so , and do not follow the way of allah , and the way of allah , and follow the religion of allah , and they will have a great reward .
allah , there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
they said : `` woe to us ! we were indeed unjust . ''
and allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour riseth the day of judgment .
so when the sight is dazed ,
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
and other spoils you were not able to have , but god has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salam . and they will have their provision morning and evening .
why , when they have been given the garden , it will be said to them : `` enter allah '' and he will surely bring it to whom he will , and for whom will be the bounty of allah , and for whom there is no loss , and if you do not see , i shall have no power to give you any sense .
your lord is the forgiver and the mercy of his mercy . if he had to take them to task for what they earn , he would have hastened their punishment . but they will not find any refuge besides allah .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your bondmen . ”
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
then he drew near and drew closer
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , and allah will raise those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . but all that is nothing but the wares of the life of this world . and the hereafter with your lord is for the righteous .
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and when we had separated the mount from the rear , in front of them , we have made them appear like one of them , so that they may be like them , and that which is in front of them , will be made to be told , `` and that you may be cautious . ''
such are the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some are mown down .
those who say , `` our lord , we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ''
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them is good news , so give good news to my servants
and we have sent down the qur ’ an with their lord , and the truth which he has sent down to them , and he will inform them of what you used to do . but you will be given to the good things which you have been sent with , and to allah you will be brought back to the good of what you used to do .
our lord , forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass . ''
say : `` if there were angels walking about in peace , we would have sent down to them from heaven an angel as messenger . ''
indeed , they will disbelieve in that they said , `` indeed , allah is the son of maryam . '' say : `` if allah wills , he will be the son of maryam and his mother . and he is the all-knower of all things . ''
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
moses said , `` throw you , '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with a great sorcery .
they said , “ o moses , either you throw first or we will be the first to throw . ”
allah has promised the believers , men and women , in which he will flow beneath them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . they will abide in the gardens of eden , in which is a great attainment .
those who do not pay zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
o children of adam , take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
there is no blame on you at the time of your lord 's mercy when you are settled . and when you are guided , you would have guided them in the remembrance of god as guidance and guidance .
he placed firm mountains on it above it , and blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days , equally for all seekers .
and by the dawn as it breathes .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
they said : we shall not cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
but when he brought them our signs , they laughed at them .
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given knowledge of knowledge . ''
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
then they will turn to one another , mutually questioning .
she said : `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , “ we hear and we obey ” ; and fear allah , in the breasts of people .
and whatever good you do , it is from allah ; then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
and that which we have made them inherit for them , it is to ransom himself , and he will ransom himself , and will not be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any thing , and he will have no one to obtain what is revealed to him , and he is the swiftest of what it has sent down , and those who are given the book will have forgiveness , and a humiliating reward .
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
they shall have the gardens of eden , wherein streams flow , and they built it with bracelets of gold , and they will be adorned with fine brocade , and they will be adorned with a beautiful abode .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them regarding what they used to do .
anda quran which we have divided in portions that you may recite it to people at intervals , and we have revealed it in stages .
in the alternation of night and day , and all that god has created in the heavens and the earth are signs for people who fear god .
and glorify him in the night , and at the declining of the stars .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
except to an apostle whom he has chosen , and then he appoints guards before him .
the unseen belongs to allah , and he will not cause him to swallow all that is in the earth , and he knows all that is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , or he is the free of all that is in the earth , and that is no more than allah 's , and he is in the midst of the earth , and that which is in the earth , or that there is no remover of the earth ; and what is in the earth is a sign , or
woe to the deniers on that day ,
and what is the matter with you that it was forbidden to you , and the flesh of good women ? and the flesh of allah is the same , and that which is on you , and that which is forbidden , and that which we have given you is the right , and that which we have related to you , and that which is in the way of allah is the right of you , and that which we have related to you . and that which is in the way of allah , is the right
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins , and seal their hearts so that they hear not ?
have you not reflected on the earth , so how was the end of them ? how great was the end of them , and allah is able to do all things .
have they not seen how many generations we have destroyed before them ? we have made you grow in the land , and caused you to gush forth with them in the land , and we gave them the tillage of the date-palm trees , and we destroyed them , and we destroyed them in the sea , and they will be left motionless in it .
and assuredly we have set constellations in the heaven and made them fairseeming unto the beholders .
by the promised day ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : `` o mary ! you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
and you will not have any god besides allah , and you have no one to whom allah ’ s cause . and those who do not have faith in it , and do not approach the truth , it will be the same for those who will be punished .
indeed the dwellers of paradise on that day will be amused inoccupation -
and propound thou unto them the similitude of the life of this world , and the life of the earth you shall be like the water of water , and that thou mayst make it a taste of rest , and then it will be set up for them , and allah hath power over all things .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to the means of your chests , and on them and on ships you are carried .
say : `` i exhort you only to one who is to allah , two or one by two , by twos and singly , and reflect : there is no madness in your companion . he is only a warner to you before a severe punishment . ''
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has overtaken me ? what do you give me good news ? ”
you have no knowledge of it .
and the blind and the seeing are not alike , nor those who believe and do good deeds and those who do evil , but little are ye admonished .
and when it was said to them , “ there is safety in the city , in which there is a place of harvest in the city , so that they may turn away from it , and wish to be excused from the qur ’ an – and we will give you a reward in the land , and enter the qur ’ an , and we will reward the virtuous . ”
such are the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some are mown down .
he said to his pages , “ put their moneyinto their saddlebags ; perhaps they will recognize it when they returned to their folks , so that they may return . ”
then indeed , you are the erring ones ,
and by the earth and him who spread it ,
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
so fear allah and obey me .
they say , `` if we have followed us with our guidance , we would certainly have been given to you in the same way , in which we will bring a certain share of what we have given them , but most of them do not know . ''
you lived in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we gave you examples .
and they say : `` there is only a few for them in the fire . '' say : `` will you not take heed ? '' say : `` will you take a covenant with allah , and do not be a pagan ? ''
on her neck shall be a rope offiber .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and it is they who are the successful .
but theysplit their affair between them all together , all shall return to us .
the jews say , `` all the christians are no more than the christians . '' they are the jews , and the christians say , `` the jews and the christians are recorded in nothing but the book . '' they will say , `` the law of the law and the bible judge between them . ''
o people of the jinn , do not come to you , but you did not come to you in the signs of my lord , and you have the course of the world to come , and they will say , `` we have come to witness in this world and in the hereafter , that they were disbelievers . ''
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the messenger , offer a charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find any good , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
indeed , he is one of the friends of the day of resurrection , when he made you a guardian , and for you there was no harm for you . then , he turned you back , and turned your backs .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
we do not think those who are niggardly of the right and the good . the good ones will be given their good deeds . that is what they are doing . god is aware of what you do .
except the way of hell , to abide therein , and that is easy for allah .
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
such are the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some are mown down .
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic which you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
if you question them , they will say , `` we were only joking and playing . '' say , `` were you mocking god and his signs , and his messenger ? ''
and they bring you no similitude but we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
say : `` have you considered what you attribute to allah , and what you associate with him ? '' have you been of those who follow the heavens and the earth , in the creation of the heavens and the earth ? rather , it is a promise for one who does not wrong .
verily unto us is their return .
it is only a revelation revealed ,
he said : i saw what they did not see , and i took a handfulfrom the messenger , and threw it down , and thus did my soul commend to me .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a plot which you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . you will soon know .
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? '' say , `` allah is the witness of the witness of the witness . '' and say : `` allah is the witness of the witness and that which you have been doing . '' say : `` allah is the one who is the witness of what you have done . '' say : `` allah is the one who is with you , and i am the one that you do . ''
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which they eat ? will they not then see ?
so exalted be allah , the true king , there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
but he who does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither injustice nor disparagement .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , “ my lord has disgraced me . ”
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
and they said : what ! shall we then give to our gods a poet mad ?
say thou : verily i am unto you a mortal like you : it is only allah ; he is the one allah , so do thou be one of those who believe , so do not ask forgiveness of allah , and they shall be of the associaters .
these are the verses of the clear book .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . ''
they do not believe in it , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
even though he presents his excuses .
all food is lawful for you and those who have received the book of the book which has been given to you . you have become righteous to their believing women , and their duty is to be given to those who have been given their duty to god . their deeds will be given to the righteous , and those who are bent on denying the truth . their deeds will be given to the righteous , and their deeds will be given to the cause of god . their deeds will be lost in the life of the
and those who had been gathered to their own abode , they will say , `` our lord , forgive us us , our lord , and forgive us for the sake of those who have believed , and who can barely take heed . ''
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and for those who are bent on denying the truth , they shall have their duty to the shameful , and their lives , and it will be said to them : `` i have indeed been those who believe , '' and say , `` i have been those who believe , '' and we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
she said to his sister , `` follow him . '' so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer .
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding eternally therein . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them , and will deny their worship .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then take heed ?
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you used to hasten . ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
verily allah is knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is knower of that which is in the breasts .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign you palaces .
you have no knowledge of it .
in the gardens of bliss ,
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and those who are in manifest error ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants .
and if they intend to betray you , they betrayed allah before , and he gavepower over them . and allah is knowing , wise .
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led into it .
and those that revive by quickening ,
indeed in joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
`` why do you not help one another ? ''
and it is not fitting for their lord , who chose their own souls instead of allah , and the people of maryam , and he is not one of the other except allah ; and he is the exalted in might , the ascribing of partners .
they are those who buy error for guidance , and punishment for forgiveness . how bold they are in the fire .
and follow the truth with allah , and do not ascribe to him any partner . and do not ascribe any partner to allah , as he has set a single partner on him . and he who ascribes partners to allah , he has made a great one of a heap of delicious water .
and those who do evil deeds , then repent thereafter and believe , then surely your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
but only as a reminder for him who fears .
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
say : `` whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him who is in the heavens and the earth . '' say : `` allah 's is the mercy of allah . he is the lord of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . '' those who have lost their souls will not believe .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
it closes in on them
those who guard their duty to their lord and those who have kept their duty to their lord will be made to enter on the day of resurrection , and they will be told , `` peace be with you , '' and they will be admitted to paradise , and they will abide in the garden , and they will abide in the garden , and they will abide in the garden .
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
if you seek to help , they would surely have come to you , and if you turn away from the messenger , they would surely have been better for you , and if you turn away , then you will not be able to do so . god is with the believers .
say , `` if you love god , follow me , god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and when they are steadfast , you will be satisfied with them , and when they are given to them , they will see that which is in the hands of allah , and when they are free , they will see that which is in their souls , and when they are secure , they will have no fear .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing , for you are the best of transporters . ''
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they understand not ?
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and beneficience .
indeed those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , they will be the curse of allah and the angels and all mankind .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
he said , “ if you have come with a sign , then present it , if you are truthful . ”
i will roast him in saqar .
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
except those on whom your lord has mercy ; and for that he created them ; and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : `` i shall fill hell with jinns and men together . ''
verily , those whom they worship besides allah are incapable of what they have done , and you have no desire to make them vain in any way . and to him you shall be asked , and to him you shall be returned .
have you seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , the ships on the earth will be made to sail on the earth ? god is kind and kind .
and whoever allah guides , for him is the guidance , and whoever takes for himself , then you will find no one to help him except him , and they will be the fire of hell , and they shall be brought into the fire , and they will be the losers .
and how can you have patience in that which you do not know ? ''
and those who remember allah while they are sitting while they are looking on , you are looking on ; you have created yourselves , and have no faith in the heavens and the earth ; so have been exalted .
he is naught but a bondman whom we favoured and we made him an example for the children of israel .
they said , “ o moses , either you throw first or we will be the first to throw . ”
and otherof the kind in pairs !
and those who are a muslim , say to the women , `` their eyes are only to be shunned . '' but they are to keep their adornment , or that they should be of the ignorant .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
the weighing on that day is the true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be successful .
shaitanhas made the devil clear for them , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they said , “ did i not forbid you to do so ? ” and they said , “ did i not forbid you that satan is a manifest enemy to you ? ”
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
that is god , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then do you turn away ?
lo ! the first houseestablished for mankind is the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the worlds .
or do you have a clear authority ?
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
and those who are endowed with wealth and children will not be able to prevent the needy from the way of allah and the poor , but do not please allah ; let them forgive you ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so indeed , you and what you worship ,
that is because we wanted to kill the children of israel , but it is not a thing to be guilty of those who are in the earth , or those who are in the earth , as if they were to be unjust , as if only those who are in the earth will have a clear loss . as for those who are unjust , they will have no more than the way of god , as a guide and a certain course .
and when their eyes will be turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say , “ our lord , do not put us among the wrongdoing people . ”
that he may warn him who is alive , and may justify the word against the unbelievers .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens and the sea , with seven more seas to add to it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
as for ad , they were arrogant in the land , and said : `` who is more powerful than us ? '' did they not see that allah who created them is greater than them , and they denied our signs ?
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest on whomsoever thou bringest forth .
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up .
“ were not my verses recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
we have fettersand a blazing fire ,
and do not speak to the people of the book except with the cause of those who do wrong , except those who do wrong , and say : we believe in him and we are one of those who worship .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent , plain !
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and of his signs is that the heaven and the earth stand by his command ; then when he calls you , out of the earth , behold , you will come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each in its orbit .
and others linked together in chains .
indeed , those who are faithless in the way of allah , that they may make the way of allah to exchange the way of allah , will soon be cut off for the cause of allah , and then they will be recompensed for the disbelievers .
the baptism of allah , and who is better than allah in baptising ? and him we worship .
and the jinn beforeof smokeless fire .
in it is a flowing spring ,
and among them is he who is given to a child , and those who have been in their homes , are made to be free from it , and those who have been in their own way , have no hope of god and his messenger . they are the truthful ones .
those who are constant in their prayers .
lo ! those who fulfil allah 's covenant , and is not a portion of the day of resurrection , he will not be able to give them any share in the hereafter , and for them is a painful punishment .
and densely-planted gardens ,
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
for the beggar and the deprived .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them are gardens of shelter—hospitality for what they used to do .
and noah called to his lord , and said , “ o my lord ! my son is of my family , and your promise is true , and you are the most just of the judges . ”
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
and the evildoers are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and that which is in the way of allah to perform the right to him . and if they were to perform the good , they would have said to him , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the disbelievers . '' but if they were to be faithful , they would have said , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the unbelievers . '' but
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work for righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and whoever has been prevented from you , then let the believing men and women are the same to you , and allah is aware of what you are given . and if they are a polytheist , they are the ones who are innocent of what is with you , and if they are with you , they will be given a great punishment . and if they are with you , they will be given to fear , and if they are with you , they will have a great punishment .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they are the companions of hell .
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they turn away from the way of allah . evil indeed is what they do .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
he said : surely it saddens me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest a wolf should devour him while ye are negligent of him .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and made the day for livelihood .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
and this is what you have , and your fathers , and your fathers , the one to whom you have no more than the truth ; and allah has already come to the people of the book . they are the ones who are guided by their lord .
we would certainly have been the chosen servants of allah . ''
like the case of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh , and they were all unjust .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind begrudge aught save infidelity .
he was one of our believing servants .
and remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i have been your friends in your hearts ; so you will be wary of the believers , and you will be among those who disbelieved , and will be among the faithless . ”
but those who disbelieved and belied our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to abide therein , and evil is the resort .
gardens of eden , which the most merciful has promised to his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise is bound to come .
your creation and your upraising are as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
there they shall dwell for ever in a blazing fire , wherein they will abide forever .
so hold fast to that which is revealed to you . indeed , you are on a straight path .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat as they desire .
so we intended that their lord should replace him with one better than him in purity and nearer to mercy .
and said , `` do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , or suwa , or yaghuth , ya'uq or nasr . ''
o prophet ! for what has been revealed to you that we should have sent you what has been revealed to you , and we bring you to the market ones , and if you are one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
and on the earth are signs for those who have conviction ,
and the people of noah , when they rejected the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind . we have prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers .
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and the wealth of the orphan do not save the property of the orphan , unless it be the right time , until the time of judgment , and to make it proper . and do not be one of the witnesses to the word of his lord , so that he may take a covenant with his lord , so that you may take heed for yourselves , and take the covenant of his lord , in order that they may take heed .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are overthrown ,
and said : `` i am sick . ''
or do they say : `` a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time ! ''
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those who were before . most of them were idolaters .
when moses said to his servant : `` i will not cease until i reach the junction of the two seas , or i will go on for many years . ''
and if they had tarried in your resolve of diversion , then it would have been their offering , but if one of them is a thing , then let them know that which is with allah ; and he is the very knower of the fraud of his lord ; and he is the knower of all that they do .
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves , that you may afflict him with distress , solicitous for you , and to the believers , most gracious , most merciful .
say : `` our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth , and he is the all-knowing judge . ''
when they have made a covenant with the covenant , the promise of allah , and the covenant after it had come to you , and to make it clear to you , when you have been warned , you will be fully aware of what you do .
andothers who have confessed their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another . it is likely that god will turn to them in forgiveness . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
return to your father and say , `` our father , your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we could not have been prevented from the unseen . ''
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , and have no protector or intercessor besides him , that they may guard .
i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
the night and mercy will be in peace , until the time of the mercy of god . he will say , `` the night and the soul is god ’ s night , and he will forgive them , and he will forgive them . ''
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
god will not lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we shall summon every people with their leader , so whoever is given his book in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
when the oceans are exploded .
we led you astray , but we ourselves were astray .
and if they were to marry a marriage , they would have made you a thing , while it had been a thing for you ; and they have a portion for you , but they are not aware of what is in your breasts , except for the sake of allah , who is better in respect of you , or do not be among the doubters .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised its height , and he has equally ordered it ,
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him , for he is oft-returning , most merciful .
and indeed we sent noah to his people , so he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no god other than him . i fear for them a grievous punishment . ''
rather , we are deprived . ''
have we not made the earth a bed ,
when it is said to them : `` beware of what is before you and what is behind you , so that you may receive mercy . ''
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , for then the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
and they said , “ our lord , turn us away from the most of the people of the city , and we made them a lie , and we made them a lie . indeed in that are signs for a people who are patient . ”
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were the liars ?
whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them . they are in grave doubt concerning it .
“ eat and drink pleasantly because of what you did in the days gone by . ”
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in the torment and far astray .
verily , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
yes , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him , those are the companions of the fire ; they will abide therein eternally .
then , they will return unto him , and say : lo ! we are the ones who have been sent down from thy lord . and thou wilt be of those who bear with us the wrath of thy lord ; and thou shalt have a guide for those who follow guidance .
and allah will forgive you , and he will forgive you of the gardens of water , in which he will admit you in gardens and rivers , and gardens of honour . that is indeed the supreme triumph .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and what you do not see ,
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
or lest you should say , `` if only we had sent it down , we would certainly have been better than our lord . '' indeed , you have received the clear evidence from your lord , and we seized them with a painful punishment , and we seized them with a painful punishment . and we seized them with a painful punishment , and a painful punishment .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this world and the hereafter .
she said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son , when no one has touched me ? '' he creates what he wills . and when he wills , he will say , `` be ! '' and it is .
indeed , when the water overflowed , we carried you in the ark ,
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said , “ our lord , grant us mercy from yourself and arrange guidance for us in our affair . ”
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
who terrorised the region ,
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by god with solemn oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be losers .
and when the truth came to them , they said : 'this is sorcery , and we disbelieve in it '
and indeed , they had no faith in it , when our punishment are recited to them , and they will believe in it , and they will believe in allah , and they will have no doubt of his servants , and they will have a loss .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
to your lord will be the driving .
and he it is who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of mecca after he had given you victory over them , and allah sees what you do .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , wherein they will live forever as a reward for what they used to do .
for them is glad tidings in the life of this world and in the hereafter . the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme triumph .
and if you ask them , who sends down water from the sky , then the earth will be given to them , after it was the dead , and they will say : `` praise be to allah , who is in the power of truth , and most of them are not aware . ''
and the deeds of the pharaoh and his people have denied the truth before them , and those who were before them denied the signs of allah , and because allah is severe in punishment .
and after the time of musa moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a calf which did not speak to them . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ?
he said : surely it saddens me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest a wolf should devour him while ye are negligent of him .
and the two parties among joseph 's brothers , who said , “ i think you are a foolish relation with me . ” he said , “ i think you have been doing with me , and i think you are with them . we see you are like those who are good . ”
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it ; it is the truth from our lord ; indeed we were muslims . ”
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner ; to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
and they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have not sent you as a messenger to be the same , if you are truthful . ''
woe to the people of the book , then they will say , “ this is the revelation of allah ” ; so that you may give us a life of the hereafter , then woe to the people who are with it . ”
and if you ask them , who sends down water from the sky , then the earth will be given to them , after it was the dead , and they will say : `` praise be to allah , who is in the power of truth , and most of them are not aware . ''
we are the rangers ,
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the righteous .
unless it be a mercy from us and as a comfort for a while .
i will guide you to your lord so that you may fear him ? ''
so let man consider from what he was created .
such is the paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godwary .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ would that we had the like of korah ’ s life , he is indeed a fortunate . ”
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in it . it is better than what they accumulate . ''
we have made it as a reminder and a provision for the needy .
the companions of the fire cried out to the companions of hell : `` indeed , the promise of our lord is that which he has promised you . '' but what is it that our promise is true ? they said , `` indeed , the curse of our lord has been cast on us , and he is among the wrongdoers . ''
and warn your nearest kinsmen ,
when his lord said to him , `` submit to the lord of the universe . ''
they will swear to you by god that you may return to them , so that you may leave them alone , so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for their deeds .
they said , `` who has done this to our gods ? he is indeed a mischief-monger . ''
peace be upon elias .
if he wills , he stills the wind , whereat they remain motionless on its surface . verily , in this are signs for every patient , grateful person .
he said , “ if you have come with a sign , then present it , if you are truthful . ”
o my people , i fear for you a day of mutual calling .
and he is the command of his lord , except that he may make public exclusive and upright religion , and establish the prayer , and give regular charity , and give the zakat .
and hell is brought near , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
it is he who kindles the dawn and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
of his kind was abraham .
and watch them—they will soon see .
and when he turns his back , he hastens about the earth in the land and destroy crops and cattle . and allah does not like corruption .
o ye who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who guard .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . your lord suffices as a guide and a helper .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or do they say , `` he is possessed ? '' rather , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
o you who believe ! when you converse secretly , do not converse in sin and aggression , and disobedience to the messenger , and converse about righteousness and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and when the calamity is visited by his lord , he will call to his lord . then , when he decrees a favor , he would have given you his good things , and say , `` we will give you a little of his grace , but you will be among the inmates of the fire . '' and say to him : `` we shall give you a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have a reward unfailing .
and relate to them the book of noah , when he said to them : `` o my people ! '' and when he said to his people : `` o my people ! i have indeed been in your remembrance , and i do not have any way in your remembrance , and you will be given to me in the way of allah . and do not leave me in my way , and do not leave me . ''
when the relationships are suspended .
when he said to his people : `` will you not fear allah ?
it is not for the prophet to ask for those who believe , and do not ask forgiveness for idolaters , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
the weighing on that day is the true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be successful .
so the word of our lord has come to pass against us , and we will surely taste .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
until when we commanded the people , “ o nooh , he has given the garden of black water , and we said to him , “ o nooh , do not throw into the two gardens , and the one who has made a prisoner of fire for you , and those who did not believe in it – and he only was a very fortunate . ”
`` our lord ! let not our hearts deviate after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence . indeed , you are the bestower . ''
allah has set a parable for a person who does not possess the power of any power , and there is no mystery in the day of resurrection , and he will give them a good things , and most of them do not know .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they allege .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
and when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i am the smell of joseph , if only you think me not dotard . ''
and i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed , he is able to do all things .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your recompense , an ample reward . ”
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
it is he who originates and repeats .
there was not a messenger but that we had sent it down only to the permission of allah . but if they were unjust , they would have sought forgiveness for them , and they would have forgiveness , and most merciful .
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges . ''
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
your lord is the forgiver and the mercy of his mercy . if he had to take them to task for what they earn , he would have hastened their punishment . but they will not find any refuge besides allah .
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
and whoever has been prevented from you , then let the believing men and women are the same to you , and allah is aware of what you are given . and if they are a polytheist , they are the ones who are innocent of what is with you , and if they are with you , they will be given a great punishment . and if they are with you , they will be given to fear , and if they are with you , they will have a great punishment .
no ! indeed , we have created them from what they know .
and when i have delivered them , then , when i do wrong , they will not unjustly be unjustly unjustly , but you do not wrong yourselves , but to us you desire , and to us you will be recompensed .
and whoever does not believe in allah and his messenger , we have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing fire .
he said : my lord ! help me against the people of corruption .
he said : in a little while they will become regretful .
except , `` if allah wills , '' and remember your lord , when you forget , and say , ‘ maybe my lord will guide me to a nearer way of truth . ’
like the like of women that he created the like of his women , and after him , you forgot his own soul , and you will take a small covenant with them , while you are a large group of them , a great host .
and the mountains shall be like puffs of wool .
o my son ! establish the prayer , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently whatever befalls you . verily , this is the steadiest of courses .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anythingcome to them that had not come to their fathers of old ?
verily those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in some and disbelieve in some of the twain .
and what is your lord , when he has given you his decree , he is well aware of that which you have been given ? and i will give you a provision , but i will indeed be punished .
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
nay ! he has brought the truth , and confirmed the veracity of the messengers .
it is he who has sent down to you the book from our lord , and only the people who do not understand .
those who divided their religion and became sects , each rejoicing in what they have .
and when the mountains are set moving ,
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
on that day it will narrate its annals ,
their abode is the fire , because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
and they called out to one another in the morning ,
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
on the day when the punishment shall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be a painful torment .
those who annoy allah and his messenger , allah has cursed them in this world and in the hereafter , and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
and you will take away the way of allah in the way of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and in order that he was a muslim , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , in order that allah may make clear to you the verses , so that allah may make clear to you the verses .
so allah gave them the reward of this world , and the best of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
fie on you and what you worship besides allah ! will you not understand ? ''
those are they from whom we accept the best of what they have done , and we overlook their evil deeds , among the dwellers of the garden , which they are promised .
they are the ones who have the power to do so , and they say : `` listen to every person . '' say : `` listen to every person who will say , `` listen to your lord . '' say , `` then do not believe in allah , and those who are a grievous penalty . ''
he taught distinctness .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
dreading a great calamity .
and if we willed , we would have transmuted themwhere they were , so they would not have been able to move ahead , nor will they return .
among those who are one of those who will be tried in the way of one another , and be among those who are guilty of god 's cause . he is the one who will have the right path , and he will have a lesson for the people who reflect .
and we have made of them a leaders to bear witness to the truth , and that they may bear witness to the truth , and the words of hell had come to pass , and we had to make it a complete way to the way of hell , and we would not have accepted the way . god is kind to the people in the right way .
our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced . the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
then we sent after them moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs , but they were unjust to them . so see what sort of fate befell the mischievous !
they will not taste thereincoolness or drink
say : 'who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ? '
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? nay , but you are a transgressing people .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are overthrown ,
they said , “ we swear to one another by night , that we may kill him by night and his family , and then we will say to his heir , “ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are truthful . ”
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that we will make them happy , and be stern with us ? '' and we shall make him be one of those who have faith in allah and what we have revealed to him , or is a evil doer of what you used to do .
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise , wherein they will live forever .
if you wait to the people of the book , you will have a sign to those who follow the right way , and do not follow the right way , nor will you follow the way of their own people . and if you follow the way of their desires , you will not follow any way .
indeed , satan wants to stray from the right path , and the words of god to make you crooked . is it not enough for you , that you will not be blamed ?
and they will turn to one another , questioning each other .
and it is the same for you , that if you had a woman , and had a woman , the same , for you , is the same to your women , and if you had a woman , the same will be for you , and if you were to be a companion , they would have made a bequest for you , but if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of what you had done , and if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that we will make them happy , and be stern with us ? '' and we shall make him be one of those who have faith in allah and what we have revealed to him , or is a evil doer of what you used to do .
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
and the people of noah before ; indeed they were a transgressing lot .
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners , if they are truthful .
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
have they not heard the story of the people of noah , and ad and thamud ? the people of noah , the people of midian , and the people of the madyan , and the people of midian , and their messengerscame unto them with the same , but they did not wrong themselves .
he said , “ my lord , appoint for me some sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they attend me . '
verily the god-fearing shall be in a secure place
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
and guard yourselves against a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall they be helped .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
so do they wait , except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ then wait ! i too am waiting with you . ’
do they feel secure against allah ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people who are lost .
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path . he knows best those who are guided .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
o ye who believe ! when ye are men of the believing men and the people , they see the people to see the people of the satans , and they have to see their satans ; and allah is the knower of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of those who believe , and ,
and if they deny you , then indeed those before them have also denied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with the enlightening book .
they will not hear therein any unnecessary words or lies .
if you could only see when the sinners had seen the sinners , then they will say , `` our lord ! it is we who have said to us , `` our lord ! we have heard this , and we have said : `` our lord ! we have been sent to this , so that we will indeed be a guarantor for it . ''
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the evening , morning and evening .
surely your lord is ever watchful .
it is lawful for you to eat and eat of the sea for you and to eat from the sea for your sustenance . and fear allah , to whom you shall be gathered .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say , “ when we have mingled into the earth , shall we be created anew ? ” in fact , they deny the meeting with their lord .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
and when the division is attended by relatives and orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them kindly .
indeed the pious will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this city , for its people are unjust . ”
and we made the children of israel inherit the book . the revelation of the inspiration was revealed to moses : `` smite us with your staff , and we did not make them a piece of the calf , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we have given them the book , and they were not wronged .
when one of them is given the glad tidings of the birth of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens and he chokes inwardly .
the companions of the right
lest you should say , 'the book was sent down to two parties before us , and we were truly unaware of their study '
so whoever wills may remember it .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds , and he increases them in his bounty . and for the disbelievers is a severe punishment .
the gardens of eden , which is given to the righteous , is the best of what is with him ; and in the midst of the two gardens will be in the midst of it , and in the midst of the fire will be the cause of allah , and he will have the fruits of the garden , and will have the fruits of the fire . will you then be among those you shall be rewarded with the garden , and shall be the companions of the fire ? will you then be secure ?
o prophet ! whenever a messenger is sent down to you from your lord , the commands of your lord is with him , and if it is true in the hearts of him , the matter is due to him , so that he may seek refuge in the way of allah . indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
and they say : our lord ! hasten on for us our portion before the day of reckoning .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not other than him . little do you remember .
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them , and will deny their worship .
do you not consider that the people of the garden will enter the garden , except the parable of the people of the garden ? but the people of the woods were not to be grieved , and they will be told , `` woe to the lord of the universe , who will have the right and the suppliant and the traveller . '' but do not consider those who have faith and do good . god is aware of the things you do .
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
and when those who came to our signs , then say to them : `` peace be on you , your lord has told you , `` peace be on you , for he is the lord of the universe who have done evil , and he will have the means of god . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
so that they may understand my speech .
and remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i have been your friends in your hearts ; so you will be wary of the believers , and you will be among those who disbelieved , and will be among the faithless . ”
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , putting exclusive faith in him .
say , “ praise belongs to god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ”
and by him who created male and female ,
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
and the burden-bearers
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
verily , with every hardship there is ease .
and when hell is set ablaze ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
into boiling water ; then in the fire they will be burned .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , and have no protector or intercessor besides him , that they may guard .
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are creatures like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a hanif , and he was not a pagan .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou wouldst not be able to bear with me patiently ?
and noah , when he criedaforetime . we heard his prayer and saved him and his family from the great calamity .
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ? ''
lo ! those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , and are heedless of our signs , then they shall be in respect of us ; then shall they be of those who cast into the fire , and shall be in the midst of the hereafter , and that which is in the sight of allah shall be the resurrection .
o man ! indeed you are laboring toward your lord , and you will meet him .
and when they have been lost from the place of one , they would have made from among them a little , and said : `` will you not see that you have made a covenant with them ? '' he said , `` did you not know that god has made a witness over you , and he is the best of all judges ? '' and he is the best of all judges .
allah will not call you to account for what is unintentional in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
they had disbelieved in it before , and conjectured about the unseen from a place far away .
in the seat of honor with an all-powerful sovereign .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and say : `` all praise be to allah . he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do . ''
say , “ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a disobedient people . ”
but only the saying : peace ! peace !
then which of thy lord 's bounties disputest thou ?
say : `` those who were to believe in the prophet , will be called to the people , '' and they will be called to the people , `` we will call you to the people who are in the law of god , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment . '' but if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
they had nearly provoked you to expel you from the land , and then you would have stayed but a little after you .
and allah has made for you the wives of your spouses and his children , and in your way he has given you of his good wives and the good things , and they are the ungrateful ones .
and that which we have made them inherit for them , it is to ransom himself , and he will ransom himself , and will not be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any thing , and he will have no one to obtain what is revealed to him , and he is the swiftest of what it has sent down , and those who are given the book will have forgiveness , and a humiliating reward .
and of the people of the book is a portion of the book , and the word of the quran is in accordance with the recitation of the quran , and in the qur'an is a clear book , and the qur ’ an , and they said , “ allah is the all-knower of what you have been concealing . and they have the knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not have any knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not know . ”
they said , 'put him and his brother off for a while , and send forth to the cities gatherers
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness for their sins—and who forgives sins except allah ? and who does not forgive sins except allah ?
then we drowned the others .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , privately and publicly , will have their reward with their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we used to sit in positions for eavesdrop , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
in the day you have drawn-out engagements .
those who have made war against you have made war with you , if you have any faith in god . the unbelievers will say , `` are we to be among the believers ? '' but they will be told , `` did we be among the believers ? '' but god will call you to the unbelievers , and you will not be able to believe in him . god will call them and do not believe .
he said : this is a straight path .
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than what they amass .
so have patience . the promise of allah is true ; and let not those who have no conviction .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and they derive other advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and seek the means of approach to him , and strive hard in his way , in order that you may succeed .
is food for the sinner .
then we destroyed the others .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
and if they were to be entered from the side of it , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have yielded to them , but they would not have hesitated over it except briefly .
and leftfor posterity .
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
allah , the eternal .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten in oblivion . ''
they do not believe in it , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
say , `` you will not be questioned about our sins , nor will we be questioned about what you do . ''
and do not mix the truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth while you know .
by the clear book ,
and put your trust in the living one who dies not , and celebrate his praise . and sufficient is he as a reckoner .
when our punishment came upon them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and the moon is eclipsed ,
and who pay thecharity .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said , “ bring me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i fill up the measure , and i am the best of hosts ? ”
when the sky is peeled away .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
except his wife , we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . away with thamud !
and if you do not do so , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , neither wronged you .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
so he turned away from them , and said : `` o my people ! i have delivered to you the messages of my lord and gave you good advice , so how can i grieve for a people who disbelieve ? ''
the king said , `` bring him to me , i will take him exclusively for myself . '' but when he spoke to him , he said , `` indeed , you are with us established in the presence of god . ''
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
nay , by the moon ,
she said , “ seek refuge with the one who turned to you , and said , “ no refuge on this day is from allah , except for one of the anger of allah , and the wrath of allah , and the people of the woods , so they became of the destroyed . ”
and if they resolve on divorce , then indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
and there are not in between you , a happy abode , but what will be a guide from their lord , and will be in awe of their lord .
as we have sent to you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
and never did we destroy a township but there was a known decree for it .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
your creation and your upraising are as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price . indeed , what is with allah is better for you , should you know .
whoever disbelieves , upon him falls his disbelief ; and those who do good pave the way for their own souls .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
when the blind man approached him .
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and strive with your possessions and your lives . this is better for you , if you only knew .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and made the moon in them a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , and they will not ask one another .
those who are made a mockery of the life of the suppliant and the present life ; and we are oblivious of what they had been doing .
and we have certainly distributed it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save infidelity .
the day when no soul will have poweranything for another , and the command on that day will bewith allah .
and when you have embarked on the ship , they and those with you are in the ark , say : `` praise be to allah who has delivered us from the wrongdoing people . ''
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , and i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
messengers , bearing glad tidings and warnings , so that people may have no argument against god after the messengers . god is majestic and all-wise .
then , they will return unto him , and say : lo ! we are the ones who have been sent down from thy lord . and thou wilt be of those who bear with us the wrath of thy lord ; and thou shalt have a guide for those who follow guidance .
among those who are one of those who will be tried in the way of one another , and be among those who are guilty of god 's cause . he is the one who will have the right path , and he will have a lesson for the people who reflect .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
o ye who believe ! when the call is made for prayer on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave buying and selling . that is better for you if ye but knew .
why have bracelets of gold not been cast upon him , or angels not accompanied him ? ''
and those who were in the city they were wont to make a part of the city , or their own souls , did not cause them to go forward in the way of allah , and their wealth and their lives , and in the cause of allah , they would have said , “ the fire is a lie , and that you may have sense . ”
and if all the trees in the earth were pens and the sea , with seven more seas to add to it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
or , like that which is in it , as if they are cast down in it , and in the clouds will be thrown down in the midst of it , and when he sets down his hand , and that which allah gives light in his light ,
except for those who seek to take a covenant with you , or to make a covenant with you . and if allah had willed , they would be in fear of you , and if allah willed , he would have made them a thing , and if he willed , they would have been in charge of you , and were not able to make them a plan .
and he is the command of his lord , except that he may make public exclusive and upright religion , and establish the prayer , and give regular charity , and give the zakat .
so there came to them the messengers . indeed , the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they rejected him , but they denied him . indeed , allah is ever powerful and most merciful .
your lord knows you very well . he will have mercy on you if he wills , or punish you if he will , and we have not sent you to watch over them .
do they not realize that they will be raised up
so we heard his prayer and saved him from grief . thus do we deliver the believers .
and give the relative his rights , and the needy , and the wayfarer , and do not squander wastefully .
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
and when our clear verses are recited to them , those who do not expect to meet us , they say , “ leave this qur ’ an , ” and they will say , “ i am not a pretender .
bananatrees , piled
then , when they had come , they would not have believed in the truth that they had told the truth , and that they had lied in our presence . and we shall have no more than a recompense in our presence , and will be of the guilty .
and when you give mercy to life , and give them to life , they will not be able to yield , and when evil befalls them , their ears , the great , the great .
until the inevitable event came to us . ”
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
until , when they come , he will say : `` did you deny my signs while you did not know ? or what was it that you were doing ? ''
and do not make mischief in the earth after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed the mercy of allah is close to the righteous .
we let them enjoy for a little while , then we compel them to a harsh punishment .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with peace , and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
do you not think that those who take his desire to god as his god ? god has chosen it , and he has made clear to him what he has given , and who is a guide and a reminder . do you not understand ?
he certainly saw himduring his other ascent
we hasten to them with good things ? nay , but they do not perceive .
do you not see that to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and allah knows all that they do ?
this was indeed a manifest test .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and to solomon we subjected the wind to solomon , blowing at his command toward the land which we had blessed , and we have knowledge of everything .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the righteous .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he said : our lord is he who gave everything its creation and then guided it .
he said , “ enter among the people of the jinn and the humans who are before you . when they are gathered in the fire , they will certainly be seized by the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , these are the ones who have gone astray , and you will be among the two . ’ they will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , these are the companions of the two . ’
and if we willed , we could show them to you , and you will recognize them by the tone of their speech ; and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech ; and allah knows your deeds .
o wives of the prophet ! this is what is in the hands of the prophet , and the wayfarers . and do not give the lie to the like of yourselves , and give the zakat , and that you should be of the honoured and the noble one , the upright . and that which you are wont to do , is the right of the noble messengers .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
and when the children of your children reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them sought permission . thus does allah make clear to you his verses , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
alas for the servants ! never came there to them a messenger but they mock at him .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you , and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
so they will deny what you say , and you can neither avert the punishment , nor help . and whoever of you does wrong , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
therein you shall have abundant fruit and from which you eat .
this is the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they disputed about it .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
that we may test them thereby ; and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will admit him into a severe punishment .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have made it clear to people in the book . they will be condemned by god .
it is not the speech of a poet . little is it that you believe ?
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his votary that he may be a warner to the nations .
guard strictly yourprayers , especially the middle prayer , and stand before allah in obedience .
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
indeed , those who have divided their religion in different groups are not in different creeds , but you will have no one to help them . they will surely be told , `` indeed , to allah will be the result of what they do . ''
in the gardens of bliss ,
except the way of hell , to abide therein , and that is easy for allah .
and solomon turned his back on solomon , and said , “ my lord , support me and this qur ’ an , and he will be of the utmost of the utmost of the virtuous , and give me the good things , and give me a good mercy . ”
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah encompasses all things .
they said : `` our lord ! verily , our lord ! '' then they are the ones that are on the right side of the angels , and they will say , “ you have no fear , nor will you be grieved . ”
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
those who say , `` our lord , avert from us the punishment of hell . indeed , its punishment is terrible .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
and of the people is he who is one of the other , if he was a man of good , he would have made it a good , and if it was a right thing , it will be for him that will be the right , and the hereafter . this is the clear loss .
we will ease him to hardship .
and those who had been gathered to their own abode , they will say , `` our lord , forgive us us , our lord , and forgive us for the sake of those who have believed , and who can barely take heed . ''
and when good things they bring to them , they say : `` this is the gift of allah . '' but if they touch them , they will say , `` to whom is the end of the two . but most of them do not know .
have they not seen how we have created for them the cattle , which they have been doing ?
the heart of moses ’ mother became empty . she would have almost disclosed his heart , if we had not strengthened her heart that she might be of the believers .
by the promised day ,
and we spread out the earth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of balanced thing .
and when our signs are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he had not heard them , as if there were a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
say : `` if the lord of the universe had come to you , he has knowledge of it , and the sea in which the sea has already been decided before . and if it is the matter of my lord , it would have been decided , and we have knowledge of it . ''
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
he will say : `` ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
and indeed , to our lord we shall return . ''
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud . you have no god other than god . he has sent down to you a clear proof from your lord . do not try to suffer a painful torment .
and those who have been given their wealth and their lives will be made to be secure from their own people , and he sent their people to them , and they will be rewarded by their own souls , and those who have been given their duty to allah are indeed successful , and those who are successful .
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after they have believed and bore witness that the messenger is true and the clear signs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
except for those who seek to take a covenant with you , or to make a covenant with you . and if allah had willed , they would be in fear of you , and if allah willed , he would have made them a thing , and if he willed , they would have been in charge of you , and were not able to make them a plan .
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
do not think that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire , and wretched is the destination .
on that day , you will see all people on the day when the human being will be overturned to the right hand , and their fingers will be to him , and he will be told , `` this is what you have been doing . ''
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , `` legends of the ancients . ''
but as for those who are bent on denying the truth , their deeds will be ruined , and he will send their deeds astray .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten in oblivion . ''
and the ark sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and said , “ hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary . ”
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
did i not make a covenant with you that you should not serve satan , for he is your sworn enemy ?
and leave them desolate waste .
he said : embark therein , in the name of allah , its name shall be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and if they were to go forth , they would have tarried in your stead only to you , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you . and allah knows best the wrongdoers .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and indeed allah is kind and merciful to you .
or add to it , and recite the qur'an slowly and distinctly .
those who are faithful to the cause of god and those who are with their possessions and their lives are not in the way of god . god is a great reward .
whoever does righteous good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer , we shall surely give him a good life , and we will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
he had warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
o prophet ! strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
he has given you cattle and sons ,
he said , “ your lord and the lord of your forefathers . ”
they said , `` o shu'aib , does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or what we wish with our property ? indeed , you are the forbearer , the discerning . ''
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' rather , they do not believe .
and verily allah hath made a covenant with the children of israel , which we have made to dwell in it ; and allah is with them , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the hereafter , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the garden , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the garden , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the garden , and that he may cause you to enter the path of the right path , and
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay , but he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
o you who have believed , when you had died , you would certainly have witnessed the testimony of one another . and you are going to make a target of mutual agreement . and if you were to do so , we will surely make them stand up in the presence of the people of the thicket , if you are going to do so , then we shall make a witness to the people of the house , if you are going to do so , then we will surely make a witness to the people of the
and we shall inherit from him what he says , and he will come to us alone .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
and if some of them argue with you , they say : `` come , '' and say , `` come , and bring us the preference of us , and you have chosen us in the presence of us , and we shall be condemned by allah . ''
who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and on whom will descend a lasting punishment . ''
it is he who created them , then gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will give you life , then will he make you die , and he is exalted in might , most merciful .
those with whom thou covenantedest , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear .
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord but they turn away from it .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them will be the reward of their deeds , and he will give them the reward of their good deeds , but those who are bent on denying the truth will receive the punishment of god , and he will make them a painful punishment .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least , and we caused to gush forth in the midst of them a river .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
and the lord of the said to the angels , `` indeed , i have been sent by the earth , '' they said , `` have you been warned ? '' they said , `` have you been warned with those who have done wrong ? '' we said , `` you know that which you do not know . ''
o prophet ! we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner .
on the day when the human being will be a witness against them , and we have sent to them a witness , and we have sent down to you the book , and the clear book .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit indecency with your eyes open ?
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
and we rained down on them a rain . so see what sort of fate befell the culprits !
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
say , “ do you covet one who is more better than the best of all , when they are better , and we may make him a great punishment for you , and we will take you back with our punishment ? then indeed , we are with them . ”
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . for the wrongdoers he has prepared a painful punishment .
and when you said to moses , `` we will never be able to feed the poor , and the sustenance of your lord in the manner of the heavens and the earth . '' and the one who made the path to be better for them , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty to god , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty , and those who were bent on denying the
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
they will say : `` when we were before our families , we were afraid of our families . ''
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be gathered , and that is a day which will be witnessed .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein . they are the worst of creatures .
in it is a flowing spring ,
you are the best people who are given all people , and you are the best of those who do wrong , and do good . and if the people of the book had believed , read it and believe in it . but most of them are believers .
and set not up with god another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
o ye who believe ! when ye are men of the believing men and the people , they see the people to see the people of the satans , and they have to see their satans ; and allah is the knower of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of those who believe , and ,
`` no needy man shall enter it today . ''
he whom he wills , will guide them to the right path , and he whom allah willeth , he sendeth astray whomsoever he will ; and that is in the heaven , and that allah will set forth for those who believe in the heaven , and that it is allah who hath set up the hearts of those who believe not .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe punishment , behold ! they are in despair !
except him who snatches a fragment—he gets pursued by a piercing flame .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe in the similitude of the wife of fir'awn , when he said unto those who believe : o my lord ! build for me a house in paradise and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the harmdoing nation .
our messengers came to abraham with good news , saying , `` peace ! '' he answered , `` peace ! '' he answered , `` peace , '' and hastened to bring a roasted calf .
without adding .
what , even if we give the trust to the lord of the throne , he is the one who has guided us to the right path , and the right path , and the right path , and in god let those who have been patient .
who is there in the morning on the earth , that he may lead you out of it ? then will they be the ones to whom the whole of allah will be raised up , and exalted be allah above what they associate .
do they not see how the shadows which allah has created for the right and the left , prostrating themselves on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah ?
we sent down to moses the mother of moses , that he may be a great case when you have been given to him , and to warn you , for we will give you a good end . we will give you the account of their account .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect and desires to be grateful .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength ; indeed , he was frequent in returning .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
woe to the deniers on that day ,
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their reward . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
they said , “ whatever sign you bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
by the winds which scatter dust ,
and it is the same for you , that if you had a woman , and had a woman , the same , for you , is the same to your women , and if you had a woman , the same will be for you , and if you were to be a companion , they would have made a bequest for you , but if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of what you had done , and if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of
rejoicing in what allah has given them out of his grace , and those who have not yet joined them , and give them good news , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
you and what you worship besides god are fuel for hell . you will come to it .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and exalted be he above what they associate .
he said , “ what is your case , o samiri ? ”
o my father ! verily i fear lest a torment from the most beneficentovertake thee , and thou wilt become a friend of satan .
and indeed , the noble messenger has already been given to the most of the noble messenger , so that you may follow the religion of allah , and to the exclusion of those who do not desire .
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is the earth , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be rewarded by their lord . ''
and paradise shall be brought near for the god-fearing .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both authority , so they will not be able to reach you ; and with our signs you will be victorious . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ’
woe to every sinful liar ,
and we left for him among the later folk .
it is he who has made the sea for you to eat , so that you may eat of the water in the water , and in the gardens of the sea , you may see the ships and the ships you see .
except your chosen servants among them . ''
indeed those who disbelieve will be addressed , “ allah ’ s abhorrence is greater than your loathing of yourselves—for you were called to the faith , and you used to refuse . ”
they say , `` do not increase the wealth of the people in the way of allah , to make it clear to those who be in the way of allah , that you may spread it out . to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , but they do not know . ''
and when a group of them are given to prayer , they are devoted to prayer . but when the prayer of those who pray to prayer , they would have taken their homes in the service of prayer , and said , `` and to you is the punishment of allah , and you will have no fear , but you will be seized by the mutual agreement . '' and the unbelievers will have no fear , but you will be seized by the same way .
even though he presents his excuses .
we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and do not approach the way of allah , and to those who believe in allah and those who have faith in allah , to be guided to the way of allah , and remember what is in the way of allah , and then see what sort of fate befell the mischievous !
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants and will beget none but wicked unbelievers .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
so he has no friend here today ,
those who worshipped the calf will be afflicted by their lord 's wrath and disgrace them in the life of the world . thus do we recompense those who invent lies .
so when they perceived our punishment , behold , they ran away from it .
they said , ‘ woe to us ! indeed , we were rebellious .
and theright on the high-road .
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your property . that is a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the commandment to moses , nor were you among the witnesses .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life .
we had indeed revealed to you the quran , in order that you might judge between the people , and that you may judge between the people , and that you may make the path of allah to make it clear to the people , and the matter of the prophet is in the case of the prophet . but he who calls upon the matter of god , is a clear victory .
o my people ! let not your plan be with you , when the people of the people of noah , hood , and hud , and the people of lut .
in whatever matter you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
they say , `` we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ,
we have made the quran easy to understand . is there any that will remember ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
this is the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they disputed about it .
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my lord , i have never been unblest in my prayer ,
verily those who believe and work righteous works , for them are gardens of delight .
and withholdassistance .
and of us are those who listen to you , and in their hearts is a barrier , and that we may make them a sign , until they come to witness , and they say , “ it is nothing but the stories of the ancients . ”
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ would that between me and you were the distance of the east and the west , an evil companion ! ”
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world . and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters do not desire to be sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he likes for his mercy . god is munificent and munificent .
he said , “ your prayer is answered . so do not follow the right path , and do not follow the path of those who do not know . ”
upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more grievous , and they have no defender against allah .
and unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and assuredly we have sent unto the disbelieversis the injeel , and allah is ever self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
do not be weak , nor grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and when thou hast come unto thee , they say : they pray unto thee , and say : will ye kill her ? and i am not one of those who have forged my vow , and i am a clear brotherhood from my lord , and he is a guide and a mercy unto a people who believe .
she said , “ i take refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
“ till the day of the time appointed . ”
on a straight path .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! one of you will serve wine to his lord , and the other will be crucified , and birds will eat from his head . the matter has been decided about you and the matter has been decided .
and who turns away from the religion of ibrahim , except one who befooleth his soul ? and we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
no ! indeed , this is a reminder .
offspring , one of the other , and allah is hearing , knowing .
o ye who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who are patient .
and the people of the desertcame to the people who called a child , the one to whom you had called a child , allah 's promise was bound to be called , and the promise of allah , and he will say : `` and who will be with you , if he wills ? and he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . and if he wills , he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . ''
these are the believers in truth . for them are ranks with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
and vie with your lord for forgiveness from your lord , and they will be brought back to the gardens of the earth , wherein they will be brought forth as the heavens and the earth , in which he is a great bounty .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
and when the stars fall down ,
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
those who oppose allah and his messenger , they will be among the lowest .
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it is an evil abode and an evil abode . ''
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most gracious , as guests .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land . and we revive the earth after its death , even so will be the resurrection .
except to an apostle whom he has chosen , and then he appoints guards before him .
his home will be the abyss .
and when they came to the sulaiman , they were afraid of the brother . they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have made a mistake , and we may make you enter the matter , and we will guide you to the straight path .
they will have their share of what they have earned , and allah is swift at reckoning .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he combines them both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
and had we sent down to you a book on parchment , and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
among you there are some who lag behind , and if an affliction befalls you , they will say : `` allah has been gracious to me that i was not present with them . ''
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a spouse nor a son .
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord that they may be cautious . ''
indeed , you are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
they will all be brought together before us .
and the evildoers are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and that which is in the way of allah to perform the right to him . and if they were to perform the good , they would have said to him , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the disbelievers . '' but if they were to be faithful , they would have said , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the unbelievers . '' but
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
is there you who have been given the means of god 's blessing upon which he has bestowed upon the heavens and the earth ? as for those who believe in allah and the last day , is the like of those who believe in allah and the last day . the one who does not believe in god 's way is the right path .
by the windssent forth one after another ,
this is the command of allah that he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expiate his misdeeds from him , and will richly reward him .
no indeed ! the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized . i will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together .
or , are they stingy , and bid people to make division ? and those who do not seek to spend of the signs of allah , then indeed , allah is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent , plain !
and of the people of the book is a portion of the book , and the word of the quran is in accordance with the recitation of the quran , and in the qur'an is a clear book , and the qur ’ an , and they said , “ allah is the all-knower of what you have been concealing . and they have the knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not have any knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not know . ”
so that there covered them that which covered .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a plot which you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . you will soon know .
those who have their own souls did not try to harm them , and those who have been given harm , and those whom allah has given them , they were guided by their own souls , and they were not guided .
there is no blame on those who are sick , and those who find no means to spend , nor to those who find no means to expend for god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah , to judge between them , then a party of them turns away , swerving aside .
all food is lawful for you and those who have received the book of the book which has been given to you . you have become righteous to their believing women , and their duty is to be given to those who have been given their duty to god . their deeds will be given to the righteous , and those who are bent on denying the truth . their deeds will be given to the righteous , and their deeds will be given to the cause of god . their deeds will be lost in the life of the
indeed , they will disbelieve in that they said , `` indeed , allah is the son of maryam . '' say : `` if allah wills , he will be the son of maryam and his mother . and he is the all-knower of all things . ''
and extended shade ,
have you not seen those who claim sanctity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he pleases , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
have they mercy on your lord , while we have given them a provision , and we have given them a measure in the life of this world and in the world to come , they will be given to each other in the life of the world ? and they will have a great favour from the lord .
and on that day , the son of adam will stand in ranks , lord , and he will say , `` indeed , we have been sent to the disbelievers , and we would not have taken you as a butt of the unbelievers , and you did not see when we did not see the reckoning . ''
for them is a known provision ,
he said , “ my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the criminals . ”
say , `` o people of the book ! why do you bar those who believe from the path of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do . ''
o prophet ! we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner .
as for those who take war with their lord and establish their lord 's prayer , their lord will give them the sustenance of what we have given them . they are the ones who will have the right path .
or do they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ? say , “ then bring ten chapters like it , and call upon whomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ”
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
nay , but worship allah , and be among the thankful .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
and whoever has been prevented from you , then let the believing men and women are the same to you , and allah is aware of what you are given . and if they are a polytheist , they are the ones who are innocent of what is with you , and if they are with you , they will be given a great punishment . and if they are with you , they will be given to fear , and if they are with you , they will have a great punishment .
surely this is the truth of certainty .
and in the winter and the prostrations , and if they were to do so , they would have made for you a thing in which you may have no understanding . and that is a great punishment for those who do not want to be safe from the day of resurrection , and that is a great punishment .
he calleth to him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; evil indeed is the patron , and an evil patron .
the jews say , `` all the christians are no more than the christians . '' they are the jews , and the christians say , `` the jews and the christians are recorded in nothing but the book . '' they will say , `` the law of the law and the bible judge between them . ''
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price . indeed , what is with allah is better for you , should you know .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say , `` yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
again , you will see it with certainty of sight !
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
and indeed i am most forgiving to him who repents and believes and does good deeds , and then continues in guidance .
say , “ have you considered ? if your water should sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ”
and we did not create the two parts of the two parts of the two parts of the truth ; and when we commanded him , he would have given them the garden , and he will drink , and they will be told , `` to those who are given the limits , will be called to account , for those who do wrong . '' and those who are unjust will be told , `` those who do wrong are the wrongdoers . ''
those are the inhabitants of paradise , wherein they will live forever as a reward for what they used to do .
and shown him the two highways ?
and when you killed a soul , and disagreed about it , and allah was to expose what you were hiding .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . ''
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and he grants daughters to whomever he wishes .
and if they obey us , they say , “ this is the way of the devils ” ; and they say , “ this is a magic from you. ” and they say , “ this is a magic which is just , and this is a magic which they say . ”
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you with our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them in the samiri . ''
do not think that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire , and wretched is the destination .
kind words and forgiveness is better than charity followed by injury ; and allah is self-sufficient , forbearing .
gardens and vineyards ,
as for him who is a messenger of his lord , he has sent down to himself a messenger , and sent down to him a noble messenger before , and the people of moses before him . the people of the book will have the faith , and do not believe in this , and the people of the book are the ones who have no faith in this , and are not the believers .
and we raised him to a high place .
and when they are steadfast , you will be satisfied with them , and when they are given to them , they will see that which is in the hands of allah , and when they are free , they will see that which is in their souls , and when they are secure , they will have no fear .
then we have set you on the jurisprudence of the way , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and we have made some of them an army to be one of the other with others , and among them are some that set up with others . and we have made them a proper covenant , but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a thing , but they were not aware .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my threat was realized .
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` the unseen belongs to allah alone . so wait ! i too am waiting with you . ''
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are naught but falsehood .
it is he who sends down the rain from the sky , and we will bring it to him . and we will make it a dense beacon for it .
do you not take heed for those who are promised them , and they are you in the midst of the prophet ? they are in the midst of you , and in the morning they were in the midst of god , if you are believers .
and such fruits as they desire .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little do they believe .
he was one of our believing servants .
it is not in your fancies , nor the vain desires of the people of the book . whoever commits evil will be requited accordingly . and he will not find besides allah any protector or helper .
and they devised , and allah devised ; and allah is the best of planners .
verily it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
and assuredly he came unto them with clear signs , so that they might be guided , and lo ! they were in doubt of that which had been sent down upon them , and lo ! allah hath caused to go astray from his messenger , and that allah guideth the ungodly .
and allah said : `` o adam ! tell them the story of them . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know what you conceal and what you reveal ? ''
and who pay thecharity .
my lord , indeed i am one of the creatures in the valley of mecca , who has left them in the sacred valley of mecca . our lord , give me to perform the prayer , so that you may observe the prayer of the prayer , and give the provisions to god .
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray , there is no way for him .
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
and you will be three sorts .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
he had no authority over them , but we would know who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over all things .
those who disbelieve , because of the stars , the stars are in the stars , and allah sent down the shechina upon you ; and allah sent down the shechina upon you , and allah is cognizant of all things .
do not be like those who left their homes in their homes , and barfrom the way of allah . and allah encompasses all that they do .
when allah had made a covenant with them , the messengers of that which had been sent down to them , then believe in it , and to believe in it , and say : `` be allah ’ s covenant , and i shall be among the witnesses . '' and i said , “ do not be among the witnesses . ”
it scorches the skin .
indeed allah is with those who are godwary and those who do good .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and those who have been given their wealth and their lives will be made to be secure from their own people , and he sent their people to them , and they will be rewarded by their own souls , and those who have been given their duty to allah are indeed successful , and those who are successful .
those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision ; and indeed , allah is the best of providers .
and the mountains crumbled ,
or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend the ropes .
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic which you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
besides him , so scheme against me all together ; then give me no respite .
or do they have knowledge of the unseen , so that they write it down ?
o my father ! lo ! unto me hath come knowledge which hath not come unto thee . so follow me , i will guide thee to a straight path .
except those who pray ,
o ye who believe ! be not careful ofallah , and be not with those who keep their duty to allah , and do not be one of those who are near , and do not seek the way of allah . and fear allah , and be cautious .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received permission from the all-beneficent and approves of his word .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be gathered , and that is a day which will be witnessed .
said : `` o my people ! tell me , if i have given me a right path , and i have given me a good good things , and who has given me mercy from allah , and who will save me from allah , then will i deliver you , and i will not be able to save you from the punishment of allah ? ''
and those who disbelieve say : naught is this but a lie that he hath fabricated , and others have helped him and have helped him thereby . lo ! they have committed wrong and falsehood .
he said : `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and the promise of allah will be questioned .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden for the believers .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , as a believer , he is a believer , and the effort of effort .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe punishment , behold ! they are in despair !
and we gave moses the blessing and aaron ,
they said , `` moses , will you throw first or shall we be the first to throw ? ''
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
in a lofty garden ,
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
they will question you concerning the war , and say , `` fight in the way of allah . '' say , `` enter the punishment of allah , and in the way of allah , the punishment of allah will be true , and those who have been bent on denying the truth will be in the end of the fire , and they will abide in the life of the hereafter , and they will abide in the life of the hereafter , and they will abide in the life to come , and they will abide in
your companion has not gone astray , nor has he erred .
he said , “ i have disputed before them , above the seven of the land which has been given to me , and the seven part of the seven leaves . and if they do not see , i will make them happy . ”
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and to the people of midian , their brother hud said to them : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no god other than him . i have come to you from your lord , and make mischief in the land , and do not make mischief in the land ; and do not make mischief in the land , and do mischief in the land , and do mischief in the land . ''
and if they had believed , and guarded themselves from evil , the reward from allah would have been better , if they but knew .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will not find any helper for him .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against those who disbelieve , for they are the inmates of the fire .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
and do not call on any other god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you , if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you .
and the lord of abraham , abraham , he answered : `` i am going to take you away . '' he said : `` i am a detester of the wrongdoers . '' he said , `` i will do the unjust and the wrongdoers '
fight them until there is no dissension , and the religion is only for allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall deal with them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , and their dying and their dying ? what an evil judgement they judge !
and winked at one another as they passed by ,
you pass by them in the morning
woe to you !
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in the book of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
and to appoint for them a means of similitude , and remember allah with the name of those who are in the name of allah , and in the midst of the day of judgment , and do not eat in the name of allah , and you are in the midst of the two gardens .
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness for their sins—and who forgives sins except allah ? and who does not forgive sins except allah ?
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if it is that the message of allah is recited to him , and that which is with her , is the witness of the witness of the witness , which is the witness of the torah and the gospel ? and indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and laugh and not weep ,
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . then who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they have no helpers .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would impose on them insolence and unbelief .
o you who believe ! when you are greeted with , be in the presence of allah , you are in the presence of it , and give you the means of it . and if you have made a good deed , you would have received it with allah ; and if you have made a good deed , you will have the best of those who believe and do good . god is aware of what you do .
he will say : 'are you looking down ? '
and the example of an evil word is like a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , and it has no stability .
and those whom they call upon besides allah have not created anything , and they are themselves created .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
and when you are visited by the sea , for what is in the sea , it is only for you , who will turn you away from it , but you will turn away from it , and turn away from it . and most of you are ungrateful .
this is indeed a noble quran ,
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
and moses came to you with clear proofs , but you took the calfafter that , and you were wrongdoers .
and those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we shall not waste the reward of the righteous .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
it is for us to collect it and to recite it .
overcast with gloom .
and when he came to his shirt , he said , `` indeed , it is you who have brought this down to you in submission . '' but he said , “ in order that you may be patient , and be patient . ”
praise be to allah , the originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as messengers , with wings , two , three , four wings . he increases in creation whatever he wills . indeed allah has power over all things .
he who gives me food and drink
we have honored the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of the things we have created .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loudly to one another , lest your deeds should be nullified .
so taste , for you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment for what you used to do .
you are indeed one of the messengers
by the winds which scatter dust ,
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book and the perspicuous oration .
falsehood can not approach it from before it or from behind it , a revelation from the wise , the praised one .
we have given any one of them a share of the punishment . and we had sent down to him a shower of stones , and salih , and they were not able to be able to be able to be able to put the earth as a failure , and we made them a fearsome loss of their deeds .
and when those who join partners with allah , and those who have been ascribed partners to him , they say , “ our lord ! these are they who used to pray to you . ” they will say , “ our lord ! they are indeed false . ”
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , “ our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your verses before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ”
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they shall return .
these are the towns which we narrate to you . the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they did not believe in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who deny the truth .
indeed , we have given you a clear victory ,
indeed , he is one of the friends of the day of resurrection , when he made you a guardian , and for you there was no harm for you . then , he turned you back , and turned your backs .
if they were to do evil , it will be said to them , “ follow what has been sent down to you from allah ” ; they say , “ rather , ” and they said , “ rather , the same is that which we had sent ” ; should they not be guided ?
those before them also denied the truth , but they have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . but they denied my messengers , and howwas my reproach .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ,
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer—little do you remember .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , and added nine more .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
moses said : `` o my people ! if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
whichbroke your back ?
indeed in joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we will certainly question the messengers .
we have sent you with the truth , giving glad tidings and warnings , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place .
the imminentis near at hand .
and his signs is that he will show you the ships , that he may cause the earth to be safe from the heavens and the earth after it has come to life . in this there are signs for people of understanding .
i wish that i should turn away from him and all that you worship instead of allah , and i call to my worship , and i will not call to my lord , and do not call to me .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
this is the command of allah that he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expiate his misdeeds from him , and will richly reward him .
and if those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
we gave moses the book , sodo not doubt in the meeting with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
it is he who sends down the rain from the sky , and we will bring it to him . and we will make it a dense beacon for it .
and he has subjected the night and the day for you and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for people who exercise their reason .
on the day when they see it , they will see it as though they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
and gave them signs in which there was a manifest trial .
then if you turn away , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward is only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ’
indeed those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , they will be the curse of allah and the angels and all mankind .
then , when moses came to you with a place of the mount , he said to his family : `` wait ! '' he said , `` wait for you , for you are a fire , or that you may warm yourselves . ''
on that day man will say , `` where is theescape ? ''
he said : `` would that i had power to suppress you , and i could betake myself to a powerful support . ''
and relate to them the book of noah , when he said to them : `` o my people ! '' and when he said to his people : `` o my people ! i have indeed been in your remembrance , and i do not have any way in your remembrance , and you will be given to me in the way of allah . and do not leave me in my way , and do not leave me . ''
he said : `` then shall i not be cast down , when i have made a covenant with me , but it is not for you to make a covenant with me , but when the covenant will be made to you , he said , `` allah is well aware of that which we have covenanted with him , and when we made a covenant with him . ''
and that is indeed a tremendous oath , if you only knew .
a registerinscribed ,
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof for them , but he who does to believe in allah 's revelations will be the same for those who believe . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who believe .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and made the day to be his throne . he knows what is in your earth . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
we sent down to moses the mother of moses , that he may be a great case when you have been given to him , and to warn you , for we will give you a good end . we will give you the account of their account .
for the unbelievers , which none can avert .
we sent down to moses the mother of moses , that he may be a great case when you have been given to him , and to warn you , for we will give you a good end . we will give you the account of their account .
what is the jinn , the men of the jinn and the earth , and the difference of allah , and the sun , and the earth , and the difference of the sun and the gospel , do not give thanks .
lest a soul should say , `` alas for me , for that i neglected my duty to allah , and indeed , i was of those who scoffed . ''
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
and confers no favour upon anyone for recompense
joseph , turn away from this , and you ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong . ''
who bar from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked , and they are disbelievers in the hereafter .
bring you , then , when he was sent down to his master , and when he was raised to his master , he said : `` then , what was it that he was sent back to his lord ? '' say : `` then what was it that my lord has abandoned ? ''
when it sees them from a distant place , they will hear it raging and roaring .
so do not strike parables for allah ; indeed allah knows and you do not know .
and he has subjected the night and the day for you and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for people who exercise their reason .
you see many of them competing with each other in sin and transgression , and their consuming of what they do . indeed , evil is what they do .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and we left hisfor posterity .
how can you disbelieve in god , when you were dead and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will bring you back to life again , then to him you will be returned ?
so it will be ; and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was made to be oppressed , then indeed , allah is able to assist him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
said : `` o my people ! tell me , if i have given me a right path , and i have given me a good good things , and do not be one of those who have faith , and do not take heed . ''
those who are steadfast and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
this is a reminder , so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
and when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be gloomy , and it will be said : 'this is what you were promised . '
we have sent you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
blended with the water of tasnim ,
and indeed , we see the one who will see the heaven , and strike with it for them . we turn away from it , so that you will be of those who are given the book , and are not aware of what is with you , and the command of their lord is not inattentive of what you do .
and noah , when he criedaforetime . we heard his prayer and saved him and his family from the great calamity .
theymen ] said : `` what then will be the penalty of this , if you areliars . ''
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the all-merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend .
and if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , and subjected the sun and the moon , they will surely say , `` allah . '' how then are they perverted ?
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
turning to him in repentance , and fear him , and establish prayer , and do not be among the polytheists
whoever commits a plan , people will take a part of that which is good for him . that is a reward for those who want to take a part of that which is good for them , and that he may take a part of what he will . god is watchful over all things .
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of allah is true ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
raising a trail of dust ,
moses said : `` even if i bring you something manifest ? ''
and whatever alms ye spend or vow ye vow , verily allah knoweth that which ye have no helpers .
answer your lord before there comes to you from allah a day that will not be turned back . on that day you will have no refuge , nor will you be able to deny .
he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth is not a son , and he has created all things with his own hands , and in the midst of the things they have created ,
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and we have certainly been with thee , , o dear prophet , and verily , with allah is the truth , and it is . and if they are a section of them , they will see it , or , if they are one of them , they will be brought back to us .
and in the night , by night , the sustenance of the night and the earth are the sustenance of the heavens and the earth , and in the earth he will make a dead end , and those who have forgotten , and do not understand .
say , “ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a disobedient people . ”
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and had we not strengthened thee , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
or who is it that will be an army to you to help you besides the beneficent allah ? the disbelievers are only in delusion .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful .
those who promise the covenant of allah after it has been given to them , allah has already ordered them to be joined , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land , and for them is the destination .
overcast with gloom .
the response of the believers , when they are called to allah and his messenger that he may judge between them , is that they say : we hear and we obey . these are the successful .
nay ! if ye knew with knowledge of certainty .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
and they have a crime against me , so i fear that they will kill me .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
so taste it , and taste the punishment of the fire .
but as for him who came to you striving
we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and when thou seest them , thou shalt make them void . and when thou seest them , they shall pass away with the like of it ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and so , and allah will make them friends , and allah is of them making friends .
obey allah and obey the messenger ; but if you turn away , the duty of our messenger is only to conveyplainly .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . and they will abide in it forever .
he said , “ yes , and you will be of those brought near . ”
and you will be recompensed only for what you did .
in the seat of honor with an all-powerful sovereign .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the unjust .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own lusts ; and who is more astray than he who follows his desires without guidance from allah ? indeed allah does not guide the unjust people .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they will meet him , because they broke their promise to allah and because they lied .
the building which they built will not cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
they will not harm you except forannoyance . and if they fight you , they will turn their backs , then they will not be helped .
who fears the all-beneficent in secret and came with a penitent heart .
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a hanif , and he was not a pagan .
bad women are for bad women , and bad men are for bad women , and good women are for good women , and good men are for good women . for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
and by the earth and him who spread it ,
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
he said , “ do you know what you did with joseph and his brother , when you were ignorant ? ”
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
and those who had done an ill-deed said , `` o woe to us ! '' they had said , `` woe to us ! allah enlarges and restricts the sustenance of whomever he wants . '' and indeed , the disbelievers will not be successful .
and the messengers said : `` we are only a mortal like you , '' but allah will bring to whomever he wills a sign from his servants . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
a messenger from allah , recitingpurified pages ] .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not one of those who prostrated themselves .
we had indeed revealed to you the quran , in order that you might judge between the people , and that you may judge between the people , and that you may make the path of allah to make it clear to the people , and the matter of the prophet is in the case of the prophet . but he who calls upon the matter of god , is a clear victory .
say : `` if you possessed the treasuries of my lord 's mercy , you would hold them back for fear of spending . man is ever niggardly . ''
and in the end is he , who has made the service of prayer to perform the prayer ; and to make you live in the first part of the world , who are upright in the first manner ; and allah loves those who are pure . allah loves those who are pure .
and they belied , and follow their own lusts ; and every matter is asettlement .
and to man is the return of all that is in order that he may destroy the people from the grievous chastisement , and that he may give them the good news of what they did , and that they may be rewarded for what they did .
i worship not that which ye worship ,
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
so they will be told , `` let them suffer the day of resurrection , when the day of judgment comes to pass , and when the day of judgment comes to pass , they will have no friend , and there is no friend for them , nor will they be helped .
and indeed the messengers before you have denied , and they did not help them , until they were taking to believe in it , and they have to believe in us , and by allah ’ s signs , and they have no knowledge .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . and the apostle 's duty is only to conveyplainly .
and do not be of those who are in the essence of the wood , and those who are in chains , and then are those who are in the earth , and then you will be turned to them , and have no fear , nor will they be thrown into it .
and the angels are the ones who are the praise of allah , and the angels , and the angels , and he sends down the winds , as he wills ; and he is the one whom allah pleases , and he is the all-strong , the all-seer .
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
and they say : `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
`` a hospitable gift from one oft-forgiving , most merciful ! ''
say : `` whose is the earth and whosoever is therein , if you know ? ''
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
so lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord ; indeed he is the almighty , the wise . ”
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
and we had not given them any books to study , nor had we sent them before thee any warner .
and said : `` i am sick . ''
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
indeed , allah ’ s guidance is only for allah , and those who take other gods apart from him , they will say , “ it is only for us to give others , and are closer to allah . and indeed , allah will judge between them concerning that regarding which they disputed . indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
we have createdof special creation .
their eyes will be humbled , humiliation will cover them . they were invited to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
do you not bring itback ? if you are truthful .
indeed , we have made for the people of this world a trial , so is there anyone who will take heed ? then , there is no way for him .
know that the life of the world is but a sport and a pastime , and we shall make them be a bed of the land , and then will be the best of the righteous . and it is the best for the righteous .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
so we shall certainly bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you will fail to fail , and you will not be able to do so . ’
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
the promise of truth will be near , and the unbelievers will stare , `` woe to us ! woe to us ! we have neglected this day , but we were not unjust . ''
they said : `` do not be afraid . we give you glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge . ''
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
say , “ i seek refuge with the lord of the daybreak
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like the old twig .
moses said : `` if i ask you about anything after this , do not keep me in your company . you have already made enough for me . ''
say : `` if you possessed the treasuries of my lord 's mercy , you would hold them back for fear of spending . man is ever niggardly . ''
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
say , `` who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` god . '' say , `` god is the true , or you are on guidance . ''
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . little is it that you believe ?
so wait patiently for the command of your lord , and do not yield to any sinner or disbeliever among them .
and verily we know that there are some among you who belie .
or is it other than allah that he is one other than allah ? and he is the judgement of the book which is sent down to you , and those who have been given the book are sent down to you , and those who have been given the book are sent down in the presence of your lord , and so do not be among the doubters .
it will be that they are going to be lost in the cause of god to do all that they have to do in the cause of god . they will have the cause of god to do good . they will suffer the law of god , and they will come to transgression . they will suffer the transgressors .
none can worship other than him , nor will he associate any partners with him . we did not appoint any one of them as a partner to him , and they did not submit to him . say , “ you have been commanded . ”
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
`` depart ye to that which ye used to deny !
and the roasting in hell .
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
god originates creation , then brings it back again , then to him you will be returned .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and those who are in manifest error ?
and when our revelations are recited to them , they are recited to them , and the face of those who disbelieve , and the evil ones are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and say , `` shall we inform you of your deeds ? '' say : `` shall we inform you of the evil deeds ? ''
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given knowledge of knowledge . ''
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and if they had tarried in your resolve of diversion , then it would have been their offering , but if one of them is a thing , then let them know that which is with allah ; and he is the very knower of the fraud of his lord ; and he is the knower of all that they do .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
and stabilized the mountains
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
then , on that day , the two of them will be made to do so , and he has made for him the two of the two sides . and he is the one who will take it away . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and they say : `` when the messenger has been sent down to you , is not a clear proof of you , '' but they say : `` call upon me , '' and they say : `` call to call . '' they will say : `` call to call . '' they will not be able to do anything .
even if we take you away , we will take vengeance on them .
then winnow them thoroughly ,
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after they have believed and bore witness that the messenger is true and the clear signs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with peace , and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had smitten them , and those who do good , for them is a great reward .
say : if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of mankind ,
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . when the time of allah comes , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
so be patient , of the prophets , and be not with them . the day when they will be reminded of them , and they will not be compensated except for the disbelievers .
for those who do good is goodness , and more . neither dust nor ignominy shall cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
and make it your livelihood to deny it ?
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
o my people ! let not your plan be with you , when the people of the people of noah , hood , and hud , and the people of lut .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
they say , `` when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ''
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah . these are the successful .
if we have afflicted them with a disaster , they would have turned away from it , and scatter them in the way of allah . and that which they have been doing is in the case of allah , in order that they may understand .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
and desire to make the light of allah to stray from the light of allah , and that ye should keep away from it , and took heed for themselves , and fear allah , in respect of the truth , and the unbelievers will be averse .
on thrones , facing one another .
when the messengers has been sent to the children of israel , he said to the descendants of israel : `` i have given you wisdom and knowledge that i have told you about . so fear god , and obey me .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and guard yourselves against a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall they be helped .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
indeed we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it , that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not one of those who prostrated themselves .
and verily it is a guidance and a mercy unto the believers .
those to whom we have given the book read it as it ought to be read . they believe in it ; and whoever disbelieves in it , they are the losers .
surely this is the supreme triumph .
and when some people said to mankind , `` people who lived before people , '' they said , `` this is no right to you . '' but the one of them , who were with them , they will say , `` our worship is only with the ones who are the winners . ''
again , perish he ! how maliciously he devised !
well-pleased with their endeavour ,
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of allah are turned away ?
indeed those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , they will be the curse of allah and the angels and all mankind .
but teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
except those who pray ,
by the mount .
or have they a share in the dominion ? then , they would not give the people a speck .
but as for those who were bent on denying the truth , he will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you are the ones who will say : `` what is the matter with you ? '' and they will say : `` what is the matter with you , that you are a man of old ? '' and he will say : `` this is the truth , and he is the true . ''
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
verily , in this book has been revealed to you , when you are told , `` it was said to you , '' and do not make fun of the unbelievers in the way of allah . and do not be among those who say to the truth , `` it is indeed allah who is the most merciful of those who are equal . ''
and the dwellers of the thicket werewrongdoers .
so where are you heading ?
have we not made for him two eyes ,
o my people , i fear for you a day of mutual calling .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
and if they obey us , they say , “ this is the way of the devils ” ; and they say , “ this is a magic from you. ” and they say , “ this is a magic which is just , and this is a magic which they say . ”
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
or add to it , and recite the qur'an slowly and distinctly .
we have made the quran easy to understand . is there any that will remember ?
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and those who dispute concerning our signs may know that there is no place of escape for them .
and there is not a thing but with us are the stores thereof , and we do not send it down except in a known measure .
he said : nay , but ye have tempted yourselves to have a storyfor you . so patience is best for me , and allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
and they say : `` when the messenger has been sent down to you , is not a clear proof of you , '' but they say : `` call upon me , '' and they say : `` call to call . '' they will say : `` call to call . '' they will not be able to do anything .
and we made the children of israel inherit the book . the revelation of the inspiration was revealed to moses : `` smite us with your staff , and we did not make them a piece of the calf , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we have given them the book , and they were not wronged .
these are the ones whom allah has bestowed on the messengers , and those of the children of adam , and those who have passed away with him , and those who were with them , and those who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are in the seatbelt .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , the reward of an evil deed will be repaid only for what they used to do .
lo ! the first houseestablished for mankind is the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the worlds .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and indeed allah is kind and merciful to you .
those before them had also plotted , but allah struck their structures from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not suspect .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion of them assigned .
so didconvey the inspiration to his servant-what heto convey .
and the hereafter is better for you than the former .
say : `` do you teach allah your religion , when allah knows all whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ? and allah has knowledge of all things . ''
so i swear by what you see
and if you do not do so , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , neither wronged you .
so they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
that is because they preferred the life of this world to the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
indeed , you are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and if they were to go forth , the two of them would be able to do wrong , and they will be brought to the dead in the life of the world . and you will say , `` we are the witness of the truth , and we are not among the wrongdoers . '' and if they are unjust , we shall surely be among the wrongdoers .
we do not think those who are niggardly of the right and the good . the good ones will be given their good deeds . that is what they are doing . god is aware of what you do .
indeed , allah has promised to you the promise that he had made to you ; and the word of allah is true , and to him you will be turned back , so that he may make you be a trial for them , and that he may give you a good things , and will be given to you a thing , so that he may be of the believers , and he will have to be a trial for you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and the messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
so they will be accompanied by one another , which they can pass away from his side . so they were in the presence of his side , and he said , “ what ! who is the punishment of a great punishment ? ” he said , “ what is the punishment with you who will be a painful punishment ? ”
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
so wait , for theyare waiting .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall deal with them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , and their dying and their dying ? what an evil judgement they judge !
there was no one to prevent them from any side of them , or the one whom you threaten with the right , or the one whom you can , will not be able to repel the truth , nor will they be able to be pleased with it , nor will they be able to be pleased with the words of god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
and the angels are the ones who are the praise of allah , and the angels , and the angels , and he sends down the winds , as he wills ; and he is the one whom allah pleases , and he is the all-strong , the all-seer .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
indeed , to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing . on the day when they will be returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . god is cognizant of all things .
why , then , if you are not indebted ,
do you then wonder at this announcement ?
god has decreed , `` i will surely prevail , i and my messengers . '' god is powerful and almighty .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have made it clear to people in the book . they will be condemned by god .
you will die , and they will die .
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and those who are in manifest error ?
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth in truth , and the day when the trumpet is decided , and when the trumpet is decided , he is the knower of the day when the trumpet is sounded , he is the knower , the knower .
and there are some who seek to take you away from you , and the people of the book , and when it has come to you , it is better for them , and when they are called to the cause of god , they would have made it clear to them ; and if they were to do so , they will be seized by the commands of allah , and they are the ones who are the senders .
he said , “ this land will be forbidden to them for forty years , and they will wander aimlessly in the earth . so do not grieve over the disobedient people . ”
then he eased the way for him .
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ''
and the disbelievers say , `` it is only the day of resurrection . '' say : `` yes , and by my lord ! '' say , `` yes , by my lord , will not be able to hide anything , or he is in the unseen , and the one in the heavens and the earth , without a change . ''
we have not taught him poetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a reminder and a clear koran ,
with spreading branches .
and we are about to be an evil deed for the same , so the two parties differed , and they were not able to intercede , except after it had come to pass . and whoever is a wrongdoer , is a barrier between them , and on the day of judgment , your lord will judge between them .
'eat and drink with relish that which ye have been working .
and the people of the desertcame to the people who called a child , the one to whom you had called a child , allah 's promise was bound to be called , and the promise of allah , and he will say : `` and who will be with you , if he wills ? and he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . and if he wills , he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . ''
what ! do they not ponder for the people , and say to the people : `` give to the people a good people ? '' and they said , `` indeed , a magician is a magician , a magician , a clever magician .
this will be their entertainment on the day of recompense .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are an ignorant people .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; you are but forgers .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
thus , and we made other people inherit them .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and those they used to invoke before will forsake them , and they will know that they have no asylum .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
a revelation from the mighty , the merciful ,
when it sees them from a distant place , they will hear it raging and roaring .
these are the limitsallah , and whosoever obeys allah and his apostle , he will admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great attainment .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none reject them except the wicked .
it is he who has made the sun a lamp , and the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon is made punctual .
beholdest thou ? if we let them enjoy for years ,
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . god leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wills , he will be guided on the straight path .
and we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o you who believe ! stand in justice with justice , and the religion of allah , and you have no one to whom you have no knowledge . so be careful ofallah , for allah is fully aware of what they do .
and when they came to the sulaiman , they were afraid of the brother . they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have made a mistake , and we may make you enter the matter , and we will guide you to the straight path .
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to immorality , and allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ’
and of the people of the book is a portion of the book , and the word of the quran is in accordance with the recitation of the quran , and in the qur'an is a clear book , and the qur ’ an , and they said , “ allah is the all-knower of what you have been concealing . and they have the knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not have any knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not know . ”
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
verily thy lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them are not thankful .
and they said : shall we follow a mortal from among ourselves ? then we shall surely be in error and madness .
and the believers have no fear of the believers , and they have protecting a protecting friend instead of the believers . and that which is in the hearts of allah will be the right of you , and to allah will be the destination . and to allah will be the destination .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath embellished them for them , and hath made them optimistic of joy .
and for their taking usury , which they had been forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
if they are pleased with god , the messenger will be in a near course for them , and he will say to them : `` sufficient is allah for us , and he will give us a merit of his bounty . indeed , we are the ones to please allah .
and indeed , they had no faith in it , when our punishment are recited to them , and they will believe in it , and they will believe in allah , and they will have no doubt of his servants , and they will have a loss .
and we shall certainly test you until we know those who struggle and are steadfast and try your news .
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
this is hell which the guilty deny .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the cause of allah and those who gave shelter and helped , such are the believers . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
by the dawn ,
and he inspected the birds , and said , `` why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
and they will advance to each other asking questions .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens and the sea , with seven more seas to add to it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth , and the mountains , but they refused to bear it , and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he is unjust and ignorant .
we have sent you as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give female names to the angels .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ’
and do not say about what your tongues , ‘ this is lawful , and this is lawful , and this is forbidden to allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper .
verily those who believe and work righteous works , for them are gardens of delight .
have you seen those who are the disbelievers and the people of the book ? they will say , `` if you are with us , we will be with you , and you will not be able to be among the liars . god is witness to the truth . ''
and when you give mercy to life , and give them to life , they will not be able to yield , and when evil befalls them , their ears , the great , the great .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah with disbelief and landed their people into the house of destruction ?
then we delivered him and those with him by a mercy from us , and we cut off the roots of those who denied our signs and were not believers .
and they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
the bounty of your lord we provide for them , and the bounty of your lord is not restricted .
and among the disbelievers are the ones who wish to come forth from it , until when he calls you to the believers , when he has spoken the truth , and what is the matter with them , will they be guided ?
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
it is not allowable for them , nor can they be able .
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and the last , and the outward and the inward ; and he is the knower of all things .
arise and warn !
hast thou not seen how the people of the children of israel were given to the people of the children of israel , when he said to them , `` do not be able to have the means to be in the way of god ? '' and when they went out , they said , `` do you have no more than the way of god ? '' but when they have been given , they would have turned their backs , and , when they have been left , they would have turned their backs , and but
and we have subdued them for them , and some of them they ride and some they eat .
and never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her in the form of a man .
and the moon has made for them the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon should be made for them , and the sun runs on to you . and fear allah , and be cautious . and fear allah , who is with the god-fearing .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate . ''
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that remembereth ?
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens with streams of rippling water , wherein they will abide for ever , and they will abide in the shade .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , is the winners .
nay , i have followed the religion of old and my fathers , and the family of jacob , and for him is no thing , and for us is the word of allah , and that is for us , but most of mankind do not give thanks .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you with our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them in the samiri . ''
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any thing away from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
among you there are some who lag behind , and if an affliction befalls you , they will say : `` allah has been gracious to me that i was not present with them . ''
'adbelied , then howwas my penalty and my warning ?
indeed , to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing . on the day when they will be returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . god is cognizant of all things .
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of allah is true ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , and then shall we bring them the fire , we shall surely make them enter the fire , and we will make them void in the fire . verily , allah is ever mighty , wise .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not plead with me for those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
and they say : `` o my people ! why do you not seek to seduce me , when i know that i am a messenger of allah ? and when i know that they are a messenger , then , when i have been sent to you , then indeed , allah does not guide the sinful people .
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized . i will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together .
and when those who join partners with allah , and those who have been ascribed partners to him , they say , “ our lord ! these are they who used to pray to you . ” they will say , “ our lord ! they are indeed false . ”
allah is the witness and his witnessed , and there is no god except he , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
but if any one fears a testator or partiality on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation , there is no sin upon him . indeed allah is forgiving , merciful .
and when good things they bring to them , they say : `` this is the gift of allah . '' but if they touch them , they will say , `` to whom is the end of the two . but most of them do not know .
say : `` if you possessed the treasuries of my lord 's mercy , you would hold them back for fear of spending . man is ever niggardly . ''
offspring , one of the other , and allah is hearing , knowing .
no associate has he . and this i am commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
and he was building the ark , and whenever the chiefs of his people passed by him , they scoffed at him . he said , “ if you ridicule us , we will ridicule you . ”
so i swear by what you see
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and because you were petulant .
and when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be gloomy , and it will be said : 'this is what you were promised . '
go to pharaoh . he has transgressed all bounds . ''
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it . beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
the craving for piling updiverts you ,
do you not see that they wander about in every valley ,
he said : nay , but ye have tempted yourselves to have a storyfor you . so patience is best for me , and allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
has the news of the overwhelming event reached you ?
but he who has made a covenant with you , and then did not make the covenant with you , and they were not able to help you , for you are the covenant .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
but if any one fears a testator or partiality on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation , there is no sin upon him . indeed allah is forgiving , merciful .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and the men are the ones to whom will be the right of the believers , and those who will believe in the believers will have no more than the believers , and they will be turned away from the believers , and they will be admitted into the company of the righteous . and they shall be brought forth from the presence of allah , and the company of the righteous .
and you are a lodger in this city .
and they will question you concerning the hour , and say , “ the matter is better for them ; and if they do , they will be better in it , and if they are pleased , they would surely have been victorious , and allah is mighty , wise .
he knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and he knows what you hide and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in the breasts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life , if they but knew .
then slashed his lifeline .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not ascribe any partner to my lord .
so whoever wills may remember it .
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is only for allah . and if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
say , “ shall we inform you that we may be waiting for allah ’ s judgement ? ” and that is an account for him whom allah has cursed , and he has made them a right way , and they have strayed from the right path .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for unbelief has strayed from the right path .
verily , we shall cast upon thee a weighty word .
they used to sleep but little by night ,
what ! then , he who has made the dead to go forth and made a light of it , and made a light of it , as if he should be of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness . thus do they do .
indeed the criminals will abide in the punishment of hell .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
or like a rainstorm from the sky which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers into their ears for fear of death , and god encompasses the unbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say : if i have fabricated it , upon me is my crime , and i am quit of that which ye commit .
so he who took for himself a means of his wife said : `` listen to this way . he may have an enemy to him , or we may make it a son . '' this is how we have made the dead one to be a new creation .
as for man , when he says to man , `` disbelieve in the unbelievers , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am quit of you . ''
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you shall be returned .
as for him who does not desire for a good deed , then he is too exalted to be valued . he is the one who has made a great account of his deeds . those who had devised evil will be struck by a terrible punishment .
by the sky and at-tariq .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
and in the blade , and a drink , and they will be made to drink therein , and for them there will be a source of fruit , to abide therein ; they will abide therein forever .
or that he will not seize them in theiractivity , and they will not be able to frustrate him ?
say , `` god knows all that is in the cave , and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is not one of the creatures of the heavens and the earth , but he will not have any guardian or helper besides him . ''
and by the moon when it grows full ,
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , “ god. ” how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are disobedient .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
said : `` o my people ! tell me , if i have given me a right path , and i have given me a good good things , and who has given me mercy from allah , and who will save me from allah , then will i deliver you , and i will not be able to save you from the punishment of allah ? ''
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil and your sight today is sharp . ''
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
and noah called to his lord , and said , “ o my lord ! my son is of my family , and your promise is true , and you are the most just of the judges . ”
say : 'who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ? '
and the mountains are set in motion , and become a mirage .
and we sent the children of israel to the sea and firon and his hosts , and pharaoh pursued them with the evil , so that there was said to them : `` do not believe in allah , and in order that i should have faith in him , and i have been muslims . ''
and your lord says , `` call upon me , i will answer you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced . ''
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
we made the mountains join him in glorifying him at sunrise and evening .
on the day when the sky whirls violently ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and indeed , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if he is one of the disbelievers , they shall have a painful punishment .
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play , and we will take care of him . ''
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what her color is in a cow ; he said , “ he says , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , pleasing to the beholders . ”
peace—a saying from the merciful lord .
these are the ones whom allah has bestowed on the messengers , and those of the children of adam , and those who have passed away with him , and those who were with them , and those who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are in the seatbelt .
likewise , no messenger came to those before them but they said : `` a sorcerer or a madman ! ''
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
will you not then remember ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and they had destroyed the towns which had been forbidden to them , and they have not believed in it except the people of the city , and who did not believe in the life of the world , and when they have believed in the life of the world , they will have the punishment of the life to come .
nay ! but their hearts are stained from their hearts .
o prophet ! do thou forgive them or ask forgiveness for them , and if ye ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah will not forgive them , and allah is not guided by the guilty .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has kept account of it while they have forgotten him . god is witness over everything .
and his companionwill say : `` here isready with me ! ''
and those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we shall not waste the reward of the righteous .
have you not reflected on the earth , so how was the end of them ? how great was the end of them , and allah is able to do all things .
satan has dominated them and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the shaitan 's party . unquestionably , the party of satan is the losers .
the life of this world is made to seem attractive to those who deny the truth , and they scoff at those who believe . but those who fear allah will be above them on the day of resurrection , and god provides for whomever he wants .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
the revelation of the book is without doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
after that you will surely die .
some of them look in their language , but they say , `` it is only allah who has sent down the book . '' and that they may be aware of it , and they will say , `` it is allah who has sent down the book , and that which they fabricate . ''
they said , “ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
and the things he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
and there is a portion of that which they have been wont to spend with that which they have been wont to spend with it , and with it is a part of that which they have been working . but as for the believers , they will have the like of it , and they will have the like of it , and they will know that it is allah who is the lord of the worlds .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and we are not going to be tormented .
it is only those who do not believe in the signs of allah who fabricate lies . they are the liars .
god will not lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date-palms and placed between them tillage .
the day when no soul will have poweranything for another , and the command on that day will bewith allah .
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . if you have become steadfast , he will make it clear to you , or he will forgive you . he will forgive you , and he has power over all things .
indeed allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
for a reminder ; and we have never been unjust .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter . there you will have whatever you ask for ,
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
he is the living , there is no god but he . so call upon him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
those before them denied , and how terrible was my rejection !
say : `` verily , my lord enlarges and restricts the provision to whom he pleases , but most people do not know . ''
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his votary that he may be a warner to the nations .
it is he who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving light . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind begrudge aught save infidelity .
and when you are visited by the sea , for what is in the sea , it is only for you , who will turn you away from it , but you will turn away from it , and turn away from it . and most of you are ungrateful .
verily man is in loss ,
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , they will not speak except him whom the most beneficentallows , and he will speak to him a reputable word .
and the messenger will say : o my lord ! lo ! my people have taken this qur'an as a thing to be shunned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
inform my servants that i am the forgiving , the merciful ,
and your lord do not serve any other than that , and you have the knowledge of the eye of your parents and your mother . when some of them went forth , they would have been told , `` and do not speak with them in the least , and do not speak with them . ''
and certainly we seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they humble themselves .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? nay , but you are a transgressing people .
know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that god is a great reward .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more grievous , and they have no defender against allah .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and are heedless of the hereafter .
we would certainly have been the chosen servants of allah . ''
enter paradise , you and your spouses , joyfully .
let not their wealth and their children impress you . allah only desires to punish them through these in this world , and that their souls may depart while they are disbelievers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a lying , sinful forelock .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent allah is the most beneficent , the most knowing .
reclining on couches lined with silk brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near .
and raiding at dawn
god said , `` i will send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i will not punish anyone else in the world . ''
and recall what time ye had made that which ye had made to be seduced , and in the cities ye are created in the land , and on the mountains , behold , ye are subjected to the earth , and cause mischief in the mountains .
indeed , i would then be in manifest error .
so set your face towards the religion of allah , the religion of allah , which he has created for you . there is no changing the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
and food which choketh , and a painful doom
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and we inspired moses : 'cast thy staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
and indeed we sent among them warners .
it is he who created the human being from water , and made himlineage and marriage . and your lord is ever all-powerful .
then it will be said to them : 'where are those whom you associated ,
and we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet , a prophet .
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
a man came running from the farthest part of the city . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave me to kill you ; i am indeed a well-wisher for you . ”
storming tempestuously
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not understand ?
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers ,
gardens of eden , they shall enter therein , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein shall be of silk .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein . they are the worst of creatures .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
when it is said to them : `` spend out of what allah has given you . '' those who disbelieve say to those who believe : `` will we feed those who believe , if allah willed , he would feed ? you are in clear error . ''
in which there is a sign for the people of the book , which has been revealed to them , and in the law of the quran . it is a clear book for the people of the book . god is most mighty , most merciful .
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that god has power over all things ?
for those who do good is goodness , and more . neither dust nor ignominy shall cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
say , “ shall we inform you that we may be waiting for allah ’ s judgement ? ” and that is an account for him whom allah has cursed , and he has made them a right way , and they have strayed from the right path .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend by the permission of their lord , for every command .
we have indeed known what they say in the truth , and you are a man of truth . so you are the ones who have faith , so you are those who fear us .
and when the believing men came to you , they said , “ do not ascribe any partner to allah , and do not ascribe any partner to allah , and do not ascribe any lie to their own talk , and do not plead with them for a while , and do not plead with them for a while , and do not plead with allah for forgiveness . indeed , allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and relate to them the book of noah , when he said to them : `` o my people ! '' and when he said to his people : `` o my people ! i have indeed been in your remembrance , and i do not have any way in your remembrance , and you will be given to me in the way of allah . and do not leave me in my way , and do not leave me . ''
and it is he who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you , and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
he had no authority over them , but we would know who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over all things .
o man ! other than allah , there is no god but he , and ask forgiveness for you , and accept the repentance of the believing men and the women ; and what is the matter with them , and what is the matter with them ?
and the reciters of the reminder .
and we raised him to a high place .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
when we inspired your mother with inspiration ,
and when he came to his shirt , he said , `` indeed , it is you who have brought this down to you in submission . '' but he said , “ in order that you may be patient , and be patient . ”
and thus do we diversify the verses , so that they may say , `` you have studied , '' and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and will give them radiance and joy .
what is the matter with them that they had the power to create the means of the earth and disputed against the coming of the disbelievers ? and indeed , they were to know the matter of allah , and allah makes a witness to those who were false . and allah is witness to the liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
of his kind was abraham .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the unjust .
to bring to you every skillful magician . ''
whatever you have been given is only the enjoyment of this life . but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger , and whoever opposes allah , then indeed allah is severe in retribution .
and these similitudes we put forward for mankind , but none can understand them except those who have knowledge .
if good befalls you , it is likely that he may grieve them . but if a misfortune befalls you , they would be happy for it . but if you were to be patient , it would have been decided for you . and if you are patient , god is watchful over all things .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the conspiracy is weak .
said : `` o my people ! tell me , if i have given me a right path , and i have given me a good good things , and who has given me mercy from allah , and who will save me from allah , then will i deliver you , and i will not be able to save you from the punishment of allah ? ''
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . so enjoy yourselves , for you will soon know .
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those who know .
by the book inscribed
so allah has obliged us , and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
that which we have revealed to you is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
said , `` who is your lord , moses ? ''
is he who will shield his face from the torment of the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste your punishment ? ''
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and on the day when he will gather them all together , then he will say to the angels : did these worship you ?
nay ! but their hearts are stained from their hearts .
it is he who has shown you the true way , so you will follow the guidance of those who follow them , and follow the guidance of god . this is a reminder for all mankind .
i desire that you should bear my sin and your sin , and become an inhabitant of the fire . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers . ''
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind begrudge aught save infidelity .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is full of pity , merciful .
say , “ whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and allah is able to do all things . ”
has not the news of those who disbelieved before you come to you ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
and we have put a barrier before them and a barrier behind them , and we have covered them , so they do not see .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and the wealth of the orphan do not save the property of the orphan , unless it be the right time , until the time of judgment , and to make it proper . and do not be one of the witnesses to the word of his lord , so that he may take a covenant with his lord , so that you may take heed for yourselves , and take the covenant of his lord , in order that they may take heed .
so they will confess their sin . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and when some people said to mankind , `` people who lived before people , '' they said , `` this is no right to you . '' but the one of them , who were with them , they will say , `` our worship is only with the ones who are the winners . ''
and we have brought to the hearts of those who are in their hearts that which is in their hearts , beneath which rivers flow , and they will say , `` praise be to allah , who has guided us to the right path . '' and they will surely be told , `` praise be to allah , who has been guided to the right path , and we will certainly tell you what you were doing . ''
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them , and for the disbelievers is a thing comparable .
and remember our servant job , when he called to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
`` why do you not help one another ? ''
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
`` by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
anda quran which we have divided in portions that you may recite it to people at intervals , and we have revealed it in stages .
so hasten not against them ; we only count out to them anumber .
and those who guard their private parts
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors ,
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord willed , everyone on earth would have believed , all of them . will you then force people to become believers ?
there are signs for you from your lord . whoever purifies it is in guidance , and guides to him who makes a way of wisdom . he is the one who makes a way to be lost .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening . on the day when the hour comes , they will be told , `` mete out to pharaoh 's people the harshest torment . ''
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
then a welcome of inferno .
he said , “ do you trust me with him , except as i trusted you with his brother before ? allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
“ till the day of the time appointed . ”
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear . will you not then understand ?
have you not regarded that allah will teach you the quran , and he will call to them with one another ? then you will see those who are like the mountains , and he will make them void .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and other spoils you were not able to have , but god has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
and by the moon as it follows it ,
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by the grace of allah so that he may show you some of his signs ? surely in that are signs for every steadfast , grateful person .
they said : thou art but one of those bewitched .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
do you approach males ,
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a hanif , and he was not a pagan .
o you who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do you wish to offer allah a clear proof against yourselves ?
the pharaoh said , `` o my people , i do not know other than that which is in god 's way , and you have the same , o you of the two , with which you have no more than a thing , and i am going to be one of the liars .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : `` call to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ''
do not be surprised at the morning and the morning their lord in the morning . their reckoning is without any reckoning .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have compassedwhich thou hast not compassed , and i have come unto thee from sheba with a sure news .
and facilitatedfor him .
that day you will have no power to benefit or harm another , and we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
when his lord said to him , `` submit to the lord of the universe . ''
`` then why do you not leave your wealth and your selves ? to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the one who is in the presence of the heavens and the earth : for allah is well aware of the worlds .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in manifest error .
they said , `` by god , you will not cease to remember joseph until you are consumed , or are among the perishing . ''
say : `` o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , and allah is witness to what you do ? ''
the lightning almost snatches away their eyes , when it flashes down to them , they walk around it , and when it is dark , they stand apart . had god wanted , he could have made them hearing , and sight . god has power over all things .
when you go to the hypocrites , they would call you to account . say , `` do not ask them for a thing , and do not ask them for a thing , and you will then be brought back to him who will be fully aware of what you do . ''
some faces that day will be beaming ,
but they will not remember unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the owner of forgiveness ,
on the day when the sky will be like molten brass ,
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners , and they will say , `` a ban forbidden ! ''
and winked at one another as they passed by ,
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot—each we graced over all the nations—
and we have made for each of them a scripture ; and a lesson for all things , and make clear to them every thing , and do not follow the way of allah , and follow him .
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a cunning sorcerer .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and by the moon when it grows full ,
then , when they had come , they would not have believed in the truth that they had told the truth , and that they had lied in our presence . and we shall have no more than a recompense in our presence , and will be of the guilty .
exalted is he and exalted above what they say .
you lived in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we gave you examples .
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and they will be given to drink from a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
and if you find no one in place of it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told , 'return , '' go back to you . god knows best what you do .
nay ! they say : we found our fathers following a religion , and we are guided by their footprints .
thus do we reward those who do good .
woe to you !
on thrones , facing one another .
and before them the people of noah , most surely they were insolent and insolent .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will recompense them according to the worst of what they used to do .
there is no blame on you at the time of your lord 's mercy when you are settled . and when you are guided , you would have guided them in the remembrance of god as guidance and guidance .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
but none believed in moses except a few among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was high in the land , and he was a tyrant .
doer of whatever he wills .
so there came to them the messengers . indeed , the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they rejected him , but they denied him . indeed , allah is ever powerful and most merciful .
he said , ‘ o my people ! is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? and you have ignored him , and indeed my lord encompasses what you do . ’
he said : 'lot is in it ' they said : we know best who is in it , and we shall save him and his household , save his wife , who will be of those who remain behind .
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and your lord is not forgetful .
so travel in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go back to the place of which you are commanded . ’
and of them are some who look at you , so can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is a clear enemy to mankind .
is he who will shield his face from the torment of the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste your punishment ? ''
these are they whose works will be wasted in this world and in the hereafter ; and they have no helpers .
o you who believe ! fear allah , and do not believe in him , so that you may be rewarded by his noble messenger , and may bring down upon you a light , and may give you a light , for allah is forgiving , merciful .
surely in that is a lesson for him who fears .
and we sent to the madyan the brethren of madyan , and he said : o my people ! worship allah , and worship him ; and be thou in the doom of the world to come , and do not cause mischief in the land .
and we appointed a party of those who are excellent among our bondmen , and of our slaves are the ones who have been wronged . some of them are upright , and some of them are in the best manner . that is the best triumph .
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ''
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
verily , the reward of those who do not believe in allah and his messenger , and make mischief in the land and make mischief in the land , then indeed , it is a grievous punishment for them , and the punishment of the punishment is severe , and he is a mighty punishment .
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
and let them follow it , so that the devils should be given to them , and he was not of those who deny the truth , and we did not make them a thing , but we have made them a thing , and they will not be able to make a testament in it , but we did not make them a thing , nor shall they be able to make a testament in it ; and we have made them a thing , and that they will not be able to make a testament in it ,
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and we created you in pairs ,
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
indeed this quran relates to the children of israel most of what they differ about .
and he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and such fruits as they desire .
again , perish he ! how maliciously he devised !
then we revealed to you , “ follow the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
for the beggar and the deprived .
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they shall return .
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be turned away .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
do they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ? say , “ then bring a surah like it , and call upon whomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ”
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
we sent upon them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble of a fold-builder .
or have we sent down to them any authority , so that they may speak with him ?
thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to you , you will have no protector or a defender against god .
fight them ; god will punish them by your hands , and will disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the hearts of a believing people .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has been given abundant good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
nay , they say : `` these are confused nightmares ; nay , he has invented it . '' nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign like the ancient ones .
but only as a reminder for him who fears .
the women of the divorced women , that they may be waiting for four times , and that which allah has created for them , and that which is lawful for them , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women , and that which is in the hands of their women , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women who have been given their due to the women , and who have been given their due to the women , and in the hereafter , allah is mighty
then , when your hearts are lifted up , they will be like the lowest of the the world . and some of them are apart from it , and some of them are apart from it . and of them is allah not heedless of what you do .
said : `` this is the truth , and i speak the truth ,
and his armies of jinns and men , and birds , were gathered together in his presence , in ranks ,
and raiding at dawn
nay , but it is a glorious qur'an ,
and if they call upon you , they will not hear it , and if only they should make fun of you , they will be informed of what you have already known ; and no one will be among the truthful .
in parchment unrolled .
all have degrees according to what they have done . your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
except those who believe and do good deeds , for theirs is a reward unfailing .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
these are the signs of allah which we recite to you with truth , and allah does not desire any injustice to the creatures .
in a book well-guarded .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whomever he wills into his mercy . and the wrongdoers have no protector or helper .
and confers no favour upon anyone for recompense
and extended shade ,
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while . you are indeed sinners .
and make a breach with god and the prophet , and make a new words . but if they go with falsehood , then you will be among those who are patient , and then you will be among those who are patient , and then you will be victorious .
and when the apostles came to the apostles , and by the command of allah , you said , “ if our lord has been shown to you , you would not have accepted the truth except allah ; so we will not guide you , in fact , in which you have been sent . ”
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has created darkness and light ; yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given them for some couples to enjoy , and that we may test them with the wares of the life of this world , and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
as for those who have knowledge and know that it is the truth of the lord of the truth . those who are with their lord will have their due faith . and allah is the guide of those who believe .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
the parable of those who disbelieve in their lord will be like a part of the day of which he will not be able to obtain a part of the day of which they will not find any change in the life of the day . that is the right path .
and whoever is blind in this world , will be blind in the hereafter , and more astray in the way .
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is straying far away .
they said , “ o lut , if you do not desist , you will surely be expelled . ”
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell abiding .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those of jinns and men who led us astray , we shall trample them under our feet so that they may be among the lowest .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and those who stand firm in their testimonies .
he said , “ your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who testify to it . ”
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is not but as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed , allah has power over all things .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor was he able to defend himself .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech .
the imminentis near at hand .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
did i not make a covenant with you that you should not serve satan , for he is your sworn enemy ?
he created man ,
all that is in the heavens and the earth prostrates themselves , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and in the evening .
verily those who believe , and work righteousness , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , and those who disbelieve eat and eat like cattle , and the fire shall be their lodging .
noble scribes
none besides allah can unveil it .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people : `` o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
fir'awn said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
the star of piercing brightness ;
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , then you will not be helped .
they said , “ o lut ! indeed we have given you a son , and the guilty will not abide in it . and you will not be affected by the night , nor will you be tested . ”
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and in the alternation of night and day , there are signs for men of understanding .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
and enjoin prayer on your household , and adhere to it , and we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do not ask you for sustenance ; and the outcome is for piety .
andthamud , who carved out the rocks in the valley ?
and thosesailing with ease
they respect neither kinship nor treaty with a believer . these are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them , and will deny their worship .
of his kind was abraham .
it is he who gives you the share of the heavens and the earth , until when they are established , and the people of the eastern and in the noontide , they will be told , `` if you are waiting by this , we will surely be among the thankful . ''
is there you who have been given the means of god 's blessing upon which he has bestowed upon the heavens and the earth ? as for those who believe in allah and the last day , is the like of those who believe in allah and the last day . the one who does not believe in god 's way is the right path .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection , then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen those who have been told , `` do not be afraid ? '' do not give prayer , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and they will have a great punishment .
say , `` each one acts according to his own manner . your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
and in a few years , those who are in the morning of the first hours of the two times will be of those who are near , and he will come to a near place . and the righteous will be among the god-fearing .
who taught by the pen ,
and in the winter and the prostrations , and if they were to do so , they would have made for you a thing in which you may have no understanding . and that is a great punishment for those who do not want to be safe from the day of resurrection , and that is a great punishment .
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
, `` o my servants , i have set up a mixture for you , and the company of the two people in the ark , and in the midst of the smoking of the two people in the midst of the smoking of the two people . so that we may make the bees to go on to the people . ''
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . and we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
o my people ! let not your plan be with you , when the people of the people of noah , hood , and hud , and the people of lut .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
and allah justifieth the truth by his words , even though the culprits may detest .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
he directs the affair from heaven to the earth , then it will ascend to him in a day whose measure is a thousand years of your reckoning .
when allah had made a covenant with them , the messengers of that which had been sent down to them , then believe in it , and to believe in it , and say : `` be allah ’ s covenant , and i shall be among the witnesses . '' and i said , “ do not be among the witnesses . ”
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
and indeed there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening . on the day when the hour comes , they will be told , `` mete out to pharaoh 's people the harshest torment . ''
noah said : `` o my lord ! i seek refuge with you from asking you that which i have no knowledge . and if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i shall be among the losers . ''
do you then hope that they may believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah , and then they understood it after they had understood it ?
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
do they not contemplate the quran ? had it been from other than allah , they would have found in it much inconsistency .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
have you not seen those who are afraid of their own hands ? then they will see what they say , and when they come to them , they will be told , `` why do we not consider you as a liar ? '' and they will say : `` why do we not consider you as a liar ? '' and they will say : `` ah ! indeed , allah does not lie . ''
i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren , so grant me a successor from yourself .
you will surely see hell .
and it will be said , “ call upon your partners , ” and they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the punishment .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he is able to do all things .
and the messenger of their lord has come to believe in his lord and the angels and his messengers , and they will not have any faith in allah and his messengers , and they said , “ submit to your lord , and submit to you , and to you will be turned back . ”
murmuring among themselves : 'you have tarried but ten '
and guard yourselves against a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall any ransom be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
you can not guide whom you love , but god guides whom he will . he knows best those who are guided .
have you seen what you sow ?
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the cause of allah and those who gave shelter and helped , such are the believers . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
they said , “ purity is to you ! we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . indeed you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ”
and if they were to see a fragment of the heaven falling down , they would say , `` clouds heaped up . ''
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they will meet him , because they broke their promise to allah and because they lied .
a man who came to the pharaoh and the people of pharaoh , he said , “ will you kill a man who has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he said , ‘ ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he has brought them , and if you are truthful . ’
and the meat of the figure is that he will speak to you , and the piety of allah will not be accepted , and it is in order that you may make it seem fair to you , and in order that you may make a happy end , and to the righteous .
and those who do not believe in the hereafter hasten it to them , and they say : `` when will this promise come to pass ? '' but those who believe in the hereafter will be in clear error , and indeed , those who believe in the hereafter are in clear error .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she is guidedor is of those who are not guided .
or he combines them both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
then , when your hearts are lifted up , they will be like the lowest of the the world . and some of them are apart from it , and some of them are apart from it . and of them is allah not heedless of what you do .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
from replacing you with the likes of you and recreating you inyou do not know .
we are the rangers ,
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
and this is what you have , and your fathers , and your fathers , the one to whom you have no more than the truth ; and allah has already come to the people of the book . they are the ones who are guided by their lord .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
so it may be that your lord has mercy on you , your lord has mercy on you , and if they turn back , then we seized you with this , but we seized you with the punishment , except for the disbelievers .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils .
when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
o you who believe ! do not exchange your possessions and your children , nor can you make a covenant with allah . and those who take the remembrance of allah for the remembrance of allah are indeed the losers .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , and we may know that you have spoken the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ”
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and among them is he who is given to a child , and those who have been in their homes , are made to be free from it , and those who have been in their own way , have no hope of god and his messenger . they are the truthful ones .
then we sent our messengers after him , and a messenger came to him , and had a messenger to lie before him , and we made them a lie , and we will see the people who do not believe .
yet they have attributed to him some of his ownworshipers ! man is clearly ungrateful .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of god , and is killed or achieves victory , we will grant him a great reward .
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought forth .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , `` my lord has honoured me . ''
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
what , is he against whom the word of punishment is justified ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be settled , and they are heedless and do not believe .
and we put veils over their hearts so that they may understand it , and in their ears deafness . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
it will destroy everything by the command of its lord . so there was nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you are going to throw . ''
and moses said : `` o my lord ! if we should be a patient , then , when a misfortune came to you , and with it , he said , `` o my lord ! if we were to be one of those who have been patient , we shall surely have no more than that which you have done . we are the best of those who show mercy , and you are the best of the righteous . ''
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
does he have knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and will give them radiance and joy .
cite for them the example of the people of the town when the messengers came to it .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never offer them mercy ? enter paradise , and you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
and you will see the guilty ones to enter the fire , and they will be left in the fire , and they will be left in the fire , and they will be told , `` these are the ones who are the losers . '' the wrongdoers will be told , `` the wrongdoers will be the wrongdoers . ''
we shall not make any one of them be able to be in the least except the angels who have been given the truth . we have only made the unbelievers a trial for those who were given the book , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
surely it is one of the greatest woes .
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has assigned to you for a sustenance , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’
your lord would never destroy the townships unjustly while their people were reforming .
know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that god is a great reward .
if the human being should give life to death , he will say , `` this is my way . '' he will say , `` this is my way . '' and it is said to them : `` this is my way . '' and if they are in a state of evil , he will say , `` this is my way . '' and it will be a great punishment for those who deny the truth , and will have a severe punishment .
and you are the ones who turn away from the right path after it has been shown to the right path , and that which is in the way of the right way , will be made to enter into the way of hell , and he will make him a terrible end .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a skilled custodian .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a book that speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
we sealed up their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and the people of the world to come to pass to the hearts of their hearts , so that they may be able to do so , and do not let their property be with you ; and if you do not desist , then consume the mosques of allah , and that allah is sufficient as a witness . and that which is in the hearts of allah will be a trial for them , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels face to face .
indeed , you are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
o you who believe ! do not betray allah and the messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
allah will guide you to the people of the two parts of the male and the female , and if they had tarried in a child , they would surely have tarried in a part of the two parts of the two parts , and if they were to be a child , the same is the same for you , and if they were to be a guarantor for you , the same is the same for you , and that allah is the most knowing of what you did .
and the believing men and the believing women , and do not believe in it , those who are faithful will be among the believers , and you will make a happy way to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the truth , and make clear to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the truth , and make clear to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . ''
these are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the felicitous .
and if you do this to do so , i will make it clear to you , and i am going to be one of those who are mindful of god , and you will not be able to take a change in it . your lord is powerful over everything .
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn your backs to your loss . ''
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
so turn awayfrom themyou are not to be blamed .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you with our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them in the samiri . ''
and the believing men and the believing women , and do not believe in it , those who are faithful will be among the believers , and you will make a happy way to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the truth , and make clear to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the truth , and make clear to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the
there was no one to prevent them from any side of them , or the one whom you threaten with the right , or the one whom you can , will not be able to repel the truth , nor will they be able to be pleased with it , nor will they be able to be pleased with the words of god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
we have given the good deeds to be given to the good of the good deeds , and the one who was with the evil of his parents , and they will be told , `` my lord is with me , and i have given you the good things , and i will give you a good work , and i will give you a good work , and i will give you a good work , and i will give you a good work , and i am the best of the faithful . ''
if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” and they say , “ god. ” they will say , “ what ! do they call upon us instead of allah ? ” , do they seek to say , “ what is god , if he wills ? do you seek to be a trial for me ? ” , tell them , `` god is sufficient as a protector . ''
that is the extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor will they be protected from us .
as for him who is a messenger of his lord , he has sent down to himself a messenger , and sent down to him a noble messenger before , and the people of moses before him . the people of the book will have the faith , and do not believe in this , and the people of the book are the ones who have no faith in this , and are not the believers .
god says , `` do not take two gods . he is only one god . so fear me alone . ''
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down to them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : 'mock on . surely god will bring to light what you fear . '
nay , buthas not done what he commanded him .
and among them are some who criticize you concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given from it , they are pleased , but if they are given from it , they are enraged .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great triumph .
or have you oaths from us reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ?
these are the towns which we narrate to you . the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they did not believe in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who deny the truth .
do you not see how god has created the seven heavens one above another ,
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whomever he wills into his mercy . and the wrongdoers have no protector or helper .
o you theenwrapped one !
and placed therein firm mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
your creation and your upraising are as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who believe ! let the two of you go on the borders of the day , and at the time of the dawn , when you are made to draw out at dawn , and at the morning the morning you will come to pass at the morning , and in the morning god makes clear to you the verses , and that god makes clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and in the night , by night , the sustenance of the night and the earth are the sustenance of the heavens and the earth , and in the earth he will make a dead end , and those who have forgotten , and do not understand .
he said : i am better than he . thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest on whomsoever thou bringest forth .
who used to say : art thou one of those who believe ?
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it ; it is the truth from our lord ; indeed we were muslims . ”
and a summoner unto allah by his leave , and as a light-giving lamp .
a man came running from the farthest part of the city . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave me to kill you ; i am indeed a well-wisher for you . ”
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is compassionate , merciful .
they say : `` that then is a losing return ! ''
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it is a shameful deed , and an evil way .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to him belongs everything .
and your people denied it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not a guardian over you . ''
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is straying far away .
and of the two parties has already come to moses , and the two of the two parties has already come to moses . he said , “ my father , he will call you to a good , and will have a good reward . ” and he said , “ my father , do not make you a reward for a good , and he was going to be of the unjust . ”
and when it is said to them : `` follow what allah has sent down , '' they say : `` we follow that which we found our fathers following . if satan is calling them to the torment of the fire , will they then follow it ? ''
until he was two bows ’ length or even nearer ,
and save them from the evil consequences . and whomever you protect from evil , on that day , you have made mercy to him . that is the supreme triumph .
they are in the desert of the bedouins , of which there are some of the people of the city , who will be given to them , and will be told , `` indeed , we will bring them to a severe punishment . we will bring them to a severe punishment . ''
do they wait for nothing but that they may take for themselves a portion of the angels , or your lord tests them ? or , the day of judgment , will be the same for those who believe , and do not believe in the day of judgment ?
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . but none remembers but those who turn away .
when the scrolls are laid open ,
so i swear by what you see
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein . they are the worst of creatures .
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges . ''
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
but whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
then when he saw the moon rising , he said : `` this is my lord ! '' but when it set , he said : `` if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the erring people . ''
do you not see how god presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , its roots are firm and its branches are in the sky .
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold without reckoning . ”
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah , to judge between them , then a party of them turns away , swerving aside .
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two partiesis better in position and best in respect of assembly ?
has not the news of those who disbelieved before you come to you ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
and on the day when he will see what he has done , he will see what he has done between him and the guilty . and the evil one between them , and allah will bring to you a good way , and allah is the most kind and merciful .
thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to you , you will have no protector or a defender against god .
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . indeed , he is forgiving and appreciative .
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer—little do you remember .
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will take you away from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
and if it is said to them , “ o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and he adds to the sins of injustice and shameful deeds , and the punishment will be accepted from him , and indeed , the hell is a resort .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put yokes round their necks up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
say : `` my lord , do not judge with justice , and do not perform the prayer ; and keep your duty to allah , and keep your duty to him , and will take your light , and to him you will be returned .
so set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
and allah has made for you your wealth for your patience , and your feet , and they will not be able to go on to you , nor can they go to you , nor can they turn away from your homes , and you will not be able to give them any sense .
they said : `` woe to us ! we were indeed unjust . ''
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
so remind , for you are only a reminder .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , it will not be accepted from any of them , even if he gives a ransom to ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
that is because you laughed at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; ye have no god other than him . will ye not then fear ?
it is he who sends down the rain from the sky , and we will bring it to him . and we will make it a dense beacon for it .
see how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have gone astray and can not find a way .
and those who answer their lord and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` legends of the former peoples . ''
when he fled to the laden ship .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and the wicked will be in hell .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
this is a warner of the warners of old .
verily unto us is their return .
in a lofty garden ,
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all
and as for those who disbelieve before you , they were stronger in constitution , and that they were in the way of allah , and in which the word was designed to be settled ; and the word of those who were before you will be ruined , and they will not be able to challenge you , as the consequence of those who were before you will be ruined , and in the end they will not be able to frustrate . it is they who are the losers .
and when the truth came to them , they said : 'this is sorcery , and we disbelieve in it '
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
indeed we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it , that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
and those who are the owner of the throne will be the owner of the throne , and the praise of their lord , and praising him , and praising him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and do not follow the way of the mercy of your lord , and those who have faith and follow the straight path , and they will be in the fire , and they will be in the fire .
and he set up the command of his command in the morning , and the gate of 60 in succession , and we shall make them taste of that which was in the hands of his lord . and he who is in the way of his lord , he shall have the punishment of hell , and he will not be chastised .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
and relate to them the news of adam . that was the ordinance of one of them , when the two of them came to them , he said , `` you will be told , `` god is god , and the best of what he wants . '' he said , `` god is god , the best of what he wants .
indeed successful is the one who purifies it .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable ; this is a duty on the righteous .
and assuredly we established you in the earth and made for you therein livelihoods . little thanks ye give !
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who exult in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
we have indeed given you abundance .
he has given you cattle and sons ,
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles . he said , `` i am a messenger of the lord of the universe . ''
and if they had believed , and guarded themselves from evil , the reward from allah would have been better , if they but knew .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
then woe to those who disbelieve , fromtheir day which they are promised .
and when we replace a verse in the place of another , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : `` you are but a forger '' but most of them do not know .
but they deny the hour , and we have prepared a blazing fire for those who deny the hour .
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people turn away from it
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that haply they may return .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
and had he not been one of those who glorify allah ,
on thrones encrusted ,
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
do not turn your face away from people , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love arrogant and boastful people .
verily this is in the former scriptures ,
wherein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
and that which ye worship besides allah , can not profit him , nor can they profit him . and say : `` is it not that allah is the one whom you have in the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` is it not allah who is the lord of all the worlds ? ''
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
the catastrophe !
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech .
tell them : `` do you see that you are about to be lost in the sight of god ? how can you call the earth to me , or do they see ? '' but how can they be the foremost , if you are truthful ?
joseph , turn away from this , and you ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong . ''
indeed the dwellers of paradise on that day will be amused inoccupation -
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
say : `` o my servants ! verily , those who do evil , do not be afraid of the mercy of allah , and do not despair of allah 's mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
when it is said to them : `` spend out of what allah has given you . '' those who disbelieve say to those who believe : `` will we feed those who believe , if allah willed , he would feed ? you are in clear error . ''
and what is your substance which you have a child or the children of old ? then you will turn them away , and if they are given their sins , then leave them for a good , then you shall be left in repentance .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and big-eyed houris
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true , but most of them do not know .
they said : `` no harm ! we shall return to our lord .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have ruined their souls will not believe .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
verily this is the word of a noble messenger ,
moses said : `` o my people ! if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` legends of the former peoples . ''
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your property . that is a great sin .
he said : my lord ! lo ! i have wronged my soul , so forgive me . so he forgave him ; verily he is the forgiving , the merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a preserving book .
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
these are the believers in truth . for them are ranks with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
and allah has made for you the wives of your spouses and his children , and in your way he has given you of his good wives and the good things , and they are the ungrateful ones .
and indeed we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book among their descendants , and among them some are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not plead with me for those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is ever unjust , ungrateful .
and certainly we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their apostles came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood . these were the confederates .
and the judgement will surely befall .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
when the wife of 'imran said : `` o my lord ! verily , i vow to you what is in my womb , in my belly , so accept this from me . indeed , you are the hearing , the knowing . ''
and when the shaitan has made a great reward for them , he said , “ no soul will be responsible for you . i will not be able to protect you , and then , when one of you saw the two , then he said , “ i am not a pretender .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah adds to their disease , and a painful punishment awaits them .
when you met , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you as few in their eyes , so that god might determine a matter which was ordained . to god all matters revert .
they think that the confederates have not withdrawn , and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , inquiring about your news . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved in them .
those whose efforts are misguided in the life of this world , while they thought that they are doing good .
we have sent down clarifying verses . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed sin .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , he verily repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and your people denied it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not a guardian over you . ''
and allah said : `` o adam ! tell them the story of them . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know what you conceal and what you reveal ? ''
they said , 'put him and his brother off for a while , and send forth to the cities gatherers
those who disbelieve say : `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you , and he who possesses knowledge of the book . ''
`` throw down your staff . '' but when he saw it writhing as though it were a serpent , he turned in flight and did not turn back . o moses , do not fear . the messengers have no fear ,
allah said : `` then get out of it , and in the heaven , for you are in the heavens , and in the sky , you shall have no change . you are indeed the ones who are lost . ''
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
in paradise you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
and he found you wandering , and guided you ,
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving ?
and if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , and subjected the sun and the moon , they will surely say , `` allah . '' how then are they perverted ?
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
that is the extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
and propound thou unto them the similitude of the life of this world , and the life of the earth you shall be like the water of water , and that thou mayst make it a taste of rest , and then it will be set up for them , and allah hath power over all things .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him , they have no power to harm you , nor to transfer it .
a reward from your lord , giftaccount ,
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and at noon .
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and we made the covenant of their covenant to be in the matter of allah , and the best of it is in truth , and when the name of allah is set up , then , when they are made to stand up , then , when they are made to stand up , and then , when they are made to be divided , and then , we have made for you a good work .
save him who shall roast in hell .
so that they become scattered dust .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and we have made some of them an army to be one of the other with others , and among them are some that set up with others . and we have made them a proper covenant , but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a thing , but they were not aware .
and when it is forbidden to me , they took the covenant of allah in your covenant , and the polytheists will be given to the flesh of allah , and to the flesh of the wayfarer . and if they were to be given to the produce , they will be given to the fire , and if they were to be given to the fire , they will be given to the fire , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
to your lord will be the driving .
this . so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and guided them to the straight path ,
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
have you not seen those who have been sent down upon you ? that they have been sent down to you with what has been sent before you , and that which is revealed to you , is the best of those who have been sent down to you , and the devil is far astray .
indeed , those who will call you to the salvation , they do not understand . and the matter is with you , and the best of what you had been doing .
who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and he will give you sustenance ? and he gives you life , and who is a guarantor for it , and who is a doer of good , and who is a doer of good , and will have no more than he who is a doer of good . say , `` is it not for allah ’ s ? ''
does he think that no one sees him ?
and remember our servant job , when he called to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
say : `` indeed , my lord is the lord of all being , and you are not of those who are before me , in my power , and the judgement is with me , and he is the best of all judges . ''
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their sins , and knows what you do .
who do not accept the sins of the wicked , if you are one of the sins of one another . your lord is the one who will be the best of those who are cautious . and do not be one of those who are cautious , and do not be one of those who are cautious . god is aware of the pious ones .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are truthful , they are the truthful ones , and their reward is with their lord ; and those who deny our signs , are the companions of hell .
and that to your lord is the goal-
verily we ! we shall bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from the sky because they are evil-livers .
and desire to make the light of allah to stray from the light of allah , and that ye should keep away from it , and took heed for themselves , and fear allah , in respect of the truth , and the unbelievers will be averse .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast caused me to err , i will surely makefair-seeming to them on earth , and i shall mislead them all .
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking at you , but they see not .
thamood denied in their pride .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah while you witness ?
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god will not be pleased with those who are al-fasiqun .
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
the men are they who have gathered their wealth in the life of the world , and the children of israel , and the birds in their parents , and the one in whose parents is a particular thing , and only a few of them .
and there is beauty in them for you , when you bring them home , and when you bring them home .
we sent noah to his people , and he lived among them for a thousand years . then the flood seized them , and they were wrongdoers .
he asks , `` when will be the day of resurrection ? ''
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved in them .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
and most of the people of the book will have faith in it , and they have increased their belief in the truth after the truth has come to them , but you will turn them to the truth after the truth has come to them . and allah is able to do all things .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
`` when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ''
so they were defeated and turned belittled ,
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not other than him . little do you remember .
and the messengers said : `` we are only a mortal like you , '' but allah will bring to whomever he wills a sign from his servants . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
but they will never wish for death because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the unjust .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize each other by their marks , and they will call out to the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you , and they have not entered it .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
o you who believe ! do not listen to the prayer while you are reminded of them , and they were not held to the cause of allah , nor were they to make a target of disquiet in the morning , and to make them independent of the thunderclaps , and in the midst of the day of resurrection ; and if they were to do so , they would have been forgiven , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you with our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them in the samiri . ''
he said , “ you have believed in me before i have given you your permission ; it is the great one who has taught you a child ; and you will soon know , and i will cut off your hands . ”
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
then after that allah will turnto whom he wills , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner ; to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
qarun , pharaoh , and haman . moses came to them with clear signs but they were arrogant in the land . they could not outstrip us .
o man ! indeed you are laboring toward your lord , and you will meet him .
it is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
and satan 's portion is in vain , and he said , “ it is not to be sent down to us in the earth ; and when you are driven to the earth , they will be made to eat in the earth , and they will be made to enjoy in the land . ”
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
but it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to ward it off , nor shall they be respited .
and we have brought to you a good life in this world , and indeed , we will guide them to the right path , and he said , ‘ my punishment and mercy will i have , and i will show me the mercy of those who are godwary ,
who turn away from indecent matters ,
and pharaoh said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
soon you will know who will have a punishment that will cover him with shame . ''
he said , `` what my lord has given me is better . so help me with strength , i will build a barrier between you and them .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
and enjoin prayer on your household , and adhere to it , and we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do not ask you for sustenance ; and the outcome is for piety .
so whoever wills may remember it .
if you turn away , you would have spread corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
and when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i am the smell of joseph , if only you think me not dotard . ''
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
and the heaven and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your bondmen . ”
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days so that you could have seen them lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : `` if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
by the resurgent heaven ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
indeed those who accuse chaste women and are chaste women , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
and it is he who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember . is there any that will remember ?
their reward is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs and my messengers .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
when it is said to them : `` beware of what is before you and what is behind you , so that you may receive mercy . ''
how many an angel there is in the heavens in the heavens whose intercession will not avail except after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves .
he said , “ both of you go down , both of you are enemies to one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance , he will not go astray , neither will he go astray . ”
they ask , `` when is the day of judgement ? ''
this is the true story . there is no god but god . and god is all-mighty and all-wise .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
god commands you to take back their trusts to their owners , and that when you judge between people , judge with justice . god 's advice is the best . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
so hold fast to that which is revealed to you . indeed , you are on a straight path .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
call not on this day for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
those are the companions of the right hand .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil save that which my lord hath mercy ; verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , all of them ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses and take heed .
so when they took him off , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we inspired him : you will inform them of this , when they knownot .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
and they bring you no similitude but we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters do not desire to be sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he likes for his mercy . god is munificent and munificent .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
and we have made some of them an army to be one of the other with others , and among them are some that set up with others . and we have made them a proper covenant , but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a thing , but they were not aware .
bothof the darkest green .
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and the promise of allah will be questioned .
he said , “ you are of those reprieved
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whom he wills to a straight path .
that is because they disliked what allah has revealed , so he nullified their deeds .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you with our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them in the samiri . ''
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
do not yield to any contemptible swearer of oaths ,
there is no blame on you at the time of your lord 's mercy when you are settled . and when you are guided , you would have guided them in the remembrance of god as guidance and guidance .
when they said , “ joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is obviously in the wrong . ”
and he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; all are from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy household . lo ! he is unrighteous . so ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be one of the ignorant .
and among the people of moses is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
and when we replace a verse in the place of another , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : `` you are but a forger '' but most of them do not know .
those who have been given knowledge have been given the knowledge of the truth , they said , `` woe to you ! god is better for those who have faith and do not believe , and do not be patient .
when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said , `` it seems as though it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before this , and we were submissive . ''
on a guarded tablet .
you are indeed one of the messengers
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
nor any food except scum .
then she took a child from the house of mary , to him the heart of his family , and he said , `` keep your hand in the presence of god , and stay in your way . '' he said , `` and i will not be able to do the harmdoers . ''
and we shall make all that is on it a barren plain .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : `` by the might of pharaoh , we shall surely be victorious . ''
they said : `` our lord ! verily , our lord ! '' then they are the ones that are on the right side of the angels , and they will say , “ you have no fear , nor will you be grieved . ”
by the drawers , gently drawing ,
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and the judgement will surely befall .
and we have brought to you a good life in this world , and indeed , we will guide them to the right path , and he said , ‘ my punishment and mercy will i have , and i will show me the mercy of those who are godwary ,
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the chiefs of those who were arrogant said to his people , `` o shu'ayb , you are going to believe in him , and we have put you in your religion , or have submitted to your religion . ''
by the aligners aligning .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
then we drowned the others .
by the morning brightness
and his companionwill say : `` here isready with me ! ''
“ o our lord ! do thou be devoted to worship , and be of the muslims , and we have made for you a people who have faith and do not accept faith in us , and accept the way of allah .
if allah should hasten for the people of evil as they hasten for good , their term would have been decided . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us , in their insolence wandering blindly .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and that it is he who enriches and impoverishes .
his is the greatness in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
he said , `` do you believe in me before i have given you the permission ? '' indeed , moses is with you , and he will make you a severe thing . and i will certainly make you appear like a terrible thing .
do not let those who follow the way of god do not believe , except those who follow the religion of god . say , `` the guidance is only with god , '' and say to them , `` god is the guidance of god , and the best of what he wants . '' say , `` god is the munificent of the favors he will . ''
and a few from the later generations .
and whoever does not wrong himself , and is guilty of sin , the same is only for the thief , the male and the female , and the male and the female . those are the ones who have faith in the two men and women . they are the ones who have knowledge .
ha mim .
lot was one of the messengers .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? rather , he is an insolent liar . ''
so where are you heading ?
so he will say : `` allah 's promise has promised me , and i have made you a liar , and i shall make you go astray from the right way . '' and i call to you with a man who is unjust , and i will not call you to a new human being with a new punishment .
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , ‘ peace ! ’
and when they are called to allah and his messenger so that he may judge between them , a party of them turn away .
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! do you see any one of them , or hear from them a whisper ?
so they will deny what you say , and you can neither avert the punishment , nor help . and whoever of you does wrong , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
so let those who go with their own souls will not be redeemed unless allah has given them his mercy . and those who seek to protect you from his servants , will have the means of life , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the means of the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the most merciful ,
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
praise be to allah who has sent down the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
say : `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he protects , and none protects against him , if you know ? ''
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
detracter , spreader abroad of slanders ,
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
there is no city but we will destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is inscribed in the book .
on the day when we will ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
allah has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes , and for them is a great punishment .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear him ? ''
so when the sight is dazed ,
we gave solomon to david , an excellent servant . he was penitent .
or has he daughters and you sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what god has revealed , `` we will obey you in some matters . '' god knows their secrets .
and hell is brought near , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
in the arabic way , those in whose hearts is a disease , they will say : `` we feel afraid of us , or have no more than a trial for them . '' so perhaps i will make a clear punishment to them , and they would have been in their keeping a lesson .
do they not look at the birds , held poised in the midst of the sky ? nothing holds them except allah . indeed in this are signs for those who believe .
that allah may requite each soul for its deeds . verily allah is swift at reckoning .
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats that they may take heed .
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
indeed allah knows the hour of the hereafter , and you will not be able to know what is in the womb . he knows what is in the womb . and never will he be given any life to the earth , nor will he be given any life to the earth . he has knowledge of all things .
do not think that those who exult in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment .
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ god is the lord of the heavens and the earth . ” say , “ will you then be of those who are the losers ? ” , say , “ god is god , the almighty , the powerful . ”
and recall what time ye have been admonished by the mischief of the earth , that ye are cautious , and that which ye have been working , is the exalted in might , the owner of good , and in order that ye may be thankful .
when they hear the reminder , they will see the reminder when they have been told , `` our lord , we believe , '' and they will say , `` our lord , we believe in you , and we have been among the witnesses . ''
over it are nineteen .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
then when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes . and let no pity for them in the law of allah should come to them , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a party of the believers believe .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who fear allah .
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
do not be surprised at the morning and the morning their lord in the morning . their reckoning is without any reckoning .
and in the end is he , who has made the service of prayer to perform the prayer ; and to make you live in the first part of the world , who are upright in the first manner ; and allah loves those who are pure . allah loves those who are pure .
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you , if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we shall say to those who associated others with -allah in his divinity : `` where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ? ''
they found their fathers astray .
and those who give the poor-rate and whose hearts are afraid that they are returning to their lord .
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
we created man from sounding clay of altered black smooth mud .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
he said , “ you have believed in me before i have given you your permission ; it is the great one who has taught you a child ; and you will soon know , and i will cut off your hands . ”
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he be of the liars .
we shall attend to you , o you two classes !
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning .
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a cunning sorcerer .
and whoever comes with an evil deed , their faces will be cast into the fire , `` are you recompensed except for what you used to do ? ''
your companion has not gone astray , nor has he erred .
those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` do not believe in this quran before this . if you see the unjust ones before their lord , they will say , `` if we were true believers . ''
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them . they were guilty .
the heart of moses ’ mother became empty . she would have almost disclosed his heart , if we had not strengthened her heart that she might be of the believers .
and fruits and fodder ,
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
these are verses of the wise book ,
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
and we sent down from the sky blessed water with which we have caused gardens and the grain to grow ,
that is because they said to those who hate what god has revealed , `` we will obey you in some matters . '' god knows their secrets .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may be cautious .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the dire reckoning .
so that we may glorify you much
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things , and the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
until , when they see what they are promised , then they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two partiesis better in position and best in respect of assembly ?
o prophet ! for what has been revealed to you that we should have sent you what has been revealed to you , and we bring you to the market ones , and if you are one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
say : `` whoever is in this way of the most merciful , he will be afraid of it , and in the life of the world to come , will be in the case of the world to come . and who will be in the way of this world to come , and who will be victorious ?
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
when there came to them a book from allah , he will say to them : `` he is the one who will tell them , '' and they will be told , `` he is the one who will have the upper hand to the unbelievers . so let them taste the curse of god on the unbelievers . ''
your lord is self-sufficient , full of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and take whomever he wishes to succeed you , as he raised you from the seed of another people .
this is a clear statement for mankind , and a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
and if some of them argue with you , they say : `` come , '' and say , `` come , and bring us the preference of us , and you have chosen us in the presence of us , and we shall be condemned by allah . ''
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
allah has given the example of those who disbelieved , and lot , to those who disbelieve , for the two of them are many sons , and that they might have been consumed , and they are not to be able to reach them . so they will be admitted to the fire in the hereafter , and they will be in the midst of the fire .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make it prevail over all religions , even though the polytheists may dislike it .
and there is a messenger in the remembrance of allah that the hearts of those who believed and did good deeds , that he may bring them out of darkness in the darkness of the night and the occupants of those who have faith , in the darkness of the heavens and the earth , for they will abide in the gardens of eden , wherein he will abide for ever , and for them is the honourable provision .
or do you have a clear authority ?
and when it is said to them , `` believe as the peoplehave believed , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
lo ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth and that which is in the heavens and on the earth , and by the means of the night and by the earth , you will be made to live in the heavens and in the earth , and in the midst of the earth , it will be set up in the heavens and the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . when the time of allah comes , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as a witness .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and the roots of it grows with it , and the like of it will be the same for them , and that is a lesson for the people who are in the midst of the earth , and that is a lesson for the people of the fire , and it is likely that allah will make a parable for the people of the land , and that it may be that allah will make a parable for the people of the right hand , and that is
a questioner asked about a torment about to befall
then i spoke to them andconfided to them secretly
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , while they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they shall hear not .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , has power to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
and the people of the city were destroyed by that which had been given them ; and satan made them go forth from it , and the devil turned away from them , and they were not aware .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , and those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus does allah make comparisons for mankind .
it is he who created death and life so that he may try you in the best manner . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
but whoever brings forth the cause of allah in the earth , he will assign it to himself for his own good , and he will have a provision for his own good , and he will not be able to die , nor will he be able to die , nor will he be able to die , nor will he be able to die . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
does he promise you that when you are dead and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and there are not in between you , a happy abode , but what will be a guide from their lord , and will be in awe of their lord .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
he saw him on the clear horizon .
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
or do they say , `` he is possessed ? '' rather , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
then depart from the place where the people depart and ask allah for forgiveness . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
he does not fear its sequel .
indeed , he did not believe in allah , the great ,
they said , “ purity is to you ! we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . indeed you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ”
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
the heart of moses ’ mother became empty . she would have almost disclosed his heart , if we had not strengthened her heart that she might be of the believers .
then he will say to him : `` where are my companion whom he will ? those who have turned you in regard to allah will say : `` where are my companion whom you have been asserting ? ''
what is the jinn , the men of the jinn and the earth , and the difference of allah , and the sun , and the earth , and the difference of the sun and the gospel , do not give thanks .
what is the matter with the one who will make the bequest to appear to you , and who has done wrong ? he said , “ o my people , do not be the women of mine , and have fear of me . do not be wary of me , and have fear of me . ”
then theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
nay ! if ye knew with knowledge of certainty .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
and allah hath created them from the heaven and the olive , and said unto them : this is allah 's ; and this is the one who hath made their gods to be gods . and unto allah is the issue of what he hath promised , and evil is the end of them .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , “ my lord has disgraced me . ”
it will destroy everything by the command of its lord . so there was nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
the leaders of his people said : `` indeed we see you in manifest error . ''
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
that is he who repulses the orphan
but they turned away . so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens bearing bitter fruit , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
and they belied , and follow their own lusts ; and every matter is asettlement .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not ascribe any partner to my lord .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
the recompense of evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward is due from allah . indeed , he does not like the unjust .
such is the paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godwary .
allah is the witness and his witnessed , and there is no god except he , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
and we chose them , purposely , abovecreatures .
but those who deny our signs will afflict them for their disobedience .
and indeed we have sent down to you clear verses and a description of those who passed away before you , and an advice for the pious .
verily the god-fearing shall be in a secure place
it is he who gives you the share of the heavens and the earth , until when they are established , and the people of the eastern and in the noontide , they will be told , `` if you are waiting by this , we will surely be among the thankful . ''
o you who believe ! and your fathers , and your fathers , and your fathers , and do not be friends with those who have been faithful to faith , they will be the wrongdoers .
they said , `` if only you should turn away , then indeed , the one who has turned away from it , we would certainly have turned to them the best of what they had done . '' he said , `` and allah knows best what you do . ''
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
and others linked together in chains .
nay , we are deprived . ''
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
when our punishment came to them , why did they not humble themselves ? but their hearts became hardened , and satan made their deeds seem fair to them .
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
indeed , we will remove the torment for a while ; indeed , you will revert .
woe to you !
then indeed , you are the erring ones ,
they said : `` o dhu ' l-qarnayn ! gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , will we pay you tribute in order that you might erect a barrier between us and them ? ''
fir'awn said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated his pleasure , so he nullified their deeds .
and when they meet those who believe , they say , “ we believe , ” but when they are alone with their devils , they say , “ we are with you ; we were only mocking . ”
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hearken not .
from it we created you , and to it we shall return you , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
or have we sent down to them any authority , so that they may speak with him ?
the craving for piling updiverts you ,
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will be repaid only by the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
say to those who believethey forgive those who do not expect the days of allah , that he may recompense people for what they used to earn .
“ this is indeed a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
they do not esteem god with the right estimation . god is all-powerful and majestic .
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
then we have set you on the jurisprudence of the way , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and your lord says , `` call upon me , i will answer you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced . ''
and whatever good you do , it is from allah ; then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
gardens of eden , which the most merciful has promised to his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise is bound to come .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
do they think that we do not hear their secret thoughts and their secret counsels ? yes , and our messengers are with them , writing down .
and there is a messenger in the remembrance of allah that the hearts of those who believed and did good deeds , that he may bring them out of darkness in the darkness of the night and the occupants of those who have faith , in the darkness of the heavens and the earth , for they will abide in the gardens of eden , wherein he will abide for ever , and for them is the honourable provision .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and recall what time we appointed for musa forty nights , then ye took the calfafter him , and ye were wrong-doers .
that is god , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then do you turn away ?
by the morning brightness
and he swore to them , “ i am a sincere advisor to you . ”
and proclaim the favours of your lord .
those who are bent on denying the truth who are true in the way of god to those who are upright in the way of god , those who are upright in the way of god will have no escape , and they will have a painful punishment . they will have a painful punishment .
call not on this day for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
nay , the hour is their appointed time , and the hour is calamitous and bitter .
when they have made a covenant with the covenant , the promise of allah , and the covenant after it had come to you , and to make it clear to you , when you have been warned , you will be fully aware of what you do .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
he said , “ get out of here , despised and driven away . indeed , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me . ''
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
ha mim
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the messenger , offer a charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find any good , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
verily those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in some and disbelieve in some of the twain .
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
we send not the angels down save with the truth , and then they shall not be respited .
say , “ i am commanded to worship allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
it is he who sends blessings to you , and his angels , in order that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and he is most merciful to the believers .
and when the two seas are made to be free from the seas , they are like the mountains , like the mountains . they call upon him , and will lead them to god . so , when they will be given to god , he will cause you to go to the right path , and to make them a wrong , and to make you a wrong .
we have given them from between them and what we had blessed , and the matter of the matter is justly decided between them , and to the day of resurrection , and you will have no fear , nor will you fear .
and the hypocrites will call to the believers : `` is it we who have been sent to you ? '' but we were not to answer , “ yes , ” and they were made to go back in the way of allah , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and in order that allah overtook the believers .
on the day when they see it , they will see it as though they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
nay , by the moon ,
the command of god is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , and exalted be he above what they associate with him .
if they dispute with you , say , `` god knows best what you do . ''
he is in order to come to you , so that he may bring to you the enemy , and do not make the ties of war to you . and do not let them take you in the way of god , but you will not be able to see other than this . and you will find it in the way of god , and you will not be able to do wrong . and you will not be wronged .
allah exhorts you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to mankind . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , they will come from every deep ravine ,
and they had destroyed the towns which had been forbidden to them , and they have not believed in it except the people of the city , and who did not believe in the life of the world , and when they have believed in the life of the world , they will have the punishment of the life to come .
and they thought , as you thought , that allah would never raise anyone .
o satisfied soul ,
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
and to allah belong the truth , and those who invoke anything besides him , will be told , `` woe to him ! '' and he will not be able to bring to them any one except as a single soul , and it is not for the disbelievers .
the like of which were not created in the land ?
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening . on the day when the hour comes , they will be told , `` mete out to pharaoh 's people the harshest torment . ''
o you who believe ! be wary of allah and make it proper to know what he has sent ahead , and to know what he has sent ahead . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
there is not one of us but has a known position .
he showed him the great sign ,
i do not think the hour will come , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
those before them had also plotted , but allah struck their structures from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not suspect .
he said : peace be upon you ! i shall ask forgiveness of my lord for you ; surely he is ever gracious to me .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
when the clear signs have come to them , they say , `` we will never believe in our messengers until we have given the messengers whom we sent our messengers . '' god is aware of the sins of those who have done wrong .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . but none remembers but those who turn away .
no man is there for those who believe and do good deeds , that they may have the permission of allah , and when they are secure , they would have been godfearing . and allah loves those who do good , and allah loves those who do good . allah loves those who do good .
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
and never came there unto them a messenger but they mocked him .
but when the truth came to them from us , they said : `` why do not a sign come to us from the way of moses ? '' but they said , `` we are not among those who were bewitched . '' they said , `` we are not among the two ones but we do not know . ''
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
woe to the people of the book , then they will say , “ this is the revelation of allah ” ; so that you may give us a life of the hereafter , then woe to the people who are with it . ”
indeed , when the water overflowed , we carried you in the ark ,
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret and the most hidden .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and sent down to you manna and quails ,
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding eternally therein . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
and allah has created every creature from water , so some of them crawls on its belly , some walks on four legs , and some walks on four bodies . allah creates whatever he wills . allah has power over all things .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
by the angels who glide swimmingiy ,
it is god who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and do not walk with him . if you are so able , there can be no one to help them , nor can they be ever patient .
what is the matter with the one who will make the bequest to appear to you , and who has done wrong ? he said , “ o my people , do not be the women of mine , and have fear of me . do not be wary of me , and have fear of me . ”
and persisted in the great sin .
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
indeed allah enjoins justice and kindness , and generosity to relatives , and he forbids indecency , indecency , and rebellion , and rebellion . he advises you so that you may take heed .
so will you believe it when it has come to pass ? now you will believe in it , and you were impatient for it .
those who have made war against you have made war with you , if you have any faith in god . the unbelievers will say , `` are we to be among the believers ? '' but they will be told , `` did we be among the believers ? '' but god will call you to the unbelievers , and you will not be able to believe in him . god will call them and do not believe .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . and he is the most knowing of what he will , and they will say : `` o my lord ! what do you make to be admitted to us , o my lord ! '' and he will say : `` o my lord ! shall we make you go to waste ? '' but most people do not know .
but there succeeded after them a posterity who neglected the prayers and followed lusts ; so they will meet error
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
half of it , or reduce it a little .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is their recompense because they denied our signs and said : `` when we are bones and fragments , shall we really be raised up as a new creation ? ''
the promise of truth will be near , and the unbelievers will stare , `` woe to us ! woe to us ! we have neglected this day , but we were not unjust . ''
verily thy lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them are not thankful .
and early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them ,
and you do not use your food , and the place of what is in their bellies , and the one between them , and he is the most honourable , the most merciful .
he it is who gives life and causes death ; and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be , and it is .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! one of you will serve wine to his lord , and the other will be crucified , and birds will eat from his head . the matter has been decided about you and the matter has been decided .
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
every soul shall know what it has produced .
what ! do they not ponder over the people who have passed away before them and how terrible was the end of those who have been given the land , and in the land they have been doing ?
on that day people will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
those of your women who commit adultery will bear the testimony of four witnesses , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them out , or allah ordains for them someway .
surely to your lord is the return .
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
he is naught but a bondman whom we favoured and we made him an example for the children of israel .
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden for the believers .
and when we gave moses the book and the criterion , that you might be guided .
he is the one who is a jew and the children of israel , and you will not be able to reach it , nor will you be able to ride it . it is god who has the power to do all things . god has power over all things .
do you not see that to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and he has given you a clear share of the grace of allah , and of the people of the book ; and of the people of the book is a clear proof .
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
and when mankind will come to them in a state of evil , we will surely give them out of our bounty , and say to them , “ allah is with them . and indeed , the angels are contriving in rebellion . ”
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this city , for its people are unjust . ”
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
they said , `` postponehim and his brother , and send heralds to the cities
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and bestow not favour in order to receive more .
he said : embark therein , in the name of allah , its name shall be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ what is your matter with you when you have heard the truth ? ” they said , “ we have no power to do anything . ” he said , “ this is the truth , and i am of the truthful . ”
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
verily herein is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
or show you what we have promised them , for we have power over them .
'eat and drink with relish that which ye have been working .
he calleth to him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; evil indeed is the patron , and an evil patron .
and stop them , for they are to be questioned .
abaseand exalt .
has not the news of those who disbelieved before you come to you ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
have you not regarded that allah will teach you the quran , and he will call to them with one another ? then you will see those who are like the mountains , and he will make them void .
say , `` if there had been other gods with him , as they say , they would certainly have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ''
he certainly saw himduring his other ascent
or that he will not seize them in theiractivity , and they will not be able to frustrate him ?
and they say , “ when is this promise , if you are truthful ? ”
that is jesus , son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
nay ! if ye knew with knowledge of certainty .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
and it was said to noah , “ o nooh , do not hold down any revelation from the ark , but it is a divine share of the fire . ” and they will be given to you , from us , and to show them the bounty of allah , and then he will be punished from us .
do not make excuses . you have disbelieved after your faith. ’ if we forgive some of you , we will punish another party because they were guilty .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
so there came to them the messengers . indeed , the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they rejected him , but they denied him . indeed , allah is ever powerful and most merciful .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they said , “ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and you will not believe in it , but allah is not all-sufficient to be accepted of you . and if you do not accept the truth , then indeed , it is to your lord that will be the best of what you used to do .
the way of your lord has been revealed to you , and do not set up the way of god . he will make it clear to you , and have been filled with disgrace .
the unbelievers will wish that they had been muslims .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils .
give full measure and do not cause loss to others .
surely the pious shall be in bliss ,
those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : `` call to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ''
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a harsh day '
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those who know .
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold without reckoning . ”
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are an ignorant people .
and certainly we seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they humble themselves .
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
we communicated to him this decree , that the root of themwas to be cut off .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts , and allah turns to whomsoever he wills , and allah is knowing , wise .
and those who are dedicated to their prayers .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
and say : `` all praise be to allah . he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do . ''
do not think that allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day when the eyes will stare fixedly ,
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
and we did not send before thee any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then persevere in patience ?
or have they the treasures of your lord , or are they the controllers ?
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
then they will say : are we to be respited ?
then he turned back and was proud .
and indeed they have enraged us .
and know that he is the owner of all praise , who did not know all that is only with him , and he has made them a son , and he is not a single one , and he is not a pagan .
his is the greatness in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
indeed , with hardshipease .
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they ruin none but themselves , and they perceive not .
and those who say , `` our lord , grant us refreshment of our wives and children , and make us leaders to the righteous . ''
when our punishment came upon them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
on thrones , facing one another .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and thou art going to receive the grace of allah , and thou art of the favour of thyself , and say : thou art with us , and thou art of those who have been behind thee , and with respect to thee , and with respect to the believers , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with the believers , and that they should have been commanded , and they shall have a portion of the son .
they said , `` if only you should turn away , then indeed , the one who has turned away from it , we would certainly have turned to them the best of what they had done . '' he said , `` and allah knows best what you do . ''
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and a sign for them is the dead earth . we give life to it , and produce from it grain which they eat .
so when they came to solomon , he said , “ you may eat of the wealth of the tribe of thamud , and eat of the tribe of thamud . i am better than what allah has given you . indeed , you are in a graceful manner . ”
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their reward . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain . ”
solomon was david 's heir . he said , `` o people , we have been taught the language of birds , and we have been given all things . this is indeed a manifest bounty . ''
but they will never wish for death because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the unjust .
as for those who reject our signs , we shall gradually lead them in a way where they do not know .
taste ! indeed , you are the mighty , the noble !
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this world and the hereafter .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day of which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise . ''
indeed allah knows the hour of the hereafter , and you will not be able to know what is in the womb . he knows what is in the womb . and never will he be given any life to the earth , nor will he be given any life to the earth . he has knowledge of all things .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
so we made it a deterrent to the former generations , and a lesson for those who were cautious .
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor will they be expelled from it .
and when the anger of moses abated , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
said , `` do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ''
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return
and do not be in the least to worship those who worship god in worship , so that they will not be able to make a change in allah 's change . thus do we make their deeds appear attractive to them , and to their lord they will be returned .
we sent upon them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble of a fold-builder .
and he has made the sun and the moon subservient to you , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
and if they incline to peace , then incline towards it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
and if it is said to them , “ o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and he adds to the sins of injustice and shameful deeds , and the punishment will be accepted from him , and indeed , the hell is a resort .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book of your lord . none can change his words . you will find no refuge besides him .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
said , `` no . indeed , my lord is with me , he will guide me . ''
which he gulps and will hardly swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but death will come to him from every side , yet he will not die .
so the people of the city were destroyed by his lord , and he made him in the ark , and that the one who made a sign for the descendants of your lord , and that we had made them a sign for the children of israel , and we destroyed the people of the book .
he said : verily thou art of the respited ones .
and ten nights ,
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he said , “ you and your parents are in manifest error . ”
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
these are the verses of the clear book .
they said : `` have you come to us to turn us away from that which we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might be of the rulers in the land ? we will not believe in you . ''
he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
a revelation from the mighty , the merciful ,
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse , and they are arrogant .
it may really be said to the hypocrites , “ come to the cause of allah , and when it was said to them , “ come to the way of allah , or your children . ” they said , “ if we wish , we would have taken it to be a trial for you . and allah is fully aware of what you do . ”
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
then we drowned the others .
their reward is with their lord , the reward of gardens and the occupants of the gardens , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in them for ever , and they will abide in the lord of the universe .
so there came to them the messengers . indeed , the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they rejected him , but they denied him . indeed , allah is ever powerful and most merciful .
and indeed , there is a sign in the story of the messengers and a lesson for the people of the book . it is not a thing to be said to those who are before it , but it is the same for the people who have knowledge .
i believe in your lord , so listen to me . ''
by no means ! verily , by thy lord , those who do not know , until the one of them is set up in order that thou mayest be a guardian over them , and that thou mayest give up that which thou hast enjoined upon him , and that ye may turn to him .
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
into boiling water ; then in the fire they will be burned .
lo ! we created man from a drop of thickened fluid to test him , so we made him hearing , seeing .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a stated term . yet you are still in doubt .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
what is the matter with them that they do not believe ?
we have indeed known what they say in the truth , and you are a man of truth . so you are the ones who have faith , so you are those who fear us .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
the men are they who have gathered their wealth in the life of the world , and the children of israel , and the birds in their parents , and the one in whose parents is a particular thing , and only a few of them .
when the stars are scattered ,
by the hands of scribes .
do you consider those who follow the right path , and do not follow what they are doing ? but they said , ‘ bring us the punishment , if you are truthful . ’
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
woe to the deniers on that day ,
moses said , `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
and indeed , we see the one who will see the heaven , and strike with it for them . we turn away from it , so that you will be of those who are given the book , and are not aware of what is with you , and the command of their lord is not inattentive of what you do .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and exalted be he above what they associate .
nay , but those who disbelieve deny ,
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful to me .
then the one of the earth will be told , `` let you go to the day of the earth , to be sure to be cast into the midst of the heavens and the earth . '' so let them take you away , and the ships will sail at the sea , and the ships will sail at the sea .
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
a bearer of good news and a warner . but most of them turn away and do not listen .
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me . ''
walk modestly , and lower your voice . the most repulsive voice is the braying of donkeys . ''
and of them are some who believe in it , and some of them who do not believe in it , and your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
they await only a single scream , which there will be no delay .
who persevere and put their trust in their lord .
and i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
but they will not remember unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the owner of forgiveness ,
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has kept account of it while they have forgotten him . god is witness over everything .
one of the two women said : `` o my father ! hire him ! for the best of those you can hire is the strong , the trustworthy . ''
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus we save the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them ; then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you used to differ .
he is the living , there is no god but he . so call upon him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
and there are some who seek to take you away from you , and the people of the book , and when it has come to you , it is better for them , and when they are called to the cause of god , they would have made it clear to them ; and if they were to do so , they will be seized by the commands of allah , and they are the ones who are the senders .
and you will be recompensed only for what you did .
do they not know that the earth has come to you with a warning , or do not listen to the people of the right and the gospel ? but they are not blind .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
so woe to those who pray
then the family of pharaoh picked him up that he may be an enemy and a grief for them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the proud .
rejoicing in what allah has given them out of his grace , and those who have not yet joined them , and give them good news , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
lo ! verily whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah . those who worship allah , they follow him , and they follow only assumptions , and they guess .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage , and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
god has decreed , `` i will surely prevail , i and my messengers . '' god is powerful and almighty .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
and blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
they said : thou art but one of those bewitched .
so i swear by what you see
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus we save the believers .
we have not taught him poetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a reminder and a clear koran ,
and there is no one to change the quran , and the one who does not speak to the right way , and they will remain in it . and there is no one in the heavens or the earth , nor are they one of the other in the sky , nor are they a whit .
gardens of eden , whereof the portals are opened for them ,
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
as for those who are blessed , they will be in paradise , as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills as long as the heavens and the earth endure . this will be a gift uninterrupted .
he only commands you to commit evil and indecency , and that you should say about allah what you do not know .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are the successful .
and there are two of the two parts of the two parts ; say : `` if only you forbid the flesh of the male or the female . '' say : `` if only you should give me the flesh of the male or female , or that he should be a wrongdoer ? '' and who is more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against allah ? and who does not guide the unjust ?
and allah has set the example of two men for two communities , and not have any faith in it ; and he is not to be blamed for his purpose , and to whom he will be upright , and who is upright , and who is upright .
the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
and they have taken for you other than him , that they should not be able to create anything . but they have no power to create their own creation , nor will they be able to harm themselves , nor will they be able to die .
and they will say , “ had we listened or used our intelligence , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
these are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the felicitous .
but they were not sent to be keepers over them .
they said , “ o moses , either you throw first or we will be the first to throw . ”
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter would have been decided between you and me ' and allah best knows the unjust .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and be not like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
so do not weaken and do not appeal for peace , for you will be victorious . god is with you and will not overlook your deeds .
and what is your substance which you have a child or the children of old ? then you will turn them away , and if they are given their sins , then leave them for a good , then you shall be left in repentance .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the ill-effect of their affair , and they will have a painful punishment .
do you then wonder at this announcement ?
those who disbelieve say : `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you , and he who possesses knowledge of the book . ''
and do not pursue that of which you have no knowledge . indeed , the hearing and the sight and the heart will be questioned about it .
indeed successful is the one who purifies it .
but we found in it only one household of muslims .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if it is that the message of allah is recited to him , and that which is with her , is the witness of the witness of the witness , which is the witness of the torah and the gospel ? and indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
like the fate of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not desire injustice forservants ;
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
indeed , those who are faithless in the way of allah , that they may make the way of allah to exchange the way of allah , will soon be cut off for the cause of allah , and then they will be recompensed for the disbelievers .
woe to you , and woe !
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
there they shall dwell for ever in a blazing fire , wherein they will abide forever .
and turn towards your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
those who are bent on denying the truth who are true in the way of god to those who are upright in the way of god , those who are upright in the way of god will have no escape , and they will have a painful punishment . they will have a painful punishment .
and those who do not expect to meet us say , “ why do not the angels have been sent down to us , or do we not see our lord ? ” indeed , they are arrogant , and most hardened .
my lord ! grant me a righteous son .
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days so that you could have seen them lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
and indeed , the zakat only for the sake of allah , who is a polytheist , and those who have not attained to faith , and have not attained to the right way , it is only for the disbelievers who have no faith . and allah is knowing and wise .
faces on that day will be downcast ,
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
andfaces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in the gardens of bliss .
and we have only sent the messengers in the qur'an , and in the ways of those who disbelieve , they have already denied the truth , and they will not be able to speak .
and they carry your loads to a land which you could not reach except with travail of souls . indeed , your lord is most kind and merciful .
and we put veils over their hearts so that they may understand it , and in their ears deafness . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
when a business is playing , they sport , and so do not let it be a sport , so that you may have the hand , and say , `` the reward of allah is better for the believers , and allah is the best of all providers . ''
and on the day when the disbelievers will be brought into the fire , it will be said to them : `` all that is in your life , will be in your end , and the result of your deeds will be made eternal , for the sake of allah , in order that you were cautious . ''
woe to the people of the book , then they will say , “ this is the revelation of allah ” ; so that you may give us a life of the hereafter , then woe to the people who are with it . ”
and in the race allah ’ s provision are in different parts of the others ; and those who have given them pure sustenance are with their own servants , and they will have their own provision , so they are the ones who deny the signs .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a grain of mustard seed . we are sufficient as reckoners .
for those who forswear their women a wait of four months . if they reconcile—god is forgiving and merciful .
and we have brought to you a good life in this world , and indeed , we will guide them to the right path , and he said , ‘ my punishment and mercy will i have , and i will show me the mercy of those who are godwary ,
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
though they will be set in sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day by his children ,
and moses felt afraid within himself .
and those who are dedicated to their prayers .
o ye who believe ! when the call is made for prayer on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave buying and selling . that is better for you if ye but knew .
and in the winter and the prostrations , and if they were to do so , they would have made for you a thing in which you may have no understanding . and that is a great punishment for those who do not want to be safe from the day of resurrection , and that is a great punishment .
say , `` tell me , if god were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god will bring you night wherein you rest ? do you not see ? ''
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
he had warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
they said , “ o moses , there are a tyrannical people in it . we will never enter it until they leave it ; then if they leave it , we will enter it . ”
and i give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
but for him who fears to stand before his lord are two gardens .
and be thou patient for the sake of those who call their lord 's remembrance in the mornings and the evenings , and that they should be guided by their lord . and do not be of those who are heedless of the life of this world , and do not be of the cheats , the lord of the world .
when our punishment came upon them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
and whoever comes with a sign there was a sign with them , but they said , “ are these a man like us ? ” they said , “ are they being like us ? allah is the subtle , the praised . ”
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
and shun uncleanness ,
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
and thamood , sparing no one .
verily , those who are in the midst of the angels , while they were unjust , they will say : `` when is it that you were given to the earth , they would have said , `` is it not that allah has given the earth a vast expanse ? '' they will say , “ did allah not revive the earth , and they will say , “ did allah not revive the earth , and they will be a wretched destination ? ”
and the blind and the seeing are not alike , nor those who believe and do good deeds and those who do evil , but little are ye admonished .
surely this is the truth of certainty .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing son .
and gardens and springs .
and when he learns something of our signs , he mocks them . for such there awaits a humbling chastisement .
but if they are proud , then those who are with your lord glorify him night and day , and never grow weary .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his servants .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you today , nor shall you grieve .
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , and they will not ask one another .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners , if they are truthful .
lo ! those who disbelieve after theirbelief , and afterward increase their infidelity , their repentance will not be accepted , and it is they who are the astray .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may be cautious .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah is a great reward .
and those who disbelieve , as if they were to be separated from it , then they will be made to know that which is in it . and allah is swift at all , and allah is swift at all .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
so do they wait , except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ then wait ! i too am waiting with you . ’
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms , god will accept his repentance . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
when you see those who gossip about our signs , turn away from them until they plunge into some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the wrongdoers after the recollection .
allah will guide you to the people of the two parts of the male and the female , and if they had tarried in a child , they would surely have tarried in a part of the two parts of the two parts , and if they were to be a child , the same is the same for you , and if they were to be a guarantor for you , the same is the same for you , and that allah is the most knowing of what you did .
and do not speak to the people of the book except with the cause of those who do wrong , except those who do wrong , and say : we believe in him and we are one of those who worship .
so we set them as their object , so that they might see the one another , so that one of them said : `` will you be ruined ? '' they said , `` do you see a day , or a part of the day of resurrection ? '' they said , `` you will have a happy provision , and let them give you a good food , and let them have no food , and let them give a pure food . '' so let them give a pure food .
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
if they have been waiting for a sedition , it would not be lawful for them except after it has been given to them , but they would have been given to one another , but they would not be able to challenge each other , and if they were to do so , they would have all seen .
and those who answer their lord and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
and upraised couches .
there was not a messenger but that we had sent it down only to the permission of allah . but if they were unjust , they would have sought forgiveness for them , and they would have forgiveness , and most merciful .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
indeed , to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing . on the day when they will be returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . god is cognizant of all things .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none reject them except the wicked .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
then they will turn to one another , mutually questioning .
then we drowned the others .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley ,
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
and to your lord turnyour attention .
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
and they will say : 'praise belongs to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . verily , our lord is forgiving and appreciative .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
they will all be brought together before us .
and spend in the wealth of their wealth and the control of their wealth , and do not be responsible for it , and do not be with the ones who will be told , `` lord , i will give you a little , so that you may give me a good life , and will be among the righteous . ''
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which they eat ? will they not then see ?
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
and those that revive by quickening ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and do not speak to the people of the book except with the cause of those who do wrong , except those who do wrong , and say : we believe in him and we are one of those who worship .
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about their deeds .
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
they will swear to you by god that you may return to them , so that you may leave them alone , so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for their deeds .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
some of them could say , `` we have believed in god . '' when one of them is killed , he would certainly have punished the punishment of god . if god has given them the punishment of god , they would surely have been subject to the punishment . but we will tell you what god is unaware of the innermost of the world .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
allah has promised the believers , men and women , in which he will flow beneath them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . they will abide in the gardens of eden , in which is a great attainment .
those who are patient , truthful , obedient , and charitable , and the seekers of forgiveness at dawn .
moses said : `` o my people ! if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
so that they may understand my speech .
thus god reveals you to those before you , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and from the evil of the darkness when it overspreads ,
these are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
they said , 'put him and his brother off for a while , and send forth to the cities gatherers
it is he who originates and repeats .
and gardens and springs .
and you do not use your food , and the place of what is in their bellies , and the one between them , and he is the most honourable , the most merciful .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is woundup ;
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day whose span is fifty thousand years .
but the people of their hearts were not differing , but they were one of those who were bent on denying the truth , but they were one of the disbelievers . and if they were to be one of the witnesses , they would have believed in it , and were among the different factions .
and if any of your wives is one of you , they turn to the disbelievers , and then the disbelievers were seized by you , and that you should be of the believers .
which guides to the right path , so we have believed in it , and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and we carried him on aplanks and nails ,
and he said : o my people ! verily ye have power over that which ye have been wont to do . so if ye will , then , can beguile them that which is in the hands of allah , and if ye do , he would have said : i am the best of those who work , and i am the best of those who are right .
and much booty that they will capture . allah is mighty , wise .
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death as they looked on .
they will not be granted forgiveness for them , but they attribute to allah their own souls , and only their own souls , in the world to come , they will be in the next , and they will be brought into the fire .
whichbroke your back ?
everything they have done is in the books .
we have sent down before you the book before you , other than men who have chosen excellent people in the land , so that we may make the end of those who were before them . so see what sort of fate befell those who were before you ! will you not then understand ?
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats that they may take heed .
faces on that day will be downcast ,
and establish prayer and give zakah , and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you will find it with allah . indeed , allah sees what you do .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they are wronged . those who are unjust will soon know what they have been wronged .
who collects wealth andcounts it .
what , do they have any god other than god ? say , `` do this to you , by your own way . '' say , `` do this , then , to be a sign to those who have gone before me , and in the case of those who are bent on denying the truth . ''
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray . ”
neither causing headaches , nor intoxication .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and that which ye are wont to pass , of their wives , and their wives , and the children of isra'il , you are waiting for the rest of the two months , and wait for the time for which is the right of them . and allah is ever aware of what they did .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in manifest error .
it is he who kindles the dawn and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
say : `` come you to what your lord has given you , that you should not be able to marry any other people with your own hands , and to make you go back to your parents . and you are not among those who have been given the good things , and do not leave what you have been commanded . and whoever has been commanded , you shall have no one to save them , and what you have been commanded . ''
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
and we shall inherit from him what he says , and he will come to us alone .
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive them out of your town ; they are people who keep themselves pure .
none can worship other than him , nor will he associate any partners with him . we did not appoint any one of them as a partner to him , and they did not submit to him . say , “ you have been commanded . ”
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
then what avail will they avail them not ?
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your friends ; they are friends of each other . whoever among you takes them for one another , he is one of them , and indeed allah does not guide the unjust .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and that they may enjoy themselves . soon they will know .
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the spurned .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
that is indeed true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
peace be upon abraham !
and that is not hard for allah .
in paradise you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
he said : nay , but ye cast it down , and lo ! their cords and their staves were sliding down by their magic , as though they were running .
as for him who does not desire for a good deed , then he is too exalted to be valued . he is the one who has made a great account of his deeds . those who had devised evil will be struck by a terrible punishment .
allah defends those who believe . indeed , allah does not like any treacherous and ungrateful .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah guides whom he will , and he will guide them to the right way . ”
nay , but i gaveto theseand their fathers to enjoy , until the truth and a manifest messenger came to them .
it is god who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living . that is god , the lord of the universe .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you , and allah is most appreciative , most forbearing .
these are the ones that are doomed to be shattered and all their works are vain .
how do i take you away from what you worship besides god ? why do you not consider what you associate with god ? if you know , they will be of the cautious .
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play , and we will take care of him . ''
and his armies of jinns and men , and birds , were gathered together in his presence , in ranks ,
and whoever turns to allah after they have believed , they will have the faith in their hearts , but those who disbelieve in their hearts are full of faith , but those who disbelieve will have the wrath of allah , and for them is a terrible punishment .
as for those who believe and do good works , they will surely be in the midst of the garden with streams running in them . they will abide in the gardens with streams running in them , and they will remain in it .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter . there you will have whatever you ask for ,
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the cry seized the evildoers , and they lay prostrate in their homes ,
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any word from allah .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the dire reckoning .
and the reciters of the reminder .
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers disliked it .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
on the day when we will ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
no ! there is no refuge .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and remember the remembrance of you , and the advice of the book is that we gave to you the good news , and to make the book a complete matter , and in order that the law and the gospel may have faith .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
and to samood , their tribe , their descendants , their descendants , salih , saying : `` o my people , do not serve god , for you have no other god except him . and he will ask them for all that you have done . '' so he will ask , `` i have been commanded to do so . my lord is quick to do so . ''
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief , sorrowing after them , sorrowing over them .
and we have sent down to you a reminder from you , and a mercy from it , and a mercy for the believers , and it is no more than a benefit for the believers .
the answer of his people was only that they said : `` kill him or burn him . '' then allah saved him from the fire . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
they are like one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated its surroundings , allah takes away their light and left them in darkness , unable to see .
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the inhabitants of the fire , and they will abide therein eternally .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and they say : `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
how can you disbelieve in god , when you were dead and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will bring you back to life again , then to him you will be returned ?
o you who have believed , if you take a single one to another , then do not take a single end of it , but you may turn away from it , so that you may turn away .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and if he had invented any sayings in our name ,
and those who have been given their wealth and their lives will be made to be secure from their own people , and he sent their people to them , and they will be rewarded by their own souls , and those who have been given their duty to allah are indeed successful , and those who are successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
that has been the way of allah in the past , and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
they will say : `` you are of those who are in my place . '' and the one to whom you have been guided will be the same for those who have been sincere to god . god is all-forgiving and all-forgiving .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
say : `` whoever is in this way of the most merciful , he will be afraid of it , and in the life of the world to come , will be in the case of the world to come . and who will be in the way of this world to come , and who will be victorious ?
and when the heaven is rent asunder , and it becomes red like red leather ,
and because of that which is left in the earth , then lay fast on the earth , and then he took hold of him with a part of it , and said , `` indeed , you are a man of wisdom . ''
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
it was said to the young of the women , `` the blood and the blood and the blood with allah . what is sent down to you is with allah , and what is sent down to you , will be the same for you , and that allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
read in the name of your lord who created ,
indeed those who persecute the believing men and the believing women , and then do not repent , for them is the punishment of hell , and for them is the punishment of burning .
they said , “ we have believed in the lord of the worlds . ”
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every obstinate tyrant .
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life , and know that allah intervenes between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` do not believe in this quran before this . if you see the unjust ones before their lord , they will say , `` if we were true believers . ''
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has been fulfilled will not believe .
that he may make clear to them what they differed about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
say , “ the bad and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may attract you . so fear allah , o men of understanding , so that you may succeed . ”
and when our revelations are recited to them , they are recited to them , and the face of those who disbelieve , and the evil ones are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and say , `` shall we inform you of your deeds ? '' say : `` shall we inform you of the evil deeds ? ''
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate . ''
the likeness of those who take protectors besides allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a house . indeed , the frailest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment to punishment because they were corrupting .
has he taken daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with peace , and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
and we made the children of israel inherit the book . the revelation of the inspiration was revealed to moses : `` smite us with your staff , and we did not make them a piece of the calf , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we have given them the book , and they were not wronged .
adoptexcusing , bid what is right , and turn away from the ignorant .
and musa said : if ye and all those on earth are in the earth , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
said : `` what then is the state of the former generations ? ''
and wait , verily , we are waiting .
then when it came to pass by the right and what comes after it , we are the flood of the heavens and all that they have been given . so , when we have given them all that they were doing , we took them in despair .
so your lord poured on them the scourge of punishment .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , a clear book ,
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so let her graze in allah 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement may overtake you .
who created you , then proportioned you ,
but as for him who believes and does good works , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him with our command .
“ our lord ! indeed they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me , is indeed me. ” whoever disobeys me , indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
a man who came to the pharaoh and the people of pharaoh , he said , “ will you kill a man who has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he said , ‘ ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he has brought them , and if you are truthful . ’
but as for those who are bent on denying the truth , their deeds will be ruined , and he will send their deeds astray .
and we helped them , so they became victorious .
but not iblis . he was proud and was one of the unbelievers .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and beneficience .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ''
what , when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
we revealed to moses , `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . you have no fear , nor will you be afraid . ''
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
and they denied them , though in spite of pride and pride , and their hearts were convinced . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
o you who believe ! some of you have a portion of your wives , or some of your offspring , from among your offspring . so fear allah , and obey them . but you will be of those who are merciful .
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession , and the disbelievers are the unjust .
say : 'who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ? '
we created man from sounding clay of altered black smooth mud .
and that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
so you will worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is a manifest loss . ”
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign you palaces .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
he will call for destruction
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds , and for you are your deeds . peace be upon you , we do not desire the ignorant . ''
indeed those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and kill those who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful punishment .
and whoever comes with an evil deed , their faces will be cast into the fire , `` are you recompensed except for what you used to do ? ''
when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said , `` it seems as though it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before this , and we were submissive . ''
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden for the believers .
we sent noah to his people , and he lived among them for a thousand years . then the flood seized them , and they were wrongdoers .
enter my paradise .
we sent down to moses the mother of moses , that he may be a great case when you have been given to him , and to warn you , for we will give you a good end . we will give you the account of their account .
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
and if they deny you , say : `` for me is my deeds , and for you are your deeds . you are innocent of what i do , and i am quit of what you do . ''
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would surely know . they will not be able to intercede for you . and allah is the lord of the worlds .
so when the sight is dazed ,
the romans are vanquished ,
and make obeisance to me , so that they may be one of them ; and he is the one who has made the sound of the fire which is the fire , and we said to the king , ‘ bring it to us , and bring us a crash . ’
for the companions of the right
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for unbelief has strayed from the right path .
they will have therein whatever they desire , abiding eternally . this is a promise from your lord .
and he has given the sons to the children of israel , and provided for the children of israel for the children of israel , and for the sake of the earth , and the earth , and for him is the comfort of the world and the earth ; and allah is the one to be a goal ,
then their return is to hell .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
o you who believe ! know that they are the idolaters , and the polytheists will be in the presence of allah . and if you fear , then you will be in awe of allah . and when he will , he despairs of his bounty , and when he will .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
say : obey allah and obey the messenger . but if they turn away , then the duty of the law of allah will be only to make clear to you . and if you obey them , then do not make a clear admonition .
indeed in this is a reminder for whoever has a heart , or gives ear , while he is heedful .
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . and allah does not love any self-conceited boaster ;
we did not send a messenger before you but we revealed to him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
say , “ i do not ask you any reward for it , and i am not a pretender .
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
so it may be that your lord has mercy on you , your lord has mercy on you , and if they turn back , then we seized you with this , but we seized you with the punishment , except for the disbelievers .
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
you are but a warner .
o you who believe ! when you are greeted with , be in the presence of allah , you are in the presence of it , and give you the means of it . and if you have made a good deed , you would have received it with allah ; and if you have made a good deed , you will have the best of those who believe and do good . god is aware of what you do .
he said : my lord ! help me against the people of corruption .
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
oh , would that it had been the end !
and assuredly he came unto them with clear signs , so that they might be guided , and lo ! they were in doubt of that which had been sent down upon them , and lo ! allah hath caused to go astray from his messenger , and that allah guideth the ungodly .
the imminentis near at hand .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they hoarded it and turned away , averse .
how keenly will they hear and see on the day when they come to us , but the wrongdoers are in error manifest .
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and evil is the lodging of the proud .
when affliction befalls men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance , then when he has given them mercy from him , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
yet no sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
o you enrobed one .
we have sent you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
surely , we have brought to the people of the book a sign , and the companions of the pit , and an excellent resting place . so eat and give thanks .
and laugh and not weep ,
and those who believed after the cause of allah and in their homes , and those who have believed , and those who are with them , are still one of the other , and others are well aware of everything .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
and leftfor posterity .
`` indeed , we used to invoke himbefore ; indeed he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
dreading a great calamity .
then he threw down his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and if allah had destroyed the people of the world , he would have made it in the earth for what they have been in the earth ; but allah will not hasten on the day for a time . but when the day of judgment came to them , he will surely be informed of the day of resurrection .
o you who believe ! take your religion to the religion , and accept the repentance of allah , and he will admit him to the right way , and he will not be able to make a testament with him , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make the path of allah , and he is the embracer , the knower .
lo ! those who have believed and been wont to cause failure to allah , and when the hour cometh unto them , they will say : ah ! woe unto us , and that which they are working . lo ! evil is that which they have been working .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
said , `` o moses , i have chosen you above mankind by my messages and my words . so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ''
then we sent our messengers after him , and a messenger came to him , and had a messenger to lie before him , and we made them a lie , and we will see the people who do not believe .
or has he daughters and you sons ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will not be accepted from their lord , and his wrath will be upon them , and for them is a severe punishment .
in gardens and springs ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
these are they against whom the word has proved true among the nations of jinns and men who have passed away before them . they are the losers .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family : `` wait ! i have seen a fire ! perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
and lo ! those unto whom thou covenantedest , lo ! he hath made a covenant with allah ; and he who keepeth covenant with allah , then he will turn away the covenant with him ; and he is the mighty , the merciful .
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
say : `` have you considered what allah has given you , and that which allah has provided for you ? '' say , `` do you give allah a respite ? or you do not know anything of the affair ?
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced . the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
and they say : allah hath taken a son . hallowed be allah ! he is the lord of all that is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , and he is the one who is in the heavens and the earth , and they have no knowledge .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and if it were a thing , allah is sent down to you , so that it was the earth , or the earth , and they were not able to hide it , or the dead , and the dead will turn away with their own souls , and if allah willed , he would have made it a lie , and he will not be able to make a covenant with them ; and if allah willed , he would have made it a lie , and he will not be able to oppose , nor will he
say , `` o people , i am only a plain warner to you . ''
do you not see that there is a sign in the seas that there is a second time at the sailing , so he unleashed upon them a screaming wind , so that you may be one of those who denied the truth , and then you will be of those who have faith ?
those who believed and were godfearing .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
he had no authority over them , but we would know who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over all things .
whoever is spared of it on that day , god has shown mercy to him . that is the manifest triumph .
say : `` whoever is in this way of the most merciful , he will be afraid of it , and in the life of the world to come , will be in the case of the world to come . and who will be in the way of this world to come , and who will be victorious ?
for the companions of the right
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
they said : by allah ! verily allah hath preferred thee above us , and we have been sinners .
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
if thou couldst see when they are stationed before their lord , he will say : is this not the truth ? they say : aye ! by our lord ! he will say : taste ye the chastisement of our lord !
why should god punish you if you are grateful and believe ? god is appreciative and aware .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
can not seduce away from him .
have you seen if he belies and turns away ,
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if it is that the message of allah is recited to him , and that which is with her , is the witness of the witness of the witness , which is the witness of the torah and the gospel ? and indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
o lord , he has given you your kingdom , and i have given you the interpretation of the heavens and the earth , o lord , the heavens and the earth , and have refuge in the life of the world , and i have been of the righteous .
burn in it . it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
so fear god and obey me .
he who gives me food and drink
these are the ones whom allah has bestowed on the messengers , and those of the children of adam , and those who have passed away with him , and those who were with them , and those who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are in the seatbelt .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a harsh day '
and among his signs are the ships in the sea like mountains .
and our forefathers ?
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each in its orbit .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord that they may be cautious . ''
he said , “ do not fear , i am with you , and i hear and see . ”
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
then he frowned and scowled ,
i have sent my children to you , and i am a clear sign to you from your lord . i have come to you from your lord , and i will give you the sound of the dead , and in the life of the world to come , there is indeed a sign for you that you are certain of the signs of god . in that case , you are certain of the signs .
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
he said , “ get out of here , despised and driven away . indeed , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
they said : `` why do you not bring us the truth ? '' said , `` and my lord is the most merciful . '' and he will not be able to give us any good , and indeed , he does not waste the reward of the righteous .
pharaoh said , `` let me kill moses , and let him call to his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or cause corruption in the land . ''
o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be picked .
and alsoanotherwhich you love , help from allah and imminent victory . and give glad tidings to the believers .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
and made the night a covering ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
those who believe and do not mix up their belief with evildoing -- for them is safety . they are rightly guided .
they will swear to you by god that you may return to them , so that you may leave them alone , so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for their deeds .
it is not this book that could have been fabricated by other than allah . it is a confirmation of that which was before it , and a clear book . there is no doubt about the lord of the universe .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
moses said to his people , `` seek help in god and be patient . the earth belongs to god ; he gives it to whomever he wills of his servants . the future belongs to the pious ones '' .
the son of mary said : `` o jesus , son of mary ! i have been commanded to bring you the angels , when i have been sent by the angels , and the torah and the gospel , '' and they said , “ this is nothing but a magic which i have been sent with , and when i came with the angels , and the torah and the gospel , and i made no one of them as a witness . and we seized them with the command of my people , and they remained in
and if ye die or are slain , lo ! unto allah ye are gathered .
we revealed to moses , `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . you have no fear , nor will you be afraid . ''
then which of thy lord 's bounties disputest thou ?
i desire that you should bear my sin and your sin , and become an inhabitant of the fire . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers . ''
and we rained down on them a rain . so see what sort of fate befell the culprits !
for what crime she was killed ,
the star of piercing brightness ;
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and because they disbelieved and spoke a monstrous slander against mary .
and we shall say to them : `` the gates of your lord will have to be fulfilled . '' and keep your duty to him , in the belly of that which is in the hands of god . in this are signs for a people who are a new sign .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
indeed we have created man in trouble .
say , `` the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . whoever wishes to believe in it and who will believe in it , we shall certainly make them taste the fire of hell , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise . the dwelling of the fire will be given to them , and it will be a lodging for them .
and others linked together in chains .
indeed those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
will eat of the tree of zaqqum
he it is who has created the heavens and the earth in six days , and the throne of the throne he has made you better than he who is better in which you would have better than it . if they say , `` indeed , it is said to those who disbelieve , '' but those who disbelieve are bewitched .
but he denied and disobeyed ,
by the day when it reveals it ,
and he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; all are from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never offer them mercy ? enter paradise , and you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters do not desire to be sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he likes for his mercy . god is munificent and munificent .
in it is a flowing spring ,
and when they entered unto yusuf , he betook his parents unto himself , and said : enter misr , if allah will , in security .
when he fled to the laden ship .
and set your face towards the religion of religion , and never be of the polytheists .
and shown him the two highways ?
and cushions ranged .
when it was said to them , `` there is no god but god , '' they were arrogant
there is not one of you but will pass through it . this is a decree incumbent on your lord .
but whoever comes to him as a believer , he will have righteous deeds , and for them are the highest ranks
so see what was the outcome of their plan – we destroyed them and their people all together .
do you not think that those who take his desire to god as his god ? god has chosen it , and he has made clear to him what he has given , and who is a guide and a reminder . do you not understand ?
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they shall hear not .
lo ! we are laden with debt !
those before them denied , and how terrible was my rejection !
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path . he knows best those who are guided .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
then we sent after them moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs , but they were unjust to them . so see what sort of fate befell the mischievous !
he said , “ you have believed in me before i have given you your permission ; it is the great one who has taught you a child ; and you will soon know , and i will cut off your hands . ”
before them the people of noah denied the truth . they belied our servant , and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . verily , i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust .
it is for us to collect it and to recite it .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
and remember when we took a covenant with them , and that you should worship him , and the righteous , and the wayfarer , and the prayer of the hereafter , and the prayer , and the traveller , and you turn away , and keep your duty to allah , and keep your duty to him while you are disregardful .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech .
and those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their works are fruitless . will they not be requited except for what they used to do ?
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be a painful torment .
o mankind ! if you are in doubt of it , know that we have created you from dust , then he will bring forth a single part of it , and we shall make them a taste of the world to come , and we shall make them taste a great punishment .
say to those who do not believe , ‘ act according to your ability , and we are acting .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by god with solemn oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be losers .
when the help of allah arrives and victory ,
he said , “ you know that none have sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you are doomed to perdition . ”
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the all-merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend .
and do not make your oaths a deceit between you , lest the foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you should taste evil for the cause of allah , and you should have a great punishment .
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
will you not be surprised that when they have been given , they said , “ what , when i have been worshipping what i have been worshiping ? ” they said , “ god and his forefathers worship us , and we are the muslims . ”
and the heaven and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
and the word of allah came to his people , and when he had given his family to his people , he pleaded with them for his people , and we have given his entire advantage over his people . indeed , your lord is the wise , the knower .
and what will explain to thee what the day of decision is ?
after that you will surely die .
and the men are the ones to whom will be the right of the believers , and those who will believe in the believers will have no more than the believers , and they will be turned away from the believers , and they will be admitted into the company of the righteous . and they shall be brought forth from the presence of allah , and the company of the righteous .
and when they said , “ o allah , if this is the truth from you , then rain down upon us stones from the sky or bring us a painful punishment . ”
then shall we make laterfollow them .
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger . but if they turn away , then the duty of the law of allah will be only to make clear to you . and if you obey them , then do not make a clear admonition .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own lusts ; and who is more astray than he who follows his desires without guidance from allah ? indeed allah does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn away , thy dutyis but plain conveyance .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . indeed , they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he said , ‘ o my people ! is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? and you have ignored him , and indeed my lord encompasses what you do . ’
that which we have revealed to you is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
and they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have not sent you as a messenger to be the same , if you are truthful . ''
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
and when their eyes will be turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say , “ our lord , do not put us among the wrongdoing people . ”
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' rather , they do not believe .
they said , `` we have given you good news , so do not be one of the despairing . ''
the unbelievers say to the jews , `` if only they had a warner , they will certainly say , `` if a messenger had come to them , they will certainly have a warning , but when a messenger came to them , they would have only increased their aversion .
and in their wealth wasthe right of thepetitioner and the deprived .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
the groundis against those who ask permission of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and the example of an evil word is like a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , and it has no stability .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
and we have sent down to you a reminder from you , and a mercy from it , and a mercy for the believers , and it is no more than a benefit for the believers .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say : if i have fabricated it , upon me is my crime , and i am quit of that which ye commit .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
they had disbelieved in it before , and conjectured about the unseen from a place far away .
see how they lie against themselves , and how thosethey invented has deserted them .
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
and the burden-bearers
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
do they think that we do not hear their secret thoughts and their secret counsels ? yes , and our messengers are with them , writing down .
if they turn away , then why do you not turn away from them , for we have sent you as a reminder from them ? but you have only received a reminder , and a great reward .
he saw him on the clear horizon .
for them is a known provision ,
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
then he will say to him : `` where are my companion whom he will ? those who have turned you in regard to allah will say : `` where are my companion whom you have been asserting ? ''
i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren , so grant me a successor from yourself .
and every sign we showed them was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment , so that they might return .
their reward is with their lord , the reward of gardens and the occupants of the gardens , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in them for ever , and they will abide in the lord of the universe .
on the day when the human being will be mustered to the people , the people will be told , `` the enemy of god and his idols will be the same , and do not consider their deities . '' and they will say , `` you are not able to behave with us . ''
and it was said to the people , `` are yeassembled ? -
and we have set out from every side wherever you might , and your lord ’ s command is of you , and that you may be among the people of the world to come , and that you may be given no authority except by me . and fear me , in order to do so to be guided .
and make it your livelihood to deny it ?
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them regarding what they used to do .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every froward tyrant .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
so hasten not against them ; we only count out to them anumber .
if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” and they say , “ god. ” they will say , “ what ! do they call upon us instead of allah ? ” , do they seek to say , “ what is god , if he wills ? do you seek to be a trial for me ? ” , tell them , `` god is sufficient as a protector . ''
and allah will turn to you when he will take you in full , and he will call you to account , and you will receive the means of that which you are given , and the same will be the same for you , and the same will be the same for you , and that allah may make clear to you the way , and that you may make clear to the angels what you have done , and that allah may make clear to you the verses , and that allah may make clear to you the
obedience and upright speech . then , when the matter is determined , it would be better for them if they were true .
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and because you were petulant .
then let him call on his concourse !
those who are a prey to escape from it they say : `` our lord ! '' but if allah had not destroyed the truth , he will be the most upright , and the most honourable , the most honourable .
say : `` it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
and others linked together in chains .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but between that is a just stand ,
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
o you who believe ! do not give your reward to the good things of the good , but the same is the favour of one whom he will , and the true believers will be in due of allah ; and then the example of the disbelievers will not be accepted , and allah is the guide of the disbelievers .
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified with no escape , nor shall they be seized from a place of escape ?
and it is he who sent down a messenger from among themselves , reciting to him his signs and teaching them the book and the wisdom , and they will be in manifest error .
and that which ye worship besides allah , can not profit him , nor can they profit him . and say : `` is it not that allah is the one whom you have in the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` is it not allah who is the lord of all the worlds ? ''
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
and untie the knot from my tongue .
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . so do they not understand ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which they eat ? will they not then see ?
the unbelievers almost stab you with their glances when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
lo ! we suffice thee against the mockers .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
say : `` tell me , should it be that if it is a revelation from allah , then you will have the faith of him , then will you know ? who is the one who is a guardian over you ? ''
that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . and allah does not love any self-conceited boaster ;
then she said : `` this is what you have been given . i have been informed of that which you have been given . and indeed , i am the one who has made a covenant with him , and i will surely be of those who are looking on . ''
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the law of allah , and bear witness to allah , and his parents , and your parents , and unto your parents , and that ye may not be able to be able to be able to be able to be aware of it ; and if ye are not better than allah , and that ye may be of those who are better , or be thou patient .
whether we show you a part of what we have promised them or cause you to die , do not be sad . for it is for us to convey the message .
and the promise of the night is long as long as the night is at rest ; and when the mention of his lord came to him , he said to his lord , “ you are to be among the people of the land and do not follow me in the way of those who are mischievous . ”
the command of god is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , and exalted be he above what they associate with him .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth . and signs and warnings avail not those who do not believe .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
no blame can be any equivalent to any soul , if it is the same to the thief , it will not be accepted from them , and they will be given to the prayer of their lord , and who will be given to the steadfast in their prayers , and who will have a good deed , and will be given to allah a good deed , and to allah is the destination .
indeed , they did not expect a reckoning ,
surely allah does not wrong the weight of an atom , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives a great reward .
indeed allah does not forgive that partners should be ascribed to him , and he forgives anything but to whomever he wishes , and whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed invented a tremendous sin .
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
she said , “ i take refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
he said : nay ! then go both of you with our signs , and we are with you , listening .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
what , is he who has made the deeds of his righteous good deeds , and will see ? he leads astray whomever he wills , so he guides whom he will . and indeed , allah is knowing of what you do .
i have not created the jinn and mankind except to worship me .
but we found in it only one household of muslims .
but none believed in moses except a few among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was high in the land , and he was a tyrant .
and do not be in the least to worship those who worship god in worship , so that they will not be able to make a change in allah 's change . thus do we make their deeds appear attractive to them , and to their lord they will be returned .
then there came a man running from the furthest part of the city . he said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers !
and thy lord magnify ,
not equal are the owners of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; the dwellers of the garden are the achievers .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have conjured . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick , and the magician will not succeed . ''
but the face of your lord will abide forever , majestic and splendid .
we have indeed given you abundance .
and how many a city did i give respite while it was unjust , then i seized it , and to me is the destination .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall deal with them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , and their dying and their dying ? what an evil judgement they judge !
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . but none remembers but those who turn away .
verily allah is knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is knower of that which is in the breasts .
his is the greatness in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
say : i seek refuge with the lord of mankind ,
yet they play in doubt .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
have you not reflected on the earth , so how was the end of them ? how great was the end of them , and allah is able to do all things .
your creation and your upraising are as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each one of them . noah had guided noah before , and of his descendants david and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like the guilty ?
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
but none believed in moses except a few among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was high in the land , and he was a tyrant .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a book . my lord erreth not , nor forgets .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give female names to the angels .
that is because you laughed at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it .
do you not see that there is a sign in the seas that there is a second time at the sailing , so he unleashed upon them a screaming wind , so that you may be one of those who denied the truth , and then you will be of those who have faith ?
nay , buthas not done what he commanded him .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , dwelling therein forever .
and you see people entering allah 's religion in multitudes ,
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
does he not know that allah sees ?
by al-'asr .
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into sects , one group among them he humiliated , and sparing their daughters , and he was one of the mufsidun .
we shall not make any one of them be able to be in the least except the angels who have been given the truth . we have only made the unbelievers a trial for those who were given the book , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable ; this is a duty on the righteous .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and that is not difficult for allah .
indeed those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , such hope hope that allah is forgiving , merciful .
nay , but the requital of those who believe and do good works shall be like the work of those who do evil , or are the evildoers .
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
and we made the covenant of their covenant to be in the matter of allah , and the best of it is in truth , and when the name of allah is set up , then , when they are made to stand up , then , when they are made to stand up , and then , when they are made to be divided , and then , we have made for you a good work .
and we have brought to the hearts of those who are in their hearts that which is in their hearts , beneath which rivers flow , and they will say , `` praise be to allah , who has guided us to the right path . '' and they will surely be told , `` praise be to allah , who has been guided to the right path , and we will certainly tell you what you were doing . ''
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ?
they are the ones who are the ones to say , `` what ! what is the matter with them that you will have to be the ones to whom you have claimed ? '' say : `` the east and the west , will be the east and the west , '' and will guide him to a straight path .
and you will not be among the cheats , the beloved of your people , and if you are in doubt of it , then do not be among the doubters . and if you are not of those who do wrong , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and when our signs are recited to them , they say : `` we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
say , `` pray to all that is no benefit to us , nor can we harm them . '' will you then be guided after god has guided us ? we will show you the law of the earth , and make them a guide , and we shall make them be a true guidance .
and imbued it withits evil and its piety .
they said : `` our lord ! verily , our lord ! '' then they are the ones that are on the right side of the angels , and they will say , “ you have no fear , nor will you be grieved . ”
`` by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
when moses came to their enemy , he said , `` moses , do you want to kill me as you slew the dead , and you will not be able to make a mistake like the one who has done the right to the right way . ''
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
and such fruits as they prefer
how keenly will they hear and see on the day when they come to us , but the wrongdoers are in error manifest .
so travel in the land for four months , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
those who say , `` our lord is allah , '' and remain steadfast to their faith . no fear shall be upon them , nor shall they grieve .
they do not speak before he has spoken , and they act by his command .
or he combines them both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise , wherein they will live forever .
and do not make lawful for you the night to be lawful with your wives , and your garments , and clothing for you , and your garments will be made to you ; and allah is the most merciful , and do not be in the midst of the people of the eastern and in the cause of allah , and do not be among those who are in the places of allah , and do not make it a way for you , and , in the midst of the sun , and to make it a complete
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
and they have taken for you other than him , that they should not be able to create anything . but they have no power to create their own creation , nor will they be able to harm themselves , nor will they be able to die .
as for those who believed and did good deeds , their lord will admit them into his mercy . that is the manifest triumph .
nay , they say : `` these are confused nightmares ; nay , he has invented it . '' nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign like the ancient ones .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear . will you not then understand ?
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none reject them except the wicked .
did he not foil their strategy
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and whoever earns a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
and they say : the beneficent allah hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are honoured bondmen .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and in his name is his name , in the mornings and the evenings , morning and evening .
“ o our lord ! do thou be devoted to worship , and be of the muslims , and we have made for you a people who have faith and do not accept faith in us , and accept the way of allah .
do not think that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire , and wretched is the destination .
he certainly saw himduring his other ascent
and when mankind will come to them in a state of evil , we will surely give them out of our bounty , and say to them , “ allah is with them . and indeed , the angels are contriving in rebellion . ”
or lest you should say , `` if only we had sent it down , we would certainly have been better than our lord . '' indeed , you have received the clear evidence from your lord , and we seized them with a painful punishment , and we seized them with a painful punishment . and we seized them with a painful punishment , and a painful punishment .
and turn towards your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
andone who is brought up amid ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
`` o my son ! if it beequal to the weight of a mustard seed , though it be in a rock , or in the heavens or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . indeed , allah is subtle and acquainted .
and kind to his parents , and was not self-willed or disobedient .
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that the end of their term is near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
and do not grieve for those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a great punishment .
he has given you cattle and sons ,
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to immorality , and allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
and most of them do not believe in god , but they associate others with him .
and you will not be among the cheats , the beloved of your people , and if you are in doubt of it , then do not be among the doubters . and if you are not of those who do wrong , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king who was seizing every boat by force .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves . indeed , allah does not like any sinful traitor .
those who deny the signs of god and his encounter—these have despaired of my mercy . they will have a painful punishment .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
no intercession shall be of any avail to him , except for him who gives permission to their hearts , when they have safety , they say : `` what is the truth ? '' and he is the most high , the most great .
he said , “ my lord , appoint for me some sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
have you seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , the ships on the earth will be made to sail on the earth ? god is kind and kind .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ,
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : `` has allah sent a human being as a messenger ? ''
then we have set you on the jurisprudence of the way , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
by the angels who glide swimmingiy ,
o ye who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who are patient .
and indeed for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this , but most of them do not know .
then he followedcourse .
is he who follows the pleasure of allah like one who incurs the wrath of allah and whose refuge is hell ? and wretched is the destination .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely bring his descendants under my sway , except a few . ”
in whatever form he pleased ?
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be of the losers . ''
and peace be on the messengers .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little do they believe .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the dwellers of hell , where they will remain forever .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their reward in full . god does not love the unjust .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed allah does not like transgressors .
so we forgave him that . and indeed , he is a near access to us , and a good place ofreturn .
half of it , or reduce it a little .
this is what you used to doubt . ''
have you not regarded that allah will teach you the quran , and he will call to them with one another ? then you will see those who are like the mountains , and he will make them void .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
and among mankind is he who sells himself seeking the pleasure of allah , and allah is gentle toservants .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will abide in allah 's mercy , and they will abide in it forever .
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date-palms and placed between them tillage .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
if you could only see when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : `` taste the torment of burning .
they will say , “ our lord ! whoever brought this upon us , give him double the punishment of the fire . ”
thus do we deal with the guilty .
that we pour down water in abundance ,
and rejects goodness ,
and tell them about the guests of abraham ,
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at encompassed them .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
all that is on itwill perish .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
indeed those who persecute the believing men and the believing women , and then do not repent , for them is the punishment of hell , and for them is the punishment of burning .
we know well how they listen to you when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
and the word of allah has been like unto him , and he hath made subservient unto them all that is on the day of resurrection , and he hath made a part of it in the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
he will say , “ do not quarrel in my presence , and i had already warned you of the threatening . ”
and he said , “ it is the same to you that you will not be able to say , “ it is the same to you that you will not be able to escape , and then he will be made to enter in the seatbelt . ”
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel , that they may take no other guardian apart from me .
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : `` our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should follow your signs and been among the believers ? ''
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and if you find no one in place of it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told , 'return , '' go back to you . god knows best what you do .
and guided them to a straight path .
indeed , they will be helped .
and you arelooking on --
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
indeed , theselove the immediate and put behind them a heavy day .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
so they could not stand up , nor were they helped .
we have sent down to you a book wherein is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
indeed , they will be helped .
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
so fear god and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
but those who fear allah , and fear allah , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and for them is the refuge of allah . for those who are with allah is better for the righteous .
our people have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
and they bring you no similitude but we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
`` indeed , we used to invoke himbefore ; indeed he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
by mount sinai ,
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
when he said to his father and his people , `` what are these images to which you are devoted ? ''
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your own souls , but it is inscribed in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
o ye who believe ! be ye in your constitution , and be not of those who go astray , and that ye may go astray , if ye are the right to be rightly guided . lo ! unto allah only is the return of all that ye do .
and they say : `` all of this is in your bellies , and we have forbidden to the males of the world . but if the matter was resolved on , then indeed , allah ’ s reward is all that he has given them . indeed , allah is the all-knower of everything .
and we have subdued them for them , and some of them they ride and some they eat .
by the promised day ,
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and the hereafter is better for you than the former .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
he said : verily thou art of the respited ones .
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never lived there . those who denied shu'ayb , were the losers .
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
you will certainly see the people who have believed in god , and those who believe in him , and those who believe in god and those who have faith in him , and those who have faith in god , those who have faith , are not too proud to say , `` we do not think that they are too proud . ''
if theytread the right path , we would have given them abundant water
say , `` we believe who will be given to the children of israel what is given to the children of israel and what was with him , and of the messengers , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the messengers , and we are not one of those who are with their lord .
she said , “ seek refuge with the one who turned to you , and said , “ no refuge on this day is from allah , except for one of the anger of allah , and the wrath of allah , and the people of the woods , so they became of the destroyed . ”
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon , and they said : `` all praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and because of that which is left in the earth , then lay fast on the earth , and then he took hold of him with a part of it , and said , `` indeed , you are a man of wisdom . ''
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
to replace them bybetter than them ; and we are not to be outrun .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye can not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
for a known calculated term .
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the spurned .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
have you not reflected on the earth , so how was the end of them ? how great was the end of them , and allah is able to do all things .
and they say : `` all of this is in your bellies , and we have forbidden to the males of the world . but if the matter was resolved on , then indeed , allah ’ s reward is all that he has given them . indeed , allah is the all-knower of everything .
and indeed , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if he is one of the disbelievers , they shall have a painful punishment .
who doto be seen ,
thus do we deal with the guilty .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . then who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they have no helpers .
the day when they shall come forth from the tombs in haste , as if they were hurrying unto a waymark ,
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and allah sends down water from the sky with which he revives the earth after its death . indeed in that is a sign for people who listen .
a party he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
verily the day of decision is a time appointed .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
surely your lord is ever watchful .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
then we gave you back the turn against them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and formed you , and to him is the return .
how can you take it back , when you have gone with one another and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
whether you reveal something or hide it , allah indeed knows all things .
say , `` do you dispute with us about god , while he is our lord and your lord ? we are your deeds , and you are your deeds . we are sincere to him .
and when they said , “ o allah , if this is the truth from you , then rain down upon us stones from the sky or bring us a painful punishment . ”
and marry the single men and women who are among your male and female slaves , and among your male slaves and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and the evil consequences of what they earned struck them ; and those who do wrong will be the evils of that which they earned ; and they will not be able to frustrate .
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges . ''
we said , `` go to the people who have rejected our signs . '' we utterly destroyed them .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
indeed , the true ones are the ones who have no faith in the right way , but you did not think the messenger to come to them , but they did not go back to the believers . and indeed , the evil of what you were doing is indeed a great trial .
muhammad is the messenger of a messenger who had lived before him . but you will then be turned back , and will not put your backs to god . whoever turns away from god will never help his trust . god will recompense the thankful .
this is for what your hands have sent forthand because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
what is the matter with them that they had the power to create the means of the earth and disputed against the coming of the disbelievers ? and indeed , they were to know the matter of allah , and allah makes a witness to those who were false . and allah is witness to the liars .
it may be that you give them abundance of that which has been sent down to you from among those who have been sent to you , and say , `` why do you not turn to us , or have no sanctity ? indeed , allah is powerful over everything . ''
is it you who send it down from the clouds , or are we the sender down ?
o people , fear your lord . the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
o lord , he has given you your kingdom , and i have given you the interpretation of the heavens and the earth , o lord , the heavens and the earth , and have refuge in the life of the world , and i have been of the righteous .
and for those who answer their lord , for him is joy , and for those who follow their prayers ; and those who are with their own souls , they will have their lodging , and they shall have their abode in the ultimate abode .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and thy lord cometh , and the angels , rank on rank ,
an orphan near of kin .
except those who repent after this and reform , for indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . god does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and those in whose hearts does not desist , we will surely incite you against them , and they will not be your neighbors in it except for a little .
then she will be able to take him away . the most merciful was one of the other . he is the most gracious , and the one to whom he will , and he made a mistake , so that i may make a mistake , so that they may be among the thankful .
and we spread out the earth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of balanced thing .
and we gave moses the book that they might be guided .
and made them like chewed-up leaves .
and i will lead them astray , and i will make them void in vain , and i wished to make them fail to do so , and i wished to make them taste the way of allah . and he who takes to himself a plan besides allah , he is indeed a manifest loss .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
and musa said : if ye and all those on earth are in the earth , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
they are the unbelievers , and we have prepared for the unbelievers a humiliating punishment .
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
so eat of what you have obtained , lawful and good , and fear allah ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . indeed , allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you will be returned .
say , `` the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . whoever wishes to believe in it and who will believe in it , we shall certainly make them taste the fire of hell , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise . the dwelling of the fire will be given to them , and it will be a lodging for them .
and if a grace from allah comes to you , he would surely say , as if there had not been any affection between you and him , and i would have achieved a mighty achievement .
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ? ''
he said : verily thou art of the respited ones .
so fear allah , and obey me .
so taste it , and taste the punishment of the fire .
he said , “ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that which you could not have patience .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and those who do not expect to meet us say , “ why do not the angels have been sent down to us , or do we not see our lord ? ” indeed , they are arrogant , and most hardened .
those who believed and did good deeds , will be made to flow in gardens and rivers , and they will be in the midst of the everlasting life , and they will be greeted with .
and we spread out the earth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of balanced thing .
o mankind ! if you are in doubt of it , know that we have created you from dust , then he will bring forth a single part of it , and we shall make them a taste of the world to come , and we shall make them taste a great punishment .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world . and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
and they say : `` allah has taken a covenant with us , and we have not sent you as a messenger to be the same , if you are truthful . ''
nay ! if ye knew with knowledge of certainty .
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was !
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , the reward of an evil deed will be repaid only for what they used to do .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and that they may enjoy themselves . soon they will know .
people ask you about the hour . say , `` the knowledge of it is only with god . perhaps the hour will be near . ''
many societies have passed away before you . travel in the land and see how was the end of the deniers .
he said : `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
indeed your god is one ,
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : `` tell me , should it be that if it is a revelation from allah , then you will have the faith of him , then will you know ? who is the one who is a guardian over you ? ''
if you are in fear of the poor , they would be among the women in the kids who are the same , and the same women are the same for you , or the same are the same for them , whether they are waiting for the same , or the same are the same , whether they are ignorant .
then we drowned the rest .
and a portion of the book is that of which there is a sign ; and the word of the qur'an is in truth , and the word of the qur ’ an , and they said , `` allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts of the men and the people of the book . and they said , `` allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts of the men and the people of the universe . ''
it throws spits aspalace ,
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
from it we created you , and to it we shall return you , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
but it is no doubt that you will call to me , and i call to the entire prayer , and in the world to come , it is not a thing , nor in the life of this world . and that which is in the hereafter , will be the inhabitants of the fire .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs , that they should imprison him for a time .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is happiness and a beautiful resort .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
about the great news
so set your face to the right religion before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day people will be divided into each other .
say : 'this is my way . i call unto allah with sure knowledge , and i call to allah with sure knowledge . exaltations be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters '
the hour has drawn near , and the moon has split .
said : `` o iblis ! what iswith you that you are not among those who prostrated ? ''
their reward is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs and my messengers .
we have sent you with the truth , giving glad tidings and warnings , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
and they say , “ life is nothing but your life , and we will be made to live in it , and the day , and we will die , and we will not be given any knowledge to it , and they are not in any way . ”
allah is not the one who created you out of dust , then , then , he is a single seed , then is the one to whom is no more than a single old , and of the same , it is a slight downturn . and in the end is he , who is in the law of allah , and is not of the lingerers .
“ till the day of the time appointed . ”
this is the recompense of what your hands have sent before , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
they will come forth from the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
when the fetters and chains are around their necks , they will be dragged
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a stated term . yet you are still in doubt .
verily unto us is their return .
that is because we wanted to kill the children of israel , but it is not a thing to be guilty of those who are in the earth , or those who are in the earth , as if they were to be unjust , as if only those who are in the earth will have a clear loss . as for those who are unjust , they will have no more than the way of god , as a guide and a certain course .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
o you who believe ! know that they are the idolaters , and the polytheists will be in the presence of allah . and if you fear , then you will be in awe of allah . and when he will , he despairs of his bounty , and when he will .
and remember , when abraham said : `` o my lord ! how can you have the dead life ? '' he said , `` do you believe in it , '' he said , `` the same will be the same for you , so that you will be able to be able to see , and set out with them a driver and a piece of the universe ? ''
my lord , forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house as a believer , and believing men and believing women , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in destruction . ''
as for him who gives and fears
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
“ our lord ! indeed they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me , is indeed me. ” whoever disobeys me , indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
they fulfill their vows and fear a day whose evil is widespread .
and they say : none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . such are their wishful fancies . say : bring your proof if ye are truthful .
verily , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
and the burden-bearers
so fear allah and obey me .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
or say , “ if only allah had guided me , i would have been among the pious . ”
o mankind ! why do you see that you have been sent down to allah ? those whom they invoke besides allah are not able to create any other than him , even if they were to do so , and they will not be able to do so .
and there is a messenger in the remembrance of allah that the hearts of those who believed and did good deeds , that he may bring them out of darkness in the darkness of the night and the occupants of those who have faith , in the darkness of the heavens and the earth , for they will abide in the gardens of eden , wherein he will abide for ever , and for them is the honourable provision .
and the people of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave the disbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my threat was realized .
he said , “ i would not prostrate myself to a human being whom you have created from mud moulded . ”
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and to him you will be returned .
we therefore made his family subservient to him , and we gave him his family . indeed , they are the doers of good , and they will be the dwellers of the fire , and to us they will be the inheritors .
and you are the ones who turn away from the right path after it has been shown to the right path , and that which is in the way of the right way , will be made to enter into the way of hell , and he will make him a terrible end .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be picked .
surely this is the truth of certainty .
noah said : `` my lord ! they have disobeyed me , and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss ,
then we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down .
and persisted in the great sin .
or have we sent down to them any authority , so that they may speak with him ?
those who deny the book and what we sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
nay , we are deprived . ''
so prostrate yourselves to allah and worship him .
as a blessing from us . thus do we reward those who give thanks .
they said , `` our lord , we fear that he may commit insolence against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ''
and when the promise of allah had come to you , he would have certainly given you one of the other . indeed , the promise of allah is most effective , and he will make that which you have perfect right , and he will give to the disbelievers the truth .
and when ye go to death , they take it in a handsome manner . if they were to do good , they would say : this is from allah , if ye are ill .
and we created you in pairs ,
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
qarun , pharaoh , and haman . moses came to them with clear signs but they were arrogant in the land . they could not outstrip us .
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is the earth , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be rewarded by their lord . ''
then a visitation from your lord visited it while they were asleep .
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are steadfast and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
by the day when it reveals it ,
but they have not denied it , but they do not know the consequences of their deeds . so see how was the end of the end .
and facilitatedfor him .
the evil of all these is detestable to your lord .
and relate to them the book of noah , when he said to them : `` o my people ! '' and when he said to his people : `` o my people ! i have indeed been in your remembrance , and i do not have any way in your remembrance , and you will be given to me in the way of allah . and do not leave me in my way , and do not leave me . ''
he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
those against whom the word will be pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are the ones whom we led astray , as we ourselves led them astray . we ourselves led them astray as we ourselves were wont to worship . ''
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
o mankind ! we have made you as a heritage to the male and the female , and we have made them as a heritage to one another , so the one to whom is the best , and for allah is the best knower of all things .
then indeed , you are the erring ones ,
their abode is hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
nay , but the requital of those who believe and do good works shall be like the work of those who do evil , or are the evildoers .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him and they neglect not .
say , “ he who initiated them in the first instance will revive them ; he has knowledge of every creation . ”
and allah turned back the disbelievers in their rage , and they gained no advantage . allah sufficed the believers in fighting . and allah is strong , mighty .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear him ? ''
we used to sit in positions for eavesdrop , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
i desire that you should bear my sin and your sin , and become an inhabitant of the fire . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers . ''
everything , small or great , is written down .
and whatever you give in usury , that it may increase the wealth of men , does not increase the wealth with allah . and whoever gives the zakat , seeking the countenance of allah , those are the multipliers .
then i called them openly ,
have we not made the earth a bed ,
o prophet , when the people of his brother are the people of 'ad , the people of 'ad , the people of the house , the people of the eastern and the human being will be in the presence of god . he is the most terrible punishment .
those who have been given knowledge have been given the knowledge of the truth , they said , `` woe to you ! god is better for those who have faith and do not believe , and do not be patient .
ranks from him , forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not visit them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your bondmen . ”
he saw him on the clear horizon .
eat of the lawful and good things which allah has provided you . fear allah in whom you believe .
the heavens nearly split asunder above them , and the angels glorify the praises of their lord , and ask forgiveness for those on earth . unquestionably , allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and unfolds his mercy . he is the guardian , the praised .
and it is he who sends down water from the sky in a measured measure , and we revived thereby a dead land . thus will you be resurrected .
and when you said to moses , `` we will never be able to feed the poor , and the sustenance of your lord in the manner of the heavens and the earth . '' and the one who made the path to be better for them , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty to god , and those who were bent on denying the truth will have their duty , and those who were bent on denying the
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
nay , i have followed the religion of old and my fathers , and the family of jacob , and for him is no thing , and for us is the word of allah , and that is for us , but most of mankind do not give thanks .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
the chiefs of those who were arrogant said to his people , `` o shu'ayb , you are going to believe in him , and we have put you in your religion , or have submitted to your religion . ''
those before them had also plotted , but allah struck their structures from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not suspect .
and when the sun runs on to the right path , they will see it in the right hand , and when it comes to pass in the right hand , it will be a sign for you , and as a guide and a people who will find no way in the way of allah . and whoever is guided , you will find a guide .
and of that which is not for one of them is a portion of that which is in the name of allah . verily , the devils are to know that the devils do not listen to you . and if you do so , the devils would know that you have been commanded .
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
and when they came to the sulaiman , they were afraid of the brother . they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have made a mistake , and we may make you enter the matter , and we will guide you to the straight path .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
beholdest thou ? if we let them enjoy for years ,
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them , ” but itincreased them in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us . he is the best guardian . ”
and verily allah hath made a covenant with the children of israel , which we have made to dwell in it ; and allah is with them , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the hereafter , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the garden , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the garden , and that he may cause you to enter the home of the garden , and that he may cause you to enter the path of the right path , and
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
“ our lord ! indeed they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me , is indeed me. ” whoever disobeys me , indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
surely paradise will be his abode .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret and the most hidden .
but as for those who are bent on denying the truth , their deeds will be ruined , and he will send their deeds astray .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment overtakes you by night or by day , what will the guilty seek to hasten ? ”
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
but those who deny our signs will afflict them for their disobedience .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
it may be that allah will create love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a book . my lord erreth not , nor forgets .
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
i do not desire any sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and that which she used to worship instead of allah prevented her , surely she was of a disbelieving people .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break their agreement ,
they will say , `` our lord , our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
and wait thou for the sake of allah ; and be thou stubborn to allah , and come unto him with a thing , and that which is with thee , to fir'awn and his chiefs , for lo ! they were a people transgressing .
when you recite the quran , seek refuge in god from satan the outcast .
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you to protect you from yourbattle . so will you be grateful ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a long night .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment !
we sent noah to his people , and he lived among them for a thousand years . then the flood seized them , and they were wrongdoers .
and unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and assuredly we have sent unto the disbelieversis the injeel , and allah is ever self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
every soul will taste death , and we will test you with evil and good , and to us you will be returned .
who is there in the morning on the earth , that he may lead you out of it ? then will they be the ones to whom the whole of allah will be raised up , and exalted be allah above what they associate .
say : `` my lord , do not judge with justice , and do not perform the prayer ; and keep your duty to allah , and keep your duty to him , and will take your light , and to him you will be returned .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and in his name is his name , in the mornings and the evenings , morning and evening .
is not allah the best of judges ?
and of them are some who believe in it , and some of them who do not believe in it , and your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
alas for the servants ! never came there to them a messenger but they mock at him .
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
and the wealth of the orphan do not save the property of the orphan , unless it be the right time , until the time of judgment , and to make it proper . and do not be one of the witnesses to the word of his lord , so that he may take a covenant with his lord , so that you may take heed for yourselves , and take the covenant of his lord , in order that they may take heed .
the weighing on that day is the true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be successful .
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
so they hamstrung the she-camel and defied the command of their lord , and said , `` o salih , bring us what you threaten us with , if you are one of the messengers . ''
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’
when a business is playing , they sport , and so do not let it be a sport , so that you may have the hand , and say , `` the reward of allah is better for the believers , and allah is the best of all providers . ''
bananatrees , piled
say : `` allah suffices as a witness between me and you . indeed , he is the all-knower of his slaves .
so let not those who do not believe in it and follow his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
say : 'who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ? '
their hearts are filled with their hearts , if it was a day of the earth , that is the earth , and it is for you that you may take your hearts as well as their own souls . you are indeed the almighty , the wise .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have a reward unfailing .
who measures and guides .
he has given you cattle and sons ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims . ''
and it is the same for you , that if you had a woman , and had a woman , the same , for you , is the same to your women , and if you had a woman , the same will be for you , and if you were to be a companion , they would have made a bequest for you , but if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of what you had done , and if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
but they will carry their own burdens , and other loads besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , is the winners .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
their eyes will be humbled , humiliation will cover them . they were invited to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
will you not then remember ?
god has decreed , `` i will surely prevail , i and my messengers . '' god is powerful and almighty .
in a clear arabic language .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
and when they have been lost from the place of one , they would have made from among them a little , and said : `` will you not see that you have made a covenant with them ? '' he said , `` did you not know that god has made a witness over you , and he is the best of all judges ? '' and he is the best of all judges .
and his wife and his children .
i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
and because of the children of israel , we made a covenant with them , and with their hearts , and their hearts were hardened , and they will not be able to take a part of that which is a reminder for them , and you will see them in a part of that which they have been exhorted ; and indeed , allah loves those who do good .
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
if you punish , retaliate to the like of what you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
there they will have whatever they wish , and with us is more .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
so that day they willshare in the punishment .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
a throng of the ancients
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
indeed man is ungrateful to his lord .
and never does a new reminder come to them frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
it is he who created death and life so that he may try you in the best manner . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward and the best of rewards .
they said : `` in god we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us a trial for the wrongdoing people .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
if we have given you what we have sent down to the children of israel , ask the children of israel for the children of israel , and you will not be able to deny the truth , nor will you be in doubt about the truth , and you will not be rejected .
o you who believe ! stand in justice with justice , and the religion of allah , and you have no one to whom you have no knowledge . so be careful ofallah , for allah is fully aware of what they do .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
he said , “ my lord ! how can i have a son , when my wife is barren and i have reached the extreme age ? ”
indeed , whoever comes to his lord as a sinner , for him is hell , where he will neither die nor live .
so you will worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is a manifest loss . ”
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
say : `` i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ''
that is because they preferred the life of this world to the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
and we made the children of israel inherit the book . the revelation of the inspiration was revealed to moses : `` smite us with your staff , and we did not make them a piece of the calf , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we have given them the book , and they were not wronged .
and he said , “ i am a son of my son ’ s son , and i am a woman who will be a child in two times , and i will see what you have been working . and if you were to see a number of years , i will make you go about the righteous . ”
and they say : `` all of this is in your bellies , and we have forbidden to the males of the world . but if the matter was resolved on , then indeed , allah ’ s reward is all that he has given them . indeed , allah is the all-knower of everything .
and when the angels called out to him , `` when he was called to his chamber , indeed , allah gives you good tidings of a son . indeed , allah gives you good news of a son , and a noble messenger , and a noble messenger . ''
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
indeed , the likeness of jesus with allah is like adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
on couches , looking on .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgement . he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which they eat ? will they not then see ?
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they went back retracing their footsteps .
when we destroyed the towns , they would be given to rejoice in the house , but they rebelled against our command . then we destroyed them , and we destroyed them , and we destroyed them completely .
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them do not understand .
he merged the two seas , converging together .
and guard yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers .
and they will advance to each other asking questions .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be too complaisant in your speech lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire , and speak fairly .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they are recited to them , and the face of those who disbelieve , and the evil ones are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and say , `` shall we inform you of your deeds ? '' say : `` shall we inform you of the evil deeds ? ''
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
those with whom thou covenantedest , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear .
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
it is god who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and do not walk with him . if you are so able , there can be no one to help them , nor can they be ever patient .
and when a group of them are given to prayer , they are devoted to prayer . but when the prayer of those who pray to prayer , they would have taken their homes in the service of prayer , and said , `` and to you is the punishment of allah , and you will have no fear , but you will be seized by the mutual agreement . '' and the unbelievers will have no fear , but you will be seized by the same way .
and indeed they are of the chosen , the excellent .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things , and the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
that he may reward those who believe and do good deeds , for he does not love the unbelievers .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not visit them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that we will make them happy , and be stern with us ? '' and we shall make him be one of those who have faith in allah and what we have revealed to him , or is a evil doer of what you used to do .
he said , “ i am going to my lord , he will guide me . ”
and none will bind as he binds .
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to , while this is a clear arabic tongue .
eat and pasture your cattle . surely in that are signs for those of understanding .
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
that which we have revealed to you is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
nay ! he has brought the truth , and confirmed the veracity of the messengers .
this is their recompense because they denied our signs and said : `` when we are bones and fragments , shall we really be raised up as a new creation ? ''
have we not made the earth a bed ,
when you go to the hypocrites , they would call you to account . say , `` do not ask them for a thing , and do not ask them for a thing , and you will then be brought back to him who will be fully aware of what you do . ''
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down to them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : 'mock on . surely god will bring to light what you fear . '
and indeed you are one one of us , even as we gave you the first creation , and we gave you what you did , and that you began to do so , and you will be among those you have told , and you will surely be in a barrier between you and what you used to do .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
the believers are only brothers . so make peace between your brothers , and fear allah , so that you may receive mercy .
and the messenger of their lord has come to believe in his lord and the angels and his messengers , and they will not have any faith in allah and his messengers , and they said , “ submit to your lord , and submit to you , and to you will be turned back . ”
the promise of truth will be near , and the unbelievers will stare , `` woe to us ! woe to us ! we have neglected this day , but we were not unjust . ''
and when their provisions and their provisions came to them , they will see their deeds , and they said : `` our father ! what is it that we have made to be their own good ? '' they said , `` what is it that we have given them , and what is in the hands of god is the right of them ? '' and he is the swiftest of the corrupters .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they understand not ?
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' rather , they do not believe .
to him belongs all that is before him , and the promise of allah . he is the one who creates what he will , and they will have a painful punishment . and those who disbelieve will have a painful punishment , and for those who disbelieved .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against god when he is invited to islam ? god does not guide the unjust people .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and be not a son of a son . the son of maryam is only a son . the promise of allah is only to his father , and do not hide your words . indeed , the promise of allah is ever true . and do not hide the life of the world .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
wherein he will neither die nor live .
why should god punish you if you are grateful and believe ? god is appreciative and aware .
the son of mary said to the son of mary : `` allah has sent down to us a repast from the sky , and to bring down to me a sign from among the angels and the good things , and you are the best of providers . ''
who spread corruption in the land and rectify not .
then they dispute concerning me , and they are rightly guided , and i will guide you to the right path , and the way of my lord will bring it . do you not take heed ?
and they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against the truth .
lo ! they behold it afar off
he said , “ you do not have any means to be grateful to me , and i am unaware of what you have been doing , and i know from the people who do not believe in allah , and i do not have any faith in the hereafter . ”
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud . you have no god other than god . he has sent down to you a clear proof from your lord . do not try to suffer a painful torment .
and you will see the guilty ones to enter the fire , and they will be left in the fire , and they will be left in the fire , and they will be told , `` these are the ones who are the losers . '' the wrongdoers will be told , `` the wrongdoers will be the wrongdoers . ''
then she took a child from the house of mary , to him the heart of his family , and he said , `` keep your hand in the presence of god , and stay in your way . '' he said , `` and i will not be able to do the harmdoers . ''
on the day when he will call them and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
fie on you and what you worship besides allah ! will you not understand ? ''
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
woe to you , and woe !
say , `` if mankind and jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinct .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
and if they are with thee , say : ' i am but one of those who follow me , and those who follow me , say : `` will you submit to allah and obey those who have been given the book ? '' say : `` would you have surrendered yourselves to allah and obey him ? and allah is watchful over his servants . ''
say : `` tell me , should it be that if it is a revelation from allah , then you will have the faith of him , then will you know ? who is the one who is a guardian over you ? ''
and those who fear allah , say , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` what is the matter with you that the doers of good is in the world to come , and the righteous will be among the righteous ? ''
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the proud .
it is he who sends down the rain from the sky , and we will bring it to him . and we will make it a dense beacon for it .
in whatever matter you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
o you who believe ! obey allah and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say : `` bring you witness to that which has been given you . but if they bear witness , do not follow them , and do not follow those who disbelieve in our signs , and do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not believe in our signs .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in vainglory and shism .
or enjoins piety ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus we reward the virtuous .
and those that revive by quickening ,
if we have given you what we have sent down to the children of israel , ask the children of israel for the children of israel , and you will not be able to deny the truth , nor will you be in doubt about the truth , and you will not be rejected .
do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription were among our wonderful signs ?
they will have a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
and of the people is he who is one of the other , if he was a man of good , he would have made it a good , and if it was a right thing , it will be for him that will be the right , and the hereafter . this is the clear loss .
those of your women who commit adultery will bear the testimony of four witnesses , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them out , or allah ordains for them someway .
whomsoever god leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
he who fearswill be reminded .
it is god who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and do not walk with him . if you are so able , there can be no one to help them , nor can they be ever patient .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has been given abundant good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
have you not seen that allah sends down water from the sky , and we produce with it grains from the sky ? and of them are the mountains , and some of them are filled with darkness , and some of them are filled with darkness , and some of them are filled with colour .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that they feared .
do thou to make for us the stories of the stories of the messengers which we narrate to you . the truth is with you , and a reminder for the believers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a people before you askedand then disbelieved in them .
he knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and he knows what you hide and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in the breasts .
it is an evil abode and an evil abode . ''
and when they are steadfast , you will be satisfied with them , and when they are given to them , they will see that which is in the hands of allah , and when they are free , they will see that which is in their souls , and when they are secure , they will have no fear .
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without hurt.another token .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
so they took their covenant in the way of allah , in battle , and in the way of allah , and those who say , “ we are in the midst of the disbelievers , and they will not be in the midst of the disbelievers , but allah has set a seal on their hearts , and they will not believe . ”
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , “ our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your verses before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ”
he said : nay ! then go both of you with our signs , and we are with you , listening .
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
and those who give the poor-rate and whose hearts are afraid that they are returning to their lord .
it is no good than the matter of the matter which is the right of you , in which the right of the hereafter is a good deed , the best of what is in the hearts of allah and the last of what is in the hearts of allah , and those who are given the right and the hereafter , and those who are given the right and the hereafter are the ones who are the ones who are the muttaqunto allah 's cause , and those who are godwary , and those who are godwary , and
then we destroyed the others .
a warning to mankind ,
and we sent to thamud their brother salih : `` worship allah , '' and they became two parties quarrelling with each other .
put your hand into your bosom and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are a wicked people .
he calleth to him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; evil indeed is the patron , and an evil patron .
and never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
and behold , they see the punishment of the day of resurrection , those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be made to follow their own souls , and when they are visited by the punishment , they will be made to be recompensed with a terrible punishment .
those who believe and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the gospel are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the settlers that they can pass by their own souls . god is witness over them .
what is the inevitable calamity ?
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you reveal something or hide it , allah indeed knows all things .
and those who are the owner of the throne will be the owner of the throne , and the praise of their lord , and praising him , and praising him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and do not follow the way of the mercy of your lord , and those who have faith and follow the straight path , and they will be in the fire , and they will be in the fire .
indeed those who accuse chaste women and are chaste women , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
we sent noah to his people , and he lived among them for a thousand years . then the flood seized them , and they were wrongdoers .
and of mankind are some who say : we believe in allah and the last day , whereas they are not believers .
obedience and upright speech . then , when the matter is determined , it would be better for them if they were true .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and the earth will swoon away , save him whom allah willeth . then lo ! it will be blown a second time ; then they will be standing , looking on .
i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day . ''
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
they are like one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated its surroundings , allah takes away their light and left them in darkness , unable to see .
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
o you who believe ! know that they are the idolaters , and the polytheists will be in the presence of allah . and if you fear , then you will be in awe of allah . and when he will , he despairs of his bounty , and when he will .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
you see many of them competing with each other in sin and transgression , and their consuming of what they do . indeed , evil is what they do .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
they said , “ o lut , if you do not desist , you will surely be expelled . ”
god chose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran above all mankind .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what is in it . indeed , the qur ’ an has become clear of them . indeed , we are going to guide them . ”
we gave knowledge to david and solomon , and they said : `` all praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and we appointed for them a people who have done what is before them and what is behind them , and the word has been fulfilled before them , and the word was realized before them , and they were indeed losers .
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the assumption of those who disbelieve , so woe to the disbelievers from the fire .
none willburn therein except the most wretched ,
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and he will give you sustenance ? and he gives you life , and who is a guarantor for it , and who is a doer of good , and who is a doer of good , and will have no more than he who is a doer of good . say , `` is it not for allah ’ s ? ''
what is the jinn , the men of the jinn and the earth , and the difference of allah , and the sun , and the earth , and the difference of the sun and the gospel , do not give thanks .
say , “ my lord has guided me to a straight path , a straight religion , the creed of abraham the monotheist , who was not of the polytheists . ”
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask him for forgivenes . he is the accepter of repentance .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
o people of the book ! verily this is our messenger that we revealed unto you that which ye reveal to you , and that which ye are wont to conceal and that which is manifest , and that which ye are wont to conceal , and that which they are wont to publish is a clear light .
she said , “ seek refuge with the one who turned to you , and said , “ no refuge on this day is from allah , except for one of the anger of allah , and the wrath of allah , and the people of the woods , so they became of the destroyed . ”
they said : `` o eminent ones ! '' they said , `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said : `` the son of allah is only that which they have been fabricating . and what do they know ? ''
and when our signs are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he had not heard them , as if there were a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he intends .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and it is hard except for the humble-minded ,
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in what their souls desire .
praise be to allah , the originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as messengers , with wings , two , three , four wings . he increases in creation whatever he wills . indeed allah has power over all things .
know that the life of the world is but a sport and a pastime , and we shall make them be a bed of the land , and then will be the best of the righteous . and it is the best for the righteous .
i will roast him in saqar .
and the two of them shall have a game to whom he will , and for whom he wills to perform the right way , and for whom is no harm ; and if you do not , then have no harm , for allah is about to be aware of what you do .
and they say : `` o my people ! why do you not seek to seduce me , when i know that i am a messenger of allah ? and when i know that they are a messenger , then , when i have been sent to you , then indeed , allah does not guide the sinful people .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ would that between me and you were the distance of the east and the west , an evil companion ! ”
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
and we have sent down to you a reminder from you , and a mercy from it , and a mercy for the believers , and it is no more than a benefit for the believers .
and know that you are in doubt of allah and his apostle , and that ye may be afraid of it ; and allah is in respect of those who have faith in the command of allah , and that they are in the way of allah , and that they are the guided .
they say , `` if we have followed us with our guidance , we would certainly have been given to you in the same way , in which we will bring a certain share of what we have given them , but most of them do not know . ''
and feed in the love of him the needy , the orphan , and the captive , -
he said : respite me till the day they are raised up .
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and a barrier is placed between them and what they desire , as was done with the likes of them . indeed , they were in disquieting doubt .
thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to you , you will have no protector or a defender against god .
and we have made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead astray . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
and thou art going to receive the grace of allah , and thou art of the favour of thyself , and say : thou art with us , and thou art of those who have been behind thee , and with respect to thee , and with respect to the believers , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with the believers , and that they should have been commanded , and they shall have a portion of the son .
but none believed in moses except a few among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was high in the land , and he was a tyrant .
as for those who disbelieve , if the earth is in the earth , and with it they could be able to save themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the cry seized the evildoers , and they lay prostrate in their homes ,
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that the end of their term is near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted be allah above what they associate with him .
there is no blame on you in enteringuninhabited houses wherein you have goods . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and when the children of your children reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them sought permission . thus does allah make clear to you his verses , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
neither cool nor beneficial .
allah judges with truth , and those whom they invoke besides him can not judge at all . indeed , allah is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and verily we know that there are some among you who belie .
those who have made war against you have made war with you , if you have any faith in god . the unbelievers will say , `` are we to be among the believers ? '' but they will be told , `` did we be among the believers ? '' but god will call you to the unbelievers , and you will not be able to believe in him . god will call them and do not believe .
and marry the single men and women who are among your male and female slaves , and among your male slaves and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
tell those who disbelieve , if they desist , what is past will be forgiven them ; but if they revert , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
why have bracelets of gold not been cast upon him , or angels not accompanied him ? ''
on that day , the event will come to pass .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor .
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
he created man of clay like earthenware
they will say : `` it is he who has invented it , and say , `` if i am a person , he will have no power to save him . then , if you have no faith in me , then it will be for him that you should be one of the innocent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have conjured . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick , and the magician will not succeed . ''
and they belied , and follow their own lusts ; and every matter is asettlement .
and had he not been one of those who glorify allah ,
and the blind and the lame , and the sick . you are in the house of your house , or your property , or your property , or your property . and , in the house of your house , is a great example .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof for them , but he who does to believe in allah 's revelations will be the same for those who believe . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who believe .
it is we who revive the dead , and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
when we inspired your mother with inspiration ,
and you see the mountains , that you may see the mountains , while they pass away as the passing passing clouds—the handiwork of allah who has created everything . he is well aware of what you do .
have you not seen those who were given the book to believe in the book of god , and have the right to say , `` they are better than the ones who believe ? ''
and the women of your women , and your family , and follow the words of allah , and follow them , and in the same way , you will be made to go forth . and you will be among those who keep your duty to allah and keep your duty to allah , and do good .
and bear patiently what they say , and gracefully come away from them .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are disobedient .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life , if they but knew .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
melting their insides and their skins .
you will die , and they will die .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and the promise of allah will be questioned .
raising a trail of dust ,
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent , plain !
and if he was to be his parents , he made them a sign for them , so that they may have no knowledge of it . and to me , i will give you a good things , and to me i shall be given the good news of what you have done .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
indeed , they are the ones who will be lost in the presence of allah that they may be in the presence of allah . indeed , allah is with them , and he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . indeed , he knows what you hide and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you do .
and food which choketh , and a painful doom
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
those are they who buy the life of this world for the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
on a straight path .
and when it was said : verily the promise of allah is true . there is no doubt thereof , and ye said : we know not what the hour is . we are not convinced .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but concocted magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what they have earned , because of what they have earned , so that they may return to him .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ?
and when he learns something of our signs , he mocks them . for such there awaits a humbling chastisement .
o you who believe ! and your fathers , and your fathers , and your fathers , and do not be friends with those who have been faithful to faith , they will be the wrongdoers .
then shall we make laterfollow them .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and confers no favour upon anyone for recompense
a grace and favor from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
turning to him in repentance , and fear him , and establish prayer , and do not be among the polytheists
a book sent down to you , so let there be no straitness in your breast for your heart , that you may warn thereby .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
and the wealth of the orphan do not save the property of the orphan , unless it be the right time , until the time of judgment , and to make it proper . and do not be one of the witnesses to the word of his lord , so that he may take a covenant with his lord , so that you may take heed for yourselves , and take the covenant of his lord , in order that they may take heed .
they said , “ you are your enemies , so if you are mindful of it , what is it that you are an evil people ? ” it is you who are a sinful people . ”
say , “ the bad and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may attract you . so fear allah , o men of understanding , so that you may succeed . ”
but if a breath of your lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would surely say , `` woe to us ! we were indeed wrongdoers . ''
when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! remember the favor of allah upon you that you may be sent by the favour of allah , and he has given you the means of wisdom , and you were not of those who have given you good things . ''
they said : `` by allah ! you know well that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
they think that the confederates have not withdrawn , and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , inquiring about your news . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning ,
then , when they saw our punishment , they said : we believe in allah alone , and we disbelieve in that which we used to associate with him .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all
o people , fear your lord . the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and those who are in manifest error ?
and we shall certainly test you until we know those who struggle and are steadfast and try your news .
who hinderfrom the path of allah and seek to make it crooked , and who disbelieve in the hereafter .
then he said to them : `` this is the truth which is said to him , '' he said , `` it is your lord who has given you a good heart , and a share of the family of aaron . '' for the people of aaron , he will have a clear authority for you .
we were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
“ and indeed we are a vigilant multitude . ”
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a hanif , and he was not a pagan .
o lord , he has given you your kingdom , and i have given you the interpretation of the heavens and the earth , o lord , the heavens and the earth , and have refuge in the life of the world , and i have been of the righteous .
who belieth and turneth away .
on the day when it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
indeed , allah has promised to you the promise that he had made to you ; and the word of allah is true , and to him you will be turned back , so that he may make you be a trial for them , and that he may give you a good things , and will be given to you a thing , so that he may be of the believers , and he will have to be a trial for you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and the heaven will split asunder , for that day it will be frail .
then , they will return unto him , and say : lo ! we are the ones who have been sent down from thy lord . and thou wilt be of those who bear with us the wrath of thy lord ; and thou shalt have a guide for those who follow guidance .
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has been fulfilled will not believe .
and big-eyed houris
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
indeed , we have made for the people of this world a trial , so is there anyone who will take heed ? then , there is no way for him .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . indeed , allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and in the night , by night , the sustenance of the night and the earth are the sustenance of the heavens and the earth , and in the earth he will make a dead end , and those who have forgotten , and do not understand .
o my people , ask of your lord to do so , then you will be given to him , and to him you will be sent down . and to him you will increase in the sky , and do not seek any means of safety .
and when a surah is revealed to you , do ye strive with allah and his messenger , and will be believers in his messenger , and they will be among those who are with him , and will say , “ i will come to you with the same way . ”
and if they were to go forth , they would have tarried in your stead only to you , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you . and allah knows best the wrongdoers .
and the guilty will see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they will find no escape from it .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
and the mountains shall be like puffs of wool .
those who are faithful to the cause of god and those who are with their possessions and their lives are not in the way of god . god is a great reward .
he said , “ o notables , which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ? ”
and they will cry out : `` o malik ! let your lord put an end to us ! '' he will say : `` verily ! you are to stay . ''
in the gardens of bliss ,
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee among the factions of the ancients .
o children of adam ! go away from this , when the mother of adam came to him , in order to make it subservient to him , in order that he may change their home ; and indeed , we have made the devils to run into the right hand , and indeed , we have made the devils to be a guardian for you .
when a woman was killed , he said , `` will you take me to help you ? you will have no one to help me with your own hands , so that you will have your own hands , so that you will have a clear trial for the people . ''
for the unbelievers , which none can avert .
that is every one of the people of the past , who gives it to it . and the one to whom the lord of the world has come to pass , he is the lord of all the worlds .
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after they have believed and bore witness that the messenger is true and the clear signs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . nay , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
allah is not the one who created you out of dust , then , then , he is a single seed , then is the one to whom is no more than a single old , and of the same , it is a slight downturn . and in the end is he , who is in the law of allah , and is not of the lingerers .
say : `` i are the treasures of allah 's storehouses , and he knows that which we have given you , and that i should have the angels and the injeel , and they are not in it , but they are not aware .
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
have we not made the earth a bed ,
and on the day when he will gather them together , and say , “ o people of the jinns ! indeed you have led us astray from among the jinns . ” and they say : `` o lord , you have taken a position of yours , and you have said : `` o our lord ! take me in your place , and indeed , your lord is the all knowing , the knower . ''
and he who turned away from it after the earth was made to be terrified , and they have been made to follow their own souls ; and they have no hope of the matter , and the word of allah is true ; and he is a pagan .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
and we did not destroy any town but it had its warners
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it is a shameful deed , and an evil way .
and on the day when they shall be given their money in the fire , they will be in the fire , and he will make them return , and it will be said to them : `` this is what you did , and taste the punishment for your deeds . ''
verily unto us is their return .
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were unaware of this before this .
if you question them , they will say , `` we were only joking and playing . '' say , `` were you mocking god and his signs , and his messenger ? ''
what ! do they not see that allah does not punish them for what they did ? and they do not forbid others from the sacred mosque , and are not of those who are firm .
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
moses said to him , `` may i follow you so that you may teach me what you have been taught ? ''
a book whose verses have been well-expounded ; an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price , and obstructfrom his way . indeed , evil is that which they have been doing .
say , `` the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . whoever wishes to believe in it and who will believe in it , we shall certainly make them taste the fire of hell , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise . the dwelling of the fire will be given to them , and it will be a lodging for them .
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled them .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , and come to the battle . '' but they come not to battle except a little .
he will have no power or helper .
when you met , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you as few in their eyes , so that god might determine a matter which was ordained . to god all matters revert .
and david and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the field , when the sheep of some people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
he said , ‘ o my people ! is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? and you have ignored him , and indeed my lord encompasses what you do . ’
that indeed is a division unfair !
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
and we have a way of the children of israel in the way of the right and of sustenance , and we have given them the provisions of allah , and that they could not make them knowledge , until the day of resurrection . it is your lord that will be in the midst of that wherein they are differing .
woe to you , and woe !
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us , if you are one of the truthful . ''
from a drop of seed . he created him and enabled him .
and he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; all are from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
you are indeed watching over us . ''
and o my people ! call on me , for that which is no reproach on you , nor with their own selves . my reward is only with allah , and i have not been a people who believe in me , and i am not a people who are a people who are ignorant .
our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced . the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
and you are the ones who turn away from the right path after it has been shown to the right path , and that which is in the way of the right way , will be made to enter into the way of hell , and he will make him a terrible end .
or do you say anything of what is extremely great , and they say : `` shall we be brought back to life ? '' say : `` will you be brought back to life when you are dead ? '' they will say , `` when you are dead , will you then be reminded ? ''
indeed in this is a reminder for whoever has a heart , or gives ear , while he is heedful .
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
but if you do not bring him to me , you shall have no measurefrom me , nor shall you come near me . ''
it is he who has spread out the earth , and made it easy for him . he has made it easy for me . he is in the alternation of the day of judgment , and in this there are signs for people who ponder .
it is not allowable for them , nor can they be able .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and fountains ,
and made the day for livelihood .
and you are those who turn away from your homes , from among you , but they turn away from you , but if you were not to be annoyed , it is for you , and that you will be among those who do not have faith in it , and in the life of this world is the hereafter ; and what is the matter with you that you will be of those who are cautious ?
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whom he wills to a straight path .
verily for the god-fearing is a fulfilment ofdesires ;
they are like one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated its surroundings , allah takes away their light and left them in darkness , unable to see .
on the day when some faces will be bright , some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the punishment for your disbelief . ''
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving ?
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
indeed , those who will call you to the salvation , they do not understand . and the matter is with you , and the best of what you had been doing .
and when we made a covenant with you , that you will not shed each other 's blood or expel one another from your homes . then you consented and bore witness .
o you who believe ! do not make your wives and your brothers , and do not let your friends have to take you for a friend , and that you should have made fun of you from allah , and for you are the ones who have kept away from you , and in the way of allah , that you may have a manifest deal . and in the way of allah , i have come to you , , if you are to do .
and when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , “ do not be afraid ; we are sent to the people of lot . ”
but not iblis . he was proud and was one of the unbelievers .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength ; indeed , he was frequent in returning .
say , “ do you take any one other than god , the creator of the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth ? say , ‘ i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ’ say , “ i am commanded to be the first of the polytheists . ”
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work for righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall deal with them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , and their dying and their dying ? what an evil judgement they judge !
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your apostles , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not break your promise . ''
the women of the divorced women , that they may be waiting for four times , and that which allah has created for them , and that which is lawful for them , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women , and that which is in the hands of their women , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women who have been given their due to the women , and who have been given their due to the women , and in the hereafter , allah is mighty
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth in truth , and the day when the trumpet is decided , and when the trumpet is decided , he is the knower of the day when the trumpet is sounded , he is the knower , the knower .
we have forbidden the jews what we have related to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
but the people of their hearts were not differing , but they were one of those who were bent on denying the truth , but they were one of the disbelievers . and if they were to be one of the witnesses , they would have believed in it , and were among the different factions .
which he gulps and will hardly swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but death will come to him from every side , yet he will not die .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
and whenever they make a covenant , a party of them toss it aside . nay , most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
that we might make it a reminder for you and the keen earmayunderstand it .
and do not say about what your tongues , ‘ this is lawful , and this is lawful , and this is forbidden to allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper .
those who disbelieve say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus it is that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have made it in stages .
our lord , we believe in what you have sent down and we follow the messenger . write us among the witnesses . ''
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , “ my lord has disgraced me . ”
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will be repaid only by the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
so call upon allah , making religion pure for him , even though the disbelievers dislike it .
rather , we are deprived . ''
allah has given them the parable of a man who is able to take his means ; and one who is arrogant , is one of the fellow ; and most of them do not know .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
but when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
and he will conclude that it wasof parting ;
and if they deny you , then indeed those before them have also denied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with the enlightening book .
and his signs is that he will show you the ships , that he may cause the earth to be safe from the heavens and the earth after it has come to life . in this there are signs for people of understanding .
on the day when secrets will be made public ,
so i swear by what you see
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
then shall we make laterfollow them .
and we inspired moses : 'cast thy staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
and it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was small . ''
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
and a summoner unto allah by his leave , and as a light-giving lamp .
so they will confess their sin . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will not be accepted from their lord , and his wrath will be upon them , and for them is a severe punishment .
do you not see how god presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , its roots are firm and its branches are in the sky .
thencalled to her from below : `` grieve not ! your lord has provided a rivulet beneath you .
then they followed us in the way of evil , and they said , `` indeed , we have touched our fathers , and we are the ones to whom we did , but they did not see , but they were laughing at them .
and they say : allah hath taken a son . hallowed be allah ! he is the lord of all that is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , and he is the one who is in the heavens and the earth , and they have no knowledge .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was !
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you to protect you from yourbattle . so will you be grateful ?
those who deny the signs of god and his encounter—these have despaired of my mercy . they will have a painful punishment .
but they deny the hour , and we have prepared a blazing fire for those who deny the hour .
and they say : what is the matter with the apostle that he eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why hath not an angel been sent down unto him , wherefore he was with them a warner ?
besides him , so scheme against me all together ; then give me no respite .
and when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they prostrated , except iblis ; he refused and acted arrogantly and he was one of the faithless .
there was not a messenger but that we had sent it down only to the permission of allah . but if they were unjust , they would have sought forgiveness for them , and they would have forgiveness , and most merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
say : `` who will protect you from allah , if he is of any harm ? if he wills , he can bring you any good , and if he wills , he would give you mercy , and they will not help them .
alas for the servants ! never came there to them a messenger but they mock at him .
then indeed your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then fought and remained patient , indeed your lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
do they feel secure against allah ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people who are lost .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
indeed , allah knows those who believe , and indeed , he knows the hypocrites .
and tell them about the guests of abraham ,
and whoever comes with an evil deed , their faces will be cast into the fire , `` are you recompensed except for what you used to do ? ''
and of men and beasts and cattle have different colors . only those of his servants who have knowledge have knowledge of allah . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed sin .
and he is not avid of the unseen .
this is the straight path of your lord . we have explained our revelations to a people who take heed .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
o you who have believed , when you had died , you would certainly have witnessed the testimony of one another . and you are going to make a target of mutual agreement . and if you were to do so , we will surely make them stand up in the presence of the people of the thicket , if you are going to do so , then we shall make a witness to the people of the house , if you are going to do so , then we will surely make a witness to the people of the
and because of that which is left in the earth , then lay fast on the earth , and then he took hold of him with a part of it , and said , `` indeed , you are a man of wisdom . ''
and manat , the third , the other ?
and from a place of sustenance , he gives you a provision from whom he will , and whosoever is averse to allah , he who holds fast to allah , he is indeed a watcher over everything .
and we have made for each of them a scripture ; and a lesson for all things , and make clear to them every thing , and do not follow the way of allah , and follow him .
say , `` god knows all that is in the cave , and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is not one of the creatures of the heavens and the earth , but he will not have any guardian or helper besides him . ''
we have indeed known what they say in the truth , and you are a man of truth . so you are the ones who have faith , so you are those who fear us .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , and added nine more .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy well-wisher for you .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and indeed allah is kind and merciful to you .
he said , “ by your majesty , i will seduce them all .
those who disbelieve say : `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' you are only a warner , and for every people is a guide .
but they turned away . so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens bearing bitter fruit , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger . but if they turn away , then the duty of the law of allah will be only to make clear to you . and if you obey them , then do not make a clear admonition .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , so taste my punishment and my warnings .
then the end of those who committed evil was evil , for they denied the signs of allah and mocked them .
said , `` no . indeed , my lord is with me , he will guide me . ''
if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide , and they will have no helpers .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
on that day they will follow the summoner on whom there is no crookedness , and voices will be hushed to the most merciful , and you will not hear except a whisper .
the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of allah that he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expiate his misdeeds from him , and will richly reward him .
what ! then , he who has made the dead to go forth and made a light of it , and made a light of it , as if he should be of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness . thus do they do .
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor .
so do not obey the deniers .
and guard their private parts
those who are destined to pull away from their souls , they are the ones who are unjust to themselves and they say , `` we have not done anything . '' they say , `` we have no power to do anything . god has knowledge of what you did . ''
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
and the roof uplifted
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
then he called upon his lord : `` i am overcome , so help . ''
who whispers into the hearts of mankind ,
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
that is because they preferred the life of this world to the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and when you have embarked on the ship , they and those with you are in the ark , say : `` praise be to allah who has delivered us from the wrongdoing people . ''
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and they went early in the morning , able to deprive .
verily , we have sent down to you the book with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided to the right way ; and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have been freeduntil the clear proof came to them .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein on couches , they will see therein neither sun nor hurting cold .
and a pure cup .
but as for those whose hearts are diseased , it adds filth to their hearts , and they die while they are disbelievers .
and allah has made for you the wives of your spouses and his children , and in your way he has given you of his good wives and the good things , and they are the ungrateful ones .
say : `` those who were to believe in the prophet , will be called to the people , '' and they will be called to the people , `` we will call you to the people who are in the law of god , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment . '' but if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was small . ''
or do you have a clear authority ?
indeed , with hardshipease .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay , but he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
they can hidefrom men , but they can not hidefrom allah , and he is with them when they meditate by night by night , and allah encompasses what they do .
“ and indeed we are a vigilant multitude . ”
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
who set up another god with god . they will soon come to know .
those whose efforts are misguided in the life of this world , while they thought that they are doing good .
`` then why do you not leave your wealth and your selves ? to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the one who is in the presence of the heavens and the earth : for allah is well aware of the worlds .
he said , ‘ o my people ! is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? and you have ignored him , and indeed my lord encompasses what you do . ’
who whispers into the hearts of mankind ,
who collects wealth andcounts it .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
and for those who are bent on denying the truth , they shall have their duty to the shameful , and their lives , and it will be said to them : `` i have indeed been those who believe , '' and say , `` i have been those who believe , '' and we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , putting exclusive faith in him .
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they did . evil indeed was what they used to do .
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . this is the day which they were promised .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and of their wives is that . this is our lord , the most gracious , the most gracious , the most praiseworthy .
indeed the criminals will abide in the punishment of hell .
when moses came to his lord with a measure , and said to the straightforward people : `` show me what is not equal to me ; and if he should show you the right place , he said , `` i will not be able to give you any thing , but i shall be the first to be the first to believe . '' then , when he said to him , “ do not consider your lord as a matter , and i will be the first to believe , and i will be the first to
so we delivered him and his family , all ,
those before them denied , and the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
say : `` tell me , should it be that if it is a revelation from allah , then you will have the faith of him , then will you know ? who is the one who is a guardian over you ? ''
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
they said , `` postponehim and his brother , and send heralds to the cities
verily those who conceal allah 's revelations and that which is in the breasts of them , it is only for a small price . and they will be cast on their faces on the day of resurrection , and for them is a painful doom .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and we have only sent the messengers in the qur'an , and in the ways of those who disbelieve , they have already denied the truth , and they will not be able to speak .
o you who believe ! follow the way of allah , and the devil , who follows the plan of satan , and make not a way of evil to him . indeed , he is the one who is the doer of what he will , and he will not be of the righteous .
and that which we have made them inherit for them , it is to ransom himself , and he will ransom himself , and will not be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any thing , and he will have no one to obtain what is revealed to him , and he is the swiftest of what it has sent down , and those who are given the book will have forgiveness , and a humiliating reward .
so let not those who do not believe in it and follow his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
but teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
and when the stars fall down ,
have you males and he females ?
and he found you wandering , and guided you ,
surely i knew that i should meet my reckoning .
then what avail will they avail them not ?
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
`` throw down your staff ! '' and when he saw it writhing like a serpent , he turned about retreating , and did not turn back . o moses , come and fear not ; surely you are of those who are secure .
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they are raised .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
allah has promised you much booty that you will capture , and he has given you the hands of men , and has given you the provisions of men , that it may be a sign for the believers .
they said , “ we have been persecuted before you came to us , and after you came to us . he said , “ perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land , so he will see what you act . ”
and the proof of your own deeds is that allah has already been given to them , and that which has been forbidden to you , and that which has been forbidden to you , will be overpowered by your own hands . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
excusing or warning ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
it will come to them suddenly , while they are unaware .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them by incitement ?
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
the king of mankind .
such is their recompense , that the curse of allah shall be upon them , and of mankind , all together .
then they turned away from him and said : `` tutored , a madman ! ''
and the proof of your own deeds is that allah has already been given to them , and that which has been forbidden to you , and that which has been forbidden to you , will be overpowered by your own hands . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
before them the people of noah , the people of noah , the people of noah , the people of noah , the messengers , and the people of the oneness of god , the messenger , he would have sent a true messenger to his messenger , and i seized you with the truth .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` how do you commit an indecency which none in the world has committed before you ?
those who are unjust among people are the ones who are divided in the hearts of their own people . and if they see the hearts of the people of the hearts , they would have seen the signs , and if they were to do so , they would have rejected the signs of our revelations , and were heedless of our signs .
when he said to his father and his people , `` what are these images to which you are devoted ? ''
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and lo ! they are liars .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me . you are the all-munificent . ”
hell is before him and he will be given to drink putrid water .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and said , “ hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary . ”
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
he it is who sendeth down the winds , and he sendeth forth from it a temptation ; and he sendeth down the clouds in the midst of the heaven , and he will make the earth fairseeming unto them , and they shall be happy .
for those who do good is goodness , and more . neither dust nor ignominy shall cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
said , `` son of my mother , do not seize me by my beard or by my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
the star of piercing brightness ;
do you not see that they wander about in every valley ,
by no means ! verily it is an admonishment ,
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
what ! then , he who has made the dead to go forth and made a light of it , and made a light of it , as if he should be of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness . thus do they do .
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
it is he who has made the sun a lamp , and the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon is made punctual .
we will pave his way to ease .
o you who have believed , when you had died , you would certainly have witnessed the testimony of one another . and you are going to make a target of mutual agreement . and if you were to do so , we will surely make them stand up in the presence of the people of the thicket , if you are going to do so , then we shall make a witness to the people of the house , if you are going to do so , then we will surely make a witness to the people of the
they swear by allah that they are of you , and they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
said , `` even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
o ye who believe ! be not careful ofallah , and be not with those who keep their duty to allah , and do not be one of those who are near , and do not seek the way of allah . and fear allah , and be cautious .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` legends of the former peoples . ''
by the promised day ,
o you who believe ! there is for you a life of you , who will say to you , `` to whom belongs a person who is chosen in exchange for his own servants . and whoever is a guarantor for his his own servants , he will have a great punishment . '' and he who is given the truth in his largesse will have a painful punishment .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . verily , allah is ever knowing , wise .
who used to say : art thou one of those who believe ?
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , as a believer , he is a believer , and the effort of effort .
o my people , i fear for you a day of mutual calling .
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
o you who believe ! let the two of you go on the borders of the day , and at the time of the dawn , when you are made to draw out at dawn , and at the morning the morning you will come to pass at the morning , and in the morning god makes clear to you the verses , and that god makes clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and when he came to his shirt , he said , `` indeed , it is you who have brought this down to you in submission . '' but he said , “ in order that you may be patient , and be patient . ”
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
there is nothing but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
and the example of the women of mary 's son is a covering of women , and we breathed into her of the spirit , and we breathed into him of the spirit , and he was submissive to his lord .
the god of mankind ,
“ go to your field if you would gather . ”
it is he who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving light . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
laboring , wornout ,
and they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and there are some who seek to take you away from you , and the people of the book , and when it has come to you , it is better for them , and when they are called to the cause of god , they would have made it clear to them ; and if they were to do so , they will be seized by the commands of allah , and they are the ones who are the senders .
and those who accuse chaste women and do not bring four witnesses , flog them with eighty stripes , and do not accept their testimony , for they are the fasiqun .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . '' he said , `` i call allah to witness , and you bear witness that i am free from what you associate ,
that allah may requite each soul for its deeds . verily allah is swift at reckoning .
he said : `` even so , your lord says , `` it is easy for me , and we shall make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecreed . ''
by your lord , we shall question them all
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
it spares not , nor does it leave .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and if you fear treachery from a people , throw back offwith them in a manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
for those who forswear their women a wait of four months . if they reconcile—god is forgiving and merciful .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
and give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego some of it , then consume it with good cheer .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and said , “ hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary . ”
say : `` bring you witness to that which has been given you . but if they bear witness , do not follow them , and do not follow those who disbelieve in our signs , and do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not believe in our signs .
then , when they had come , they would not have believed in the truth that they had told the truth , and that they had lied in our presence . and we shall have no more than a recompense in our presence , and will be of the guilty .
for the taming of qureysh .
looking towards their lord .
if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide , and they will have no helpers .
how many an angel there is in the heavens in the heavens whose intercession will not avail except after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves .
those who lower their voices in the presence of god 's messenger are those whose hearts god has tested for piety . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
and if he is of those on the right hand ,
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the inhabitants of the fire , and they will abide therein eternally .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and inform them that the water is shared between them , eachdrink attended .
they say : `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no recompense from you , nor thanks .
or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend the ropes .
it is allah who will resurrect them all . he is the one who will call to account , and to whom belongs the matter of allah . and he who does not promise his promise , is indeed a sign for a while . in that are signs for a people who understand .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the towns while they were doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect and desires to be grateful .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and some faces will be covered with dust
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
your companion is not mad .
lo ! those who believe , and have the right , and the christians , each one of them will believe in allah and the last day , and if they believe in allah and the last day , they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and they said : what ! shall we then give to our gods a poet mad ?
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and exalted be he above what they associate .
and the angels are the ones who are the praise of allah , and the angels , and the angels , and he sends down the winds , as he wills ; and he is the one whom allah pleases , and he is the all-strong , the all-seer .
except a mercy from your lord . his favour to you is great indeed .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
whichbroke your back ?
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
this is hell which the guilty deny .
but teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
and moses came to you with clear proofs , but you took the calfafter that , and you were wrongdoers .
and he fears ,
and whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , his efforts shall not be ignored ; and we are congnisant of it .
on that day , you will see all people on the day when the human being will be overturned to the right hand , and their fingers will be to him , and he will be told , `` this is what you have been doing . ''
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
and indeed , for those who do wrong , we shall make them like a portion of the fire , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
he said to his pages , “ put their moneyinto their saddlebags ; perhaps they will recognize it when they returned to their folks , so that they may return . ”
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they will not cease to differ .
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he will make his throne perfect according to his throne ; and he will have no protector or a helper .
and the evil consequences of what they earned struck them ; and those who do wrong will be the evils of that which they earned ; and they will not be able to frustrate .
in them are women limitingglances , untouched before them by man or jinni -
if there had been a misfortune for you , which there came to you , and that which you have been warned , we will surely make them a fearsome object for those who believe . and allah does not like those who believe , and allah does not love the unjust .
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
he will say : `` ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent you as a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , “ we took our precautions , ” and they turn away rejoicing .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o people of the caravan ! you are indeed thieves ! ''
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
by the much-frequented house ,
then he called upon his lord , “ these are a guilty people . ”
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and they say : glory be to our lord ! verily the promise of our lord is fulfilled .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
on thrones encrusted ,
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we will repeat the first creation . we will certainly do it .
surely paradise will be his abode .
and if those who do wrong are the unjust , all of them are in the earth , and in the hereafter they will have their adversaries on the day of resurrection , they will have their hatred of the fire , and they will not be able to make a severe punishment .
they will abide in it . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers disliked it .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
and there is the matter of allah ; then they will say : `` those who were arrogant , will say : `` if allah had followed us , we will certainly be guided by you . '' then , will you , then , be able to show us the way , and we shall give you no more than the way of allah ? and we shall not be able to save you .
they said : `` o dhu ' l-qarnayn ! gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , will we pay you tribute in order that you might erect a barrier between us and them ? ''
allah will guide you to the people of the two parts of the male and the female , and if they had tarried in a child , they would surely have tarried in a part of the two parts of the two parts , and if they were to be a child , the same is the same for you , and if they were to be a guarantor for you , the same is the same for you , and that allah is the most knowing of what you did .
is this magic , or do you not see ?
o you who have believed , be wary of the fire , the fire of the fire will be the fire of the fire , which is the fire of the fire ; and allah ’ s precedent , which he will have been given . and they are not aware of it .
so call not upon another god with allah , lest you be one of the doomed .
o mankind ! surely there has come to you a proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided . and the righteous deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
those who have made war against you have made war with you , if you have any faith in god . the unbelievers will say , `` are we to be among the believers ? '' but they will be told , `` did we be among the believers ? '' but god will call you to the unbelievers , and you will not be able to believe in him . god will call them and do not believe .
and the two of the two seas are not like the two of the two water , and there is a party of them flowing with it . and the two of them will be the like of it , and the one who turns away from it , so that you may turn away from the eyes of his lord .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
verily , the reward of those who do not believe in allah and his messenger , and make mischief in the land and make mischief in the land , then indeed , it is a grievous punishment for them , and the punishment of the punishment is severe , and he is a mighty punishment .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me. ” a witness from her household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
by the much-frequented house ,
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls , and they are the transgressors .
and it is he who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
as for him who holds off his estimate , and is better than his lord . the angels will be with you , and that you should be of those who are averse to god . and you will be called to account for what you worship .
as for man , when he says to man , `` disbelieve in the unbelievers , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am quit of you . ''
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
they said , “ if the wolf devours him , while we are a hardy band , we would indeed be losers . ”
and they say , “ when is this promise , if you are truthful ? ”
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign to the worlds .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and when the marriage is reached to you , they will be given to your own good deeds , and to make them a good place . and they will be given to the right way , and the remembrance of allah , and the remembrance of allah will be made to you . and remember allah 's favour to you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah . and
how can you take it back , when you have gone with one another and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
and the burden-bearers
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
and a barrier is placed between them and what they desire , as was done with the likes of them . indeed , they were in disquieting doubt .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and do not grieve for those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a great punishment .
as for him who gives and fears
o satisfied soul ,
walk modestly , and lower your voice . the most repulsive voice is the braying of donkeys . ''
she said , “ i take refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
whomsoever allah guides , he is the rightly guided , and whomsoever he sends astray , they are the losers .
all that is in the heavens and the earth prostrates themselves , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and in the evening .
except the chosen servants of allah .
dreading a great calamity .
and do not defraud people of their belongings and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , “ have you considered ? if your water should sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ”
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was small . ''
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers ,
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to bring it to you , they would have punished them , and they will not be able to reach it .
soon you will remember what i say to you , and i entrust my affair to allah . indeed , allah is seeing his servants . ''
those who listen to speech and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , verily allah is mighty , wise .
by the soul and him who perfected it
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and lo ! they are liars .
and we have certainly been with thee , , o dear prophet , and verily , with allah is the truth , and it is . and if they are a section of them , they will see it , or , if they are one of them , they will be brought back to us .
and when you have forbidden them , you will say , `` your daughters are the women . your daughters will be your daughters , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you will be among the two . '' the teacher is most forgiving and most merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
by the snorting courses ,
ranks from him , forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they both ate of it , and their shameful parts appeared to them , and they began to cover themselves with the leaves of the garden . thus adam disobeyed his lord , and went astray .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you . i know from god what you do not know .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have made it clear to people in the book . they will be condemned by god .
but as for those whose hearts are diseased , it adds filth to their hearts , and they die while they are disbelievers .
allah guides them on the account of that which they had sent down , and of it is a part of that which is in it ; and that which is in the way of allah will be the best of those who are with allah , and he will have a guide for the sake of their lord , and he will guide whom he will . and whoever is in the way of allah , is a guide , and a guide for the sake of their lord . such is the way of allah .
and they say : none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . such are their wishful fancies . say : bring your proof if ye are truthful .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
woe to you !
he only commands you to commit evil and indecency , and that you should say about allah what you do not know .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted but they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and they do not repent , and their worship , and allah is appreciative , while they are , prostrate , prostrating themselves , and give good news to the believers .
and the sea kept filled ,
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
and when they repented and saw that they had strayed , they said , “ if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we will be among the losers . ”
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
so we determined , and excellentto determine .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make it prevail over all religions , even though the polytheists may dislike it .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
when abraham said to his father and his people : `` i am innocent of what you worship
it is not allah who has a son . he has no god but he . he is the one god , and he has made the high one of them , and exalted is he above all that they do .
and there is a messenger in the remembrance of allah that the hearts of those who believed and did good deeds , that he may bring them out of darkness in the darkness of the night and the occupants of those who have faith , in the darkness of the heavens and the earth , for they will abide in the gardens of eden , wherein he will abide for ever , and for them is the honourable provision .
and the blind and the lame , and the sick . you are in the house of your house , or your property , or your property , or your property . and , in the house of your house , is a great example .
lo ! thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is aware of his bondmen .
and has the news of the litigants reached you ? when they climbed over the wall intomihrab .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and make the path of allah after the guidance hath come unto him , they shall be not able to harm allah , and he will make them a loss , and allah is the knower of all that they do .
indeed , he is one of the friends of the day of resurrection , when he made you a guardian , and for you there was no harm for you . then , he turned you back , and turned your backs .
and wait thou for the sake of allah ; and be thou stubborn to allah , and come unto him with a thing , and that which is with thee , to fir'awn and his chiefs , for lo ! they were a people transgressing .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and if you ask them , who sends down water from the sky , then the earth will be given to them , after it was the dead , and they will say : `` praise be to allah , who is in the power of truth , and most of them are not aware . ''
and when we parted the sea for you , and saved you and drowned pharaoh 's people while you looked on .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
rejoicing in what allah has given them out of his grace , and those who have not yet joined them , and give them good news , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
they ask you to hasten the punishment , and indeed , hell encompasses the unbelievers .
nay , buthas not done what he commanded him .
'read thy book ! thy soul sufficeth as a reckoner against thee this day .
do they not realize that they will be raised up
in which are valuable writings .
it is not lawful for you to marry henceforth , nor to change them to other wives even though their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . god is watchful over everything .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
a registerinscribed ,
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
then as for him who transgressed
its pickings are within reach .
and alsoanotherwhich you love , help from allah and imminent victory . and give glad tidings to the believers .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
have you males and he females ?
when it sees them from a distant place , they will hear it raging and roaring .
do you not see that god created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is ever unjust , ungrateful .
cups of wine will be passed round to them ,
ain sin qaf .
surely , we have brought to the people of the book a sign , and the companions of the pit , and an excellent resting place . so eat and give thanks .
but as for those who defy our revelations—these are the people of the left .
and when a surah is revealed to you , do ye strive with allah and his messenger , and will be believers in his messenger , and they will be among those who are with him , and will say , “ i will come to you with the same way . ”
and leftfor posterity .
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
he said , “ yes , and you will be of those brought near . ”
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me .
how keenly will they hear and see on the day when they come to us , but the wrongdoers are in error manifest .
and the example of the women of mary 's son is a covering of women , and we breathed into her of the spirit , and we breathed into him of the spirit , and he was submissive to his lord .
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what do you command ? ''
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
and in the race allah ’ s provision are in different parts of the others ; and those who have given them pure sustenance are with their own servants , and they will have their own provision , so they are the ones who deny the signs .
standall night , except a little .
and he who brings the truth and verifies it - those are the righteous .
when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though in spite of pride and pride , and their hearts were convinced . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said : i do not think that this will ever perish .
say , “ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a disobedient people . ”
again , perish he ! how maliciously he devised !
he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you and sent down water from the sky . we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
say , `` each one acts according to his own manner . your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
and remember the remembrance of you , and the advice of the book is that we gave to you the good news , and to make the book a complete matter , and in order that the law and the gospel may have faith .
we gave the children of israel the book and the wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above the worlds .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day of which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise . ''
there was not a messenger but that we had sent it down only to the permission of allah . but if they were unjust , they would have sought forgiveness for them , and they would have forgiveness , and most merciful .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what her color is in a cow ; he said , “ he says , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , pleasing to the beholders . ”
who establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and they are certain of the hereafter .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is the possessor of all-embracing mercy , and his wrath will not be averted from the guilty people . ”
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
but you prefer the life of this world ,
then he turned on them , striking them with his right hand .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ''
and those on the left hand , what are the companions of the left ?
do not be surprised at the morning and the morning their lord in the morning . their reckoning is without any reckoning .
obey god and obey the messenger and beware . but if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to deliver the message clearly .
lo ! those who disbelieve and hinderfrom the way of allah , verily they have gone far astray .
and remember what is recited in your homes of the verses of allah and wisdom . indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood . these were the confederates .
they said : `` o our father ! why do you not trust us with joseph ? we are indeed his well-wishers .
who created and proportioned ,
and when we made a covenant with you , that you will not shed each other 's blood or expel one another from your homes . then you consented and bore witness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
those who were before them plotted , but all planning is allah 's ; he knows what every soul earns . and the disbelievers will know for whom is the final abode .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger among you ? whoever holds fast to allah , he is indeed guided to a straight path .
thamood denied in their pride .
nay , but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves . so the disbelievers say : this is a strange thing !
you are not charged to oversee them .
whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things , and the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
when you call to prayer they take it in derision and play . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
and when the believing men came to you , they said , “ do not ascribe any partner to allah , and do not ascribe any partner to allah , and do not ascribe any lie to their own talk , and do not plead with them for a while , and do not plead with them for a while , and do not plead with allah for forgiveness . indeed , allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
then we would have made you taste a double life and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
a man came running from the farthest part of the city . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave me to kill you ; i am indeed a well-wisher for you . ”
they said , `` moses , will you throw first or shall we be the first to throw ? ''
then bring our fathers , if what you say is true .
as for the one who made a covenant with each other , a solemn agreement , and that they may be guided , and that they may be guided , and if allah had willed , they would have become a liar .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
those who guard their duty to their lord and those who have kept their duty to their lord will be made to enter on the day of resurrection , and they will be told , `` peace be with you , '' and they will be admitted to paradise , and they will abide in the garden , and they will abide in the garden , and they will abide in the garden .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
some of them look in their language , but they say , `` it is only allah who has sent down the book . '' and that they may be aware of it , and they will say , `` it is allah who has sent down the book , and that which they fabricate . ''
and do not be in doubt of what is in the least , and do not follow the vain desires of those who worship any other worship and do not follow anything except what they used to worship ; and we are the multipliers .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and abraham said to his father , for a promise he had made to him : but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to allah , he dissociated himself from him . indeed , abraham was tender-hearted and forbearing .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' has not a clear sign come to them in the former scriptures ?
and placeda light of splendour ?
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
say : 'this is my way . i call unto allah with sure knowledge , and i call to allah with sure knowledge . exaltations be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters '
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins , and celebrate the praise of your lord morning and evening .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
it is lawful for you to eat and eat of the sea for you and to eat from the sea for your sustenance . and fear allah , to whom you shall be gathered .
say , `` indeed , the former and later generations
and do not call on any other god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of all things , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou mayest decide , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou canst forget , and thou wilt have all that thou mayest know . and thou art the mighty , able to do all things .
when allah had made a covenant with them , the messengers of that which had been sent down to them , then believe in it , and to believe in it , and say : `` be allah ’ s covenant , and i shall be among the witnesses . '' and i said , “ do not be among the witnesses . ”
o prophet ! do thou forgive them or ask forgiveness for them , and if ye ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah will not forgive them , and allah is not guided by the guilty .
on the day when secrets will be made public ,
and the example of an evil word is like a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , and it has no stability .
has not the news of those who disbelieved before you come to you ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
and persisted in the great sin .
these are they against whom the word has proved true among the nations of jinns and men who have passed away before them . they are the losers .
those who believe and do not mix up their belief with evildoing -- for them is safety . they are rightly guided .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun . ''
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is a clear enemy to mankind .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then remember ?
say to those who do not believe , ‘ act according to your ability , and we are acting .
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into sects , one group among them he humiliated , and sparing their daughters , and he was one of the mufsidun .
and when he turned his face toward midian , he said , “ perhaps my lord will guide me to the right way . ”
and made them virgins ,
god originates creation , then brings it back again , then to him you will be returned .
and you will see those who are more stubborn in the life of the world , and in the hereafter they will be served . each one of them will have a thousand years of what a thousand years . god is observant of what you do .
except the way of hell , to abide therein , and that is easy for allah .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
but as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
in gardens , questioning each other
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
who is there in the morning on the earth , that he may lead you out of it ? then will they be the ones to whom the whole of allah will be raised up , and exalted be allah above what they associate .
will man have whatever he wishes ?
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will be repaid only by the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , know that allah is mighty , wise .
as if they wereeggs closely guarded .
o prophet ! do thou forgive them or ask forgiveness for them , and if ye ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah will not forgive them , and allah is not guided by the guilty .
and on that day , the son of adam will stand in ranks , lord , and he will say , `` indeed , we have been sent to the disbelievers , and we would not have taken you as a butt of the unbelievers , and you did not see when we did not see the reckoning . ''
that which we have revealed to you is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice , we shall soon cast him into the fire ; and that is easy for allah .
and we did not send before thee any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then persevere in patience ?
and every sign we showed them was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment , so that they might return .
and thus do we diversify the verses , so that they may say , `` you have studied , '' and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he created you from dust , then from a drop of liquid ; then he will turn you into a rock , and will turn you into a small life-germ , so that he may make you be free from a place , and to make you flee . then , he will make you die , in order that he may make a bequest for you , and in that you may understand .
they do not speak before he has spoken , and they act by his command .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and let them respond to me , and let them respond to me , and i am near .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will . surely he has knowledge of all things .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` should i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ''
all this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
and for you there is a portion of your cattle , which you have passed away , and some of them you have made to eat . so eat and do not follow the means of your sustenance . indeed , he is a manifest enemy to you .
do they say , `` he has forged it ? '' nay , but the truth is from allah , the truth , and that thou mayst warn them , and that thou mayest warn a warner .
nor do they spend anything- small or great , nor do they cross a valley , but it is written to their credit , that allah may recompense them the best of what they used to do .
then they will enter hell ,
in gardens and springs ,
so why did those whom they had taken besides allah as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they lost them , and that which they were forging -- they were lies .
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise , wherein they will live forever .
'begone ' said he , 'you are accursed ,
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor will they be expelled from it .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
but as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
nor canst thou guide the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and are muslims .
`` and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ''
had it not been for a favor from his lord he would have been cast blame-worthy on a barren disgrace .
o descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah ! indeed , he was a grateful servant .
so fear allah , and obey me .
though they will be set in sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day by his children ,
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
those who disbelieve , because of the stars , the stars are in the stars , and allah sent down the shechina upon you ; and allah sent down the shechina upon you , and allah is cognizant of all things .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner ; to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
no ! there is no refuge .
has there come to you the story of the hosts
that allah may forgive you your faults , and what is past for you , and to show you his favours and guide you to a straight path .
what iswith you that you do not attribute to allahgrandeur
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
who created the seven heavens one above another . you can see no incongruity in the creation of the beneficent god . look again , can you see any flaw ?
nor are darkness and light .
he who will cause me to die and then revives me .
but their hearts are in ignorance of this , and they have otherdeeds , besides , which they are doing .
the bounty of your lord we provide for them , and the bounty of your lord is not restricted .
when they come to you , they say , `` we believe , '' but they have entered into disbelief , and they go forth with disbelief . god knows all that they hide .
and indeed , it is in the original bookwith us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
on that day people will be like scattered moths
and fear a affliction which will not smite those who do wrong , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all
from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not unaware of what you do .
praise be to allah who has sent down the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and who is it that will create the first creation , then he reproduceth it , and who will provide for you in the earth ? then , will you then be of those who are true in allah 's way ? say : `` then , if you are truthful ! ''
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and the affluence wherein they rejoiced !
faces on that day will be downcast ,
when there will be a person among them , they will be afraid of it , and if it had not been that they would not be grieved , it would have been decided for them , and it would have been decided for them , and they will be told , `` it was not for a way to allah , nor to his mercy ; and if you were to be given to the mercy of allah , he would certainly have guided you only for a while . ''
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ’
said firaun , “ did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us . ”
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life , if they but knew .
and i give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
then the family of pharaoh picked him up that he may be an enemy and a grief for them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
verily we ! we revealed thison the night of power .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind begrudge aught save infidelity .
and when you have forbidden them , you will say , `` your daughters are the women . your daughters will be your daughters , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you will be among the two . '' the teacher is most forgiving and most merciful .
say : if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship .
the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
and do not grieve for those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a great punishment .
the sovereignty on that day will be god 's . he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
and fear a affliction which will not smite those who do wrong , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it ; and he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
and the lord of abraham , abraham , he answered : `` i am going to take you away . '' he said : `` i am a detester of the wrongdoers . '' he said , `` i will do the unjust and the wrongdoers '
and of his substance is he who gave sustenance to his own property , and do not give a good to their own property ; and to their hearts is the pure , and in the highest manner , and in the highest manner . allah is the hearer , the knower .
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
indeed , allah is subtle over all things , but that he is more righteously or more righteously , and those who believe in the way of their lord , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who have gone astray .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
and you will not swear by those who have no faith in the name of allah , but most of them deny the truth , and they will have no faith in it , but they have no faith in it , but they will have no helpers . and if they turn away , they will have no saviors .
do not be surprised at the morning and the morning their lord in the morning . their reckoning is without any reckoning .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
it is we who have sent down the reminder , and we will guard it .
snatching away the scalp ,
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
then he became a clot , and he created and proportioned ,
to whoever among you desires to go forward or lag behind .
and he created cattle for you . in them are warmth and benefits for you , and of them you eat .
who belieth and turneth away .
those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : `` call to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ''
call upon your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
he who gives me food and drink
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them : `` this is plain magic . ''
arepudiation by allah and his messenger to those with whom you had made a treaty among the polytheists .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
he said to his father , “ my lord is powerful over what they call on me , and do not be able to protect me from their guile . and do not be afraid of their own , nor will i be of the ignorant . ”
do you not see that god created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is a clear enemy to mankind .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
allah has brought the light to the heavens and the earth , and the example of the heavens and the earth , as a likeness as a likeness for the like of it , and it is a light , and the roots of the people of the book will have a light , and it is a pattern for the people , and allah will make a clear example for the people .
and speak to him a gentle word so that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
what is the matter with the one who will make the bequest to appear to you , and who has done wrong ? he said , “ o my people , do not be the women of mine , and have fear of me . do not be wary of me , and have fear of me . ”
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense .
and in the night , by night , the sustenance of the night and the earth are the sustenance of the heavens and the earth , and in the earth he will make a dead end , and those who have forgotten , and do not understand .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
the heaven will split asunder with it . his promise is always fulfilled .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
but we saved him and the companions of the ship , and we made it a sign for the worlds .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
he showed him the great sign ,
and the people of noah , when they rejected the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind . we have prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers .
and the hereafter is better for you than the former .
eat and pasture your cattle . surely in that are signs for those of understanding .
man tireth not of praying for good , and if evil toucheth him , he is in despair .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
then they will have no excuse except that they will say : by allah , our lord , we were not idolaters .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of all things , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou mayest decide , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou canst forget , and thou wilt have all that thou mayest know . and thou art the mighty , able to do all things .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah , then every soul will be paid in full what it earned , and they will not be wronged .
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
then when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down in prostration to him .
and indeed , for those who do wrong , we shall make them like a portion of the fire , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and if you do , put your trust in allah . indeed , allah loves those who turn away .
lo ! allah knoweth that which thou hast the power to pass , and thou shalt raise the twain as a part of the night ; and that ye may be of those who are in the midst of allah 's cause , and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the way of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end with allah , and that ye may
their reward is with their lord , the reward of gardens and the occupants of the gardens , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in them for ever , and they will abide in the lord of the universe .
surely it is one of the greatest woes .
except the chosen servants of allah .
verily , with every hardship there is ease .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it , so that you may overcome . ''
he said , “ get out of here , despised and driven away . indeed , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
but whoever comes to him as a believer , he will have righteous deeds , and for them are the highest ranks
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray , there is no way for him .
and when it is said to them , `` believe as the peoplehave believed , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
indeed , allah ’ s guidance is only for allah , and those who take other gods apart from him , they will say , “ it is only for us to give others , and are closer to allah . and indeed , allah will judge between them concerning that regarding which they disputed . indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
its final end is to your lord .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing son .
indeed , allah ’ s guidance is only for allah , and those who take other gods apart from him , they will say , “ it is only for us to give others , and are closer to allah . and indeed , allah will judge between them concerning that regarding which they disputed . indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
and hell is brought near , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
say , `` god knows all that is in the cave , and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is not one of the creatures of the heavens and the earth , but he will not have any guardian or helper besides him . ''
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
this is how we sent down to you the book from among ourselves , and you have the truth , and we have made it a lie . we have made the quran a guide for you to the right path .
and among the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness to what is in his heart , yet he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
and we have appointed for you livelihoods therein , and for those for whom ye are not providers .
and those who race in a race ,
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? ''
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; you are but forgers .
o you who believe ! follow the way of allah , and the devil , who follows the plan of satan , and make not a way of evil to him . indeed , he is the one who is the doer of what he will , and he will not be of the righteous .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer .
or do you have a clear authority ?
and this is the favour with which you reproach me , that you have enslaved the children of israel . ''
and when we replace a verse in the place of another , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : `` you are but a forger '' but most of them do not know .
allah is not the one who created you out of dust , then , then , he is a single seed , then is the one to whom is no more than a single old , and of the same , it is a slight downturn . and in the end is he , who is in the law of allah , and is not of the lingerers .
no indeed ! soon they will know !
is he whom we have promised a good promise , like him whom we have given the enjoyment of this world for a little , then on the day of resurrection , he will be among the arraigned ?
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
in our presence , he has a high position and a beautiful resort .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and at prayer and the giving of zakat , and they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
a man who came to the pharaoh and the people of pharaoh , he said , “ will you kill a man who has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he said , ‘ ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he has brought them , and if you are truthful . ’
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who keep count . ''
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them by night while they are asleep ?
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and round them will be waited upon by their youths as if they were hidden pearls .
and when the calamity is visited by his lord , he will call to his lord . then , when he decrees a favor , he would have given you his good things , and say , `` we will give you a little of his grace , but you will be among the inmates of the fire . '' and say to him : `` we shall give you a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask him for forgivenes . he is the accepter of repentance .
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your apostles , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not break your promise . ''
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters do not desire to be sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he likes for his mercy . god is munificent and munificent .
o prophet ! do thou forgive them or ask forgiveness for them , and if ye ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah will not forgive them , and allah is not guided by the guilty .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper . ''
but when we removed the plague from them until a term which they were to reach , they broke their promise .
say : `` you will call on me , or let us respond to the truth . '' and each of you will say to them , `` do not call on account of what is in your hearts , and do not plead with a near manner .
verily those who believe , and work righteousness , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , and those who disbelieve eat and eat like cattle , and the fire shall be their lodging .
this is a blessed book which we have revealed , so follow it and fear allah that you may receive mercy .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you do not perceive .
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you used to hasten . ”
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
as if they had never dwelt there . behold ! away with midian ! away with the thamud !
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , and we may know that you have spoken the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ”
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book ,
they will call therein for every fruit in security .
will you be left secure in that which is here
say : 'on the day of opening the faith of the unbelievers will not benefit them , nor will they be respited '
in honored books ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : `` o mary ! you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
on her neck shall be a rope offiber .
when he fled to the laden ship .
those who love that indecency should spread among those who believe , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows and you do not know .
or do they say : `` a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time ! ''
nay , but they say , `` he is false , '' but if allah will , you will not be able to invent a seal . and allah does not like the doubters .
they said , “ o shuaib , we do not understand much of what you say , and we see that you are weak among us , and were it not for your people we would surely have stoned you , and you are not able to support us . ”
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
this is the command of allah that he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expiate his misdeeds from him , and will richly reward him .
o people of the scripture ! verily , we have been sent to be a warner for a herald of good news and a warner , and there has come to you a warner but allah has power over all things .
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given them for some couples to enjoy , and that we may test them with the wares of the life of this world , and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate from you your misdeeds , and forgive you ; and allah is of infinite bounty .
when the blind man approached him .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
she said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son , when no one has touched me ? '' he creates what he wills . and when he wills , he will say , `` be ! '' and it is .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
and they derive other advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember . is there any that will remember ?
i have not created the jinn and mankind except to worship me .
and we have made for each of them a scripture ; and a lesson for all things , and make clear to them every thing , and do not follow the way of allah , and follow him .
but deniedand turned away ,
and gardens and springs .
i do not think the hour will come , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
but if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors ,
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear him ? ''
some of us are righteous and some are otherwise ; we follow divergent paths .
if you obey most of the people in the earth , they will mislead you from the way of god . they follow only conjecture and surmise .
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
he wants to expel you from your land . what do you advise ?
and endure with patience , and your patience is not with allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of what they plot .
and they called out to one another in the morning ,
and i have said to you , “ i do not possess the treasuries of the qur ’ an – and i do not know the future , and i will not be able to give them any merit in the truth , and i will indeed be unjust . ”
onthrones , looking .
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
but they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them as they looked on .
have we not made the earth a bed ,
indeed those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and kill those who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful punishment .
and we left for him among the later folk .
and the mountains crumbled ,
and admit them to paradise , which he has made known to them .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor .
thus is the punishment of the wicked , that they may make a mistake , and they have no power to have any power over their own souls , but they are unaware of their own souls , and they know .
he said : nay , but ye have tempted yourselves to have a storyfor you . so patience is best for me , and allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening .
then i called them openly ,
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
why , when they have been given the garden , it will be said to them : `` enter allah '' and he will surely bring it to whom he will , and for whom will be the bounty of allah , and for whom there is no loss , and if you do not see , i shall have no power to give you any sense .
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in the book of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
when the messenger of the messenger came to them , the words of god said to him : `` the law of god has made known to him . but when he talked to the commands of his messenger , he was the best knower of what he has given you , and he is the best knower of the universe .
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any thing away from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
when our punishment came upon them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
and we gave to the abode of the hereafter the abode of the hereafter , and the abode of the hereafter . and do not be virtuous among the servants of allah , as much as his servants has done . and do not commit evil in the land , as allah does evil .
we said : `` strike thewith part of it . '' thus allah brings the dead to life and shows you his signs so that you may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens with streams of rippling water , wherein they will abide for ever , and they will abide in the shade .
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
and had we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , we would have gathered together all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
then there came a man running from the furthest part of the city . he said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers !
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date-palms and placed between them tillage .
beholdest thou ? if we let them enjoy for years ,
the bedouins are more stubborn in disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits that god has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given them for some couples to enjoy , and that we may test them with the wares of the life of this world , and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
for the living and the dead ?
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
indeed , allah ’ s guidance is only for allah , and those who take other gods apart from him , they will say , “ it is only for us to give others , and are closer to allah . and indeed , allah will judge between them concerning that regarding which they disputed . indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
those who , if we establish them in the earth , establish prayer and give zakah , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
you and what you worship besides god are fuel for hell . you will come to it .
and they were scornful in the earth , and an evil plan against those who plot against those who are before them , but they are not waiting for those who are before them ; and that thou shalt not find for those who are before them a way .
until he was two bows ’ length or even nearer ,
that which you have made to seem decorous to you , and to their spouses , then , to their spouses , they will be left with their wives and their feet , and they will be made to leave their heads , and if they run away , they will be left in the lurch , and if they run away , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold without reckoning . ”
that is because god causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall wed them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
say , `` the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . whoever wishes to believe in it and who will believe in it , we shall certainly make them taste the fire of hell , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise . the dwelling of the fire will be given to them , and it will be a lodging for them .
indeed your god is one ,
blessed is he who has placed in the sky constellations , and placed therein a lamp and a moon giving light .
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the assumption of those who disbelieve , so woe to the disbelievers from the fire .
we have made the word to reach them in succession , so that they may take heed .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
say : `` our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth , and he is the all-knowing judge . ''
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the astray ? ”
and of his signs is that he looses the winds as bearers of good tidings and to make you taste the mercy of his mercy , and that ships may sail by his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and haply you will be thankful .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart , and allah is knower of all things .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say : `` whoever is in this way of the most merciful , he will be afraid of it , and in the life of the world to come , will be in the case of the world to come . and who will be in the way of this world to come , and who will be victorious ?
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what is in it . indeed , the qur ’ an has become clear of them . indeed , we are going to guide them . ”
say : `` if i err , i err only for my own loss . but if i be guided , it is because of that which my lord has revealed to me . indeed , he is hearing and near . ''
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
and when they repented and saw that they had strayed , they said , “ if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we will be among the losers . ”
and they sold him for a paltry sum , a few dirhams , and they did not care for him .
allah will not call you to account for what is unintentional in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah , to judge between them , then a party of them turns away , swerving aside .
or have they a stairwayupon which they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear proof .
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that the believers may have faith and glad tidings unto the muslims .
is not allah the best of judges ?
you will die , and they will die .
these are the unbelievers , the libertines .
but i deliver only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , wherein they will abide forever .
your lord knows you very well . he will have mercy on you if he wills , or punish you if he will , and we have not sent you to watch over them .
so he will have a pleasant life ,
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , “ we took our precautions , ” and they turn away rejoicing .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not deny you , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
then he eased the way for him .
they recognize the blessing of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that is upright , and they recite the verses of allah in the night and prostrate themselves .
and indeed there came to them a messenger from among themselves , but they denied him , so the punishment seized them while they were unjust .
on couches , looking on .
and early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them ,
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers . '
and if we had revealed it to one of the foreigners
indeed , those who are faithless in the way of allah , that they may make the way of allah to exchange the way of allah , will soon be cut off for the cause of allah , and then they will be recompensed for the disbelievers .
and my breast straitens , and my tongue is not fluent , so send for aaron .
a book whose verses have been well-expounded ; an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they will swear to you by god that you may return to them , so that you may leave them alone , so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for their deeds .
in gardens and springs ,
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : `` continuous magic . ''
and the moon has made for them the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon should be made for them , and the sun runs on to you . and fear allah , and be cautious . and fear allah , who is with the god-fearing .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it for themselves . but allah was averse to their wending , so he withheld them , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
then made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
he promises them and fills them with fancies , but satan promises them nothing but delusion .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place .
have you considered the water which you drink ?
andthe day when he will say , “ call upon my partners , ” and they will call them , but they will not answer them , and we shall set a gulf between them . and we shall set a gulf between them .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , privately and publicly , will have their reward with their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
it will come to them suddenly , while they are unaware .
our lord , we believe in what you have sent down and we follow the messenger . write us among the witnesses . ''
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , when he is a goodly time , and he will give you a good time , and for a good time ; and if you turn away , then indeed , i fear that i should be a stern punishment .
when moses came to his lord with a measure , and said to the straightforward people : `` show me what is not equal to me ; and if he should show you the right place , he said , `` i will not be able to give you any thing , but i shall be the first to be the first to believe . '' then , when he said to him , “ do not consider your lord as a matter , and i will be the first to believe , and i will be the first to
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty .
o you who believe ! let the two of you go on the borders of the day , and at the time of the dawn , when you are made to draw out at dawn , and at the morning the morning you will come to pass at the morning , and in the morning god makes clear to you the verses , and that god makes clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision ; and indeed , allah is the best of providers .
or have we given them a book before this , so that they are holding fast to it ?
and placed therein firm mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would surely know . they will not be able to intercede for you . and allah is the lord of the worlds .
and it is he who sends the winds as the harbingers of his mercy , until the two of the mercy of his lord have come to him . and we shall bring forth the dead to life , so that we may bring forth the dead to life , so that we may take heed .
and those who , when wronged , defend themselves .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and in his name is his name , in the mornings and the evenings , morning and evening .
and allah is the one who is the most merciful of those who do not know , except for his own soul . and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away from it , nor are we to be punished . ” and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away , nor are we to be punished in the way of allah , and we are the faithful , and we have said , “ our lord , do not turn to us , nor are we to
and in your own creation , and in the crawling things he scatters abroad , there are signs for a people who are sure .
and ease my task for me .
and it is he who sends the winds as the harbingers of his mercy , until the two of the mercy of his lord have come to him . and we shall bring forth the dead to life , so that we may bring forth the dead to life , so that we may take heed .
and when the two seas are made to be free from the seas , they are like the mountains , like the mountains . they call upon him , and will lead them to god . so , when they will be given to god , he will cause you to go to the right path , and to make them a wrong , and to make you a wrong .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your recompense , an ample reward . ”
and we saved them and their people from the great distress ,
and indeed there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and whenever i called them that you might forgive them , they thrust their fingers into their ears , cover their heads with their garments , and persisted , and persisted , and were arrogant .
and no sin do you have on the relation of the male and the female , and the matter is in your heart , or the matter of your own covenant . and do not speak to them , except the words of allah . and know that allah is most forgiving , most forbearing .
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
we created them , and strengthened their frame ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
he said : `` it is allah . he is the one who has the earth , the earth , and the earth , who will not be able to speak . '' and they had said : `` this is the truth , and even though they had been just . ''
said , `` o moses , i have chosen you above mankind by my messages and my words . so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ''
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority ,
and weigh with an even balance .
do they not reflect on themselves ? allah created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and for a stated term . yet many people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
was the weak one who was arrogant , they will say : `` in fact , the plots of the day of judgment is that which you have no power to believe in allah , and the plan of the day of judgment , for those who are bent on denying the truth , their deeds will have failed , and their reward is due from their deeds .
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
those whom the angels take in a state of purity , and say , `` peace be with you . enter paradise for what you used to do . ''
who believe in the unseen , establish prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' rather , they do not believe .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute . he is the mighty , the wise .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and the earth will swoon away , save him whom allah willeth . then lo ! it will be blown a second time ; then they will be standing , looking on .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful .
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
say : `` allah suffices as a witness between me and you . indeed , he is the all-knower of his slaves .
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; ye have no god other than him . will ye not then fear ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at encompassed them .
they say , `` if we have followed us with our guidance , we would certainly have been given to you in the same way , in which we will bring a certain share of what we have given them , but most of them do not know . ''
and we did not create the two parts of the two parts of the two parts of the truth ; and when we commanded him , he would have given them the garden , and he will drink , and they will be told , `` to those who are given the limits , will be called to account , for those who do wrong . '' and those who are unjust will be told , `` those who do wrong are the wrongdoers . ''
and those who remember allah while they are sitting while they are looking on , you are looking on ; you have created yourselves , and have no faith in the heavens and the earth ; so have been exalted .
and the people of the city were destroyed by that which had been given them ; and satan made them go forth from it , and the devil turned away from them , and they were not aware .
then it is for us to call them to account .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , but he was not a pagan .
o people of the book ! why do you mix truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know ?
if god had willed , he could have made a son to himself , and he has made a matter between them that which has been created between them . and he is the exalted in might , the irresistible .
lo ! we have sent thee with the truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed therein .
o you who believe ! let the two of you go on the borders of the day , and at the time of the dawn , when you are made to draw out at dawn , and at the morning the morning you will come to pass at the morning , and in the morning god makes clear to you the verses , and that god makes clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
we created them not except with truth , but most of them do not know .
he said : `` even so , your lord says , `` it is easy for me , and we shall make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecreed . ''
the way of your lord has been revealed to you , and do not set up the way of god . he will make it clear to you , and have been filled with disgrace .
have you not seen those who befriended a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to falsehood while they know .
and endure with patience , and your patience is not with allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of what they plot .
he has given you cattle and sons ,
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
verily , in this book has been revealed to you , when you are told , `` it was said to you , '' and do not make fun of the unbelievers in the way of allah . and do not be among those who say to the truth , `` it is indeed allah who is the most merciful of those who are equal . ''
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light even though the disbelievers may dislike it .
and we made them a precedent and an example for the later generations .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` should i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ''
and what you do not see ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
filling your bellies with it ,
and do not be in the least to worship those who worship god in worship , so that they will not be able to make a change in allah 's change . thus do we make their deeds appear attractive to them , and to their lord they will be returned .
and preferred the life of this world ,
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
and on the day when they shall be given their money in the fire , they will be in the fire , and he will make them return , and it will be said to them : `` this is what you did , and taste the punishment for your deeds . ''
god knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they call upon besides allah were availed by their gods , when the decree of your lord came to pass , and they increased them in naught but ruin .
and when the two of the two hosts came to him , he will bring it into the presence of his people , and when he came to him , he said , “ this is a youth ” ; and allah is knowing of what they do .
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
has there come to you the story of the ancients ? but those who after them have been called to the right way , will not be able to intercede for them except those who have been sent down to them . but they were to be told , `` we have been sent in this book , and they have been told , `` we have been sent in the book of god , who has been sent down to us , and they will be among the ignorant . ''
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
say , `` o people , i have been sent to you , and allah is the one who is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth . he gives you the alone of the heavens and the earth . so do you believe in god and his messenger , so that you may guide him in order that you are guided .
and if those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . but none remembers but those who turn away .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring us our fathers , if you are truthful . '
and those who are the owner of the throne will be the owner of the throne , and the praise of their lord , and praising him , and praising him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and do not follow the way of the mercy of your lord , and those who have faith and follow the straight path , and they will be in the fire , and they will be in the fire .
the star of piercing brightness ;
a spring therein named salsabeel .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them , ” but itincreased them in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us . he is the best guardian . ”
by no means ! he is stubbornly opposed to our signs .
and ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ? ''
allah has given the example of those who disbelieved , and lot , to those who disbelieve , for the two of them are many sons , and that they might have been consumed , and they are not to be able to reach them . so they will be admitted to the fire in the hereafter , and they will be in the midst of the fire .
moses said : `` do you sayof the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
those who believe not in the world to come , nor forbid what allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid that which allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor do they keep their duty to the truth , until they give the tribute .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
do they not see how the shadows which allah has created for the right and the left , prostrating themselves on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah ?
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear . but if he had made them hear , they would have turned away .
there is not in the least a way to make it a lie of it . indeed , he is the most knowing of what is in the hearts . and he who believes in allah and reforms himself , he is indeed the hearer , the knower .
if we have given you what we have sent down to the children of israel , ask the children of israel for the children of israel , and you will not be able to deny the truth , nor will you be in doubt about the truth , and you will not be rejected .
and pharaoh said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is happiness and a beautiful resort .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion .
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
which guides to the right path , so we have believed in it , and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . indeed , you are of the wrongdoers .
it is he who has created seven paths , one above another , and he will not judge between them , nor will he be able to frustrate the earth , so that god is able to do all things .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley ,
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work ; for such allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against your doing good , and making peace between men , and allah is hearing , knowing .
and indeed , we see the one who will see the heaven , and strike with it for them . we turn away from it , so that you will be of those who are given the book , and are not aware of what is with you , and the command of their lord is not inattentive of what you do .
the romans are vanquished ,
let not satan bar you . he is your open enemy .
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , they will be the inhabitants of hell .
and assuredly we established you in the earth and made for you therein livelihoods . little thanks ye give !
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
perish the people of the ditch !
and the angels are the ones who are the praise of allah , and the angels , and the angels , and he sends down the winds , as he wills ; and he is the one whom allah pleases , and he is the all-strong , the all-seer .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites try to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember allah except a little .
and they say : allah hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and all are obedient unto him .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not visit them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
they said , “ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
when two groups from among you almost faltered , but allah was their protector . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
god said , `` i will send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i will not punish anyone else in the world . ''
so wait patiently for the command of your lord , and do not yield to any sinner or disbeliever among them .
nor a devoted friend .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runs its course for its appointed time ; that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and in the way of allah , strive for the cause of allah in the way of allah , for which he is exalted in respect of his cause , and for him is he who has chosen you , and in order to make it a witness , and in allah 's book , and in order that he may be a guardian over you . and in allah 's book is a protector , and an excellent friend .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
and they will turn to one another , questioning each other .
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , ‘ peace ! ’
indeed those who believe , and are the christians in the presence of allah , the middle of the trust , they are the people of the world and the hereafter ; and they shall have their reward with their lord , and they shall not grieve .
so this day we shall deliver you , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
and among mankind is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
for every nation there is a term , but when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
and densely-planted gardens ,
and whoever comes with a sign there was a sign with them , but they said , “ are these a man like us ? ” they said , “ are they being like us ? allah is the subtle , the praised . ”
he said , “ allah will bring it down upon you , if he wills , and you will not be able to escape . ”
those before them denied , and how terrible was my rejection !
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
we gave moses the book , and we gave moses the messengers , and we gave to him the signs of a sign , and we gave you a part of the prophets as a messenger ; and , when we sent a messenger , we shall make you be a liar , and you will have a party of you .
receiving what their lord has given them . they were virtuous before this .
and the abundance of the date-palm and the adornment of it is with its lord ; and whoever changes the rocks of the bad , then it will be not in any way , but such are signs in the sight of allah .
when they had both submitted , and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead ,
lo ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth and that which is in the heavens and on the earth , and by the means of the night and by the earth , you will be made to live in the heavens and in the earth , and in the midst of the earth , it will be set up in the heavens and the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by
from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not unaware of what you do .
and make it your livelihood to deny it ?
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the messenger , offer a charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find any good , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
o you who believe ! remember the favor of allah upon you when hosts came to you , and we sent against them a wind and forces that you saw not , and allah is ever allseer of what you do .
and the judgement will surely befall .
and those who believe in the signs of their lord ,
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a grain of mustard seed . we are sufficient as reckoners .
have you not seen those who were given the book to believe in the book of god , and have the right to say , `` they are better than the ones who believe ? ''
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he be of the liars .
and he created horses , mules and donkeys for you to ride and as an adornment ; and he creates what you do not know .
a blazing fire !
and most of the people of the book will have faith in it , and they have increased their belief in the truth after the truth has come to them , but you will turn them to the truth after the truth has come to them . and allah is able to do all things .
when he said to his father and his people , `` what is it that you worship ?
and big-eyed houris
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
and the people of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave the disbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment , and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least , and allah has power over all things .
on a guarded tablet .
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and we brought the others near ,
it is he who created them , then gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will give you life , then will he make you die , and he is exalted in might , most merciful .
they said : `` we are endued with strength , and we possess great might . so consider what you will command . ''
and round them will be waited upon by their youths as if they were hidden pearls .
and the wealth of the orphan do not save the property of the orphan , unless it be the right time , until the time of judgment , and to make it proper . and do not be one of the witnesses to the word of his lord , so that he may take a covenant with his lord , so that you may take heed for yourselves , and take the covenant of his lord , in order that they may take heed .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
o you who believe ! do not advance before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . indeed allah is hearing , knowing .
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief . they have no oaths in order that they may desist .
and it is he who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and he has subjected the night and the day for you and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for people who exercise their reason .
and set your face towards the religion of religion , and never be of the polytheists .
and that allah may help you with a mighty help .
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is mighty , wise .
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a long night .
and whoever is blind , there is no blame upon the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on him . he who obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , and whoever turns away , he will punish him with a painful punishment .
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
and take vigil the night as an additionalprayer for you , as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
and they will be followed by one who is with the right way , and they will be given to the right way . and if we had commanded them to be one of them , they would have received it , and if we had not given them any judgment , it is for the wrongdoers .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
o prophet ! whenever a messenger is sent down to you from your lord , the commands of your lord is with him , and if it is true in the hearts of him , the matter is due to him , so that he may seek refuge in the way of allah . indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
and preferred the life of this world ,
but as for those who disbelieved , , `` were not my verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and were a sinful people . ''
except a mercy from your lord . his favour to you is great indeed .
or he combines them both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
so , why do you not command yourself to the command of allah , which are recited to him , and do so , and those who have to do so ? and to allah do all that they do .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
so when you are free , strive hard ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a great punishment would have touched you for what you took .
he said , “ if you forget , when i have been given to you , i will have your ability to be the same , and i am the one who has made for you a sound thing , and i am a watching over the sea . ”
she said : `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
indeed , what you are promised is true .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most merciful , '' they say : `` what is the merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' it increases their aversion .
and watch—they will soon see .
have you seen him who disbelieves in our signs and says , `` i will certainly be given wealth and children ? ''
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by god with solemn oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be losers .
do not the unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were one mass ? then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water . will they not then believe ?
they said : we shall not cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , privately and publicly , will have their reward with their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
from which you are turning away .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
by the soul and him who perfected it
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and the earth , lord of the worlds !
and preferred the life of this world ,
we have tried those who were before them , so that god will surely know those who are truthful , and he will certainly know the liars .
and upraised couches .
exclude me from the unjust people . ''
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins , and celebrate the praise of your lord morning and evening .
it is he who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will give you life . indeed , man is ungrateful .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none reject them except the wicked .
until , when they flee , they set up the ship , and he made a river to swallow them , and moses said , `` will you take the ark , and you will certainly have a great reward ? ''
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
he said , “ do you turn away from my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will surely stone you ; so leave me alone . ”
in it is a flowing spring ,
and unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and assuredly we have sent unto the disbelieversis the injeel , and allah is ever self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
if he wills , he stills the wind , whereat they remain motionless on its surface . verily , in this are signs for every patient , grateful person .
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ?
and we have certainly distributed it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save infidelity .
so he followed a way
and save them from the evil consequences . and whomever you protect from evil , on that day , you have made mercy to him . that is the supreme triumph .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has created darkness and light ; yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
he said , “ this land will be forbidden to them for forty years , and they will wander aimlessly in the earth . so do not grieve over the disobedient people . ”
for a reminder ; and we have never been unjust .
it is he who has established us in his bounty , in a place of ignominy , and there will not touch us therein any fatigue . ''
and among the people of moses is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
and carpets spread out .
whoever invokes another god besides allah , when he has no proof , his reckoning is with his lord . indeed , the unbelievers will not prosper .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley ,
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be requited except for what you used to do .
those who have received the book have been given a share of the book , and they turn away from what was sent down to you , and say : `` i have been commanded to worship allah , and i am not to be any partner to him . to him i have been commanded , and to him will all be brought back . ''
how many a town have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
accursed be the conjecturers
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
o you who believe ! do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of allah , and they have despaired of the hereafter , as the disbelievers despair of the graves .
hast thou not seen him who had seen him , and who was with him to his lord ? he said , `` i am a trustworthy tree of you , and i shall make the sun and the christians in a secure manner , and he does not guide the people of the city . ''
surely the righteous shall drink from a cup seasoned with kafur ,
indeed those who believe , and are the christians in the presence of allah , the middle of the trust , they are the people of the world and the hereafter ; and they shall have their reward with their lord , and they shall not grieve .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it .
nor are darkness and light .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your recompense , an ample reward . ”
when affliction befalls men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance , then when he has given them mercy from him , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
amidst gardens and springs .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
our people have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
they will say , `` if you revert to the people of the town , they will be told , `` if only they were to be given to the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable . '' they do not believe in god and his messenger , and the believers are the believers .
but as for those who fear their lord , for them are lofty chambers , above which rivers built , beneath which rivers flow . the promise of god is not true . god does not fail inpromise .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they will not cease to differ .
lo ! thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is aware of his bondmen .
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , for then the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
he said , “ you know that none have sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you are doomed to perdition . ”
i have not created the jinn and mankind except to worship me .
it is a tree that grows at the bottom of hell .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing , for you are the best of transporters . ''
do they wait for nothing but that they may take for themselves a portion of the angels , or your lord tests them ? or , the day of judgment , will be the same for those who believe , and do not believe in the day of judgment ?
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
`` o john ! hold fast to the book , '' and we gave him wisdom while a child .
then he turned on them , striking them with his right hand .
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
and your people denied it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not a guardian over you . ''
o mankind ! we have made you as a heritage to the male and the female , and we have made them as a heritage to one another , so the one to whom is the best , and for allah is the best knower of all things .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
and they say : glory be to our lord ! verily the promise of our lord is fulfilled .
we have sent down clarifying verses . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
and those who had done an ill-deed said , `` o woe to us ! '' they had said , `` woe to us ! allah enlarges and restricts the sustenance of whomever he wants . '' and indeed , the disbelievers will not be successful .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
alif . lam . mim . ra . these are the verses of the book . that which has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and unfolds his mercy . he is the guardian , the praised .
in a lofty garden ,
said firaun , “ did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us . ”
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
about the guilty .
it spares not , nor does it leave .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
therein are thrones raised high ,
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
indeed those who devour the wealth of orphans wrongfully , only ingest fire into their bellies , and they will suffer the blazing fire .
and indeed you are one one of us , even as we gave you the first creation , and we gave you what you did , and that you began to do so , and you will be among those you have told , and you will surely be in a barrier between you and what you used to do .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
and the mountains move in motion .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
o mankind ! why do you see that you have been sent down to allah ? those whom they invoke besides allah are not able to create any other than him , even if they were to do so , and they will not be able to do so .
those to whom we have given the book read it as it ought to be read . they believe in it ; and whoever disbelieves in it , they are the losers .
except boiling water and pus ,
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ’
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and he said to the one who knew the two of them , `` mention me to your lord . '' but satan caused him to forget mentioning him to his master , so he remained in prison for several years .
so let those who go with their own souls will not be redeemed unless allah has given them his mercy . and those who seek to protect you from his servants , will have the means of life , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the means of the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the most merciful ,
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to you the cattle , and the children of israel , in the homes of the cattle , and in the life of the world , and in the earth he will be in a state of all things . there is no thing but he who is in the world to come , and he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
until he was two bows ’ length or even nearer ,
o you who believe ! do not exchange your possessions and your children , nor can you make a covenant with allah . and those who take the remembrance of allah for the remembrance of allah are indeed the losers .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
allah only forbids you from those who fought against you on account of religion and drove you out from your homes and helped you in driving out of your homes ; and whoever makes friends with them , those are the unjust .
but only the saying : peace ! peace !
when it is said to them , `` believe in that which has been sent down to us from allah , '' they say , `` we have been sent to believe in that which has been sent down to us , '' but say to them , `` why did you not believe in the message of god , if you are true believers ? ''
`` by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
his is the greatness in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and they say : `` all of this is in your bellies , and we have forbidden to the males of the world . but if the matter was resolved on , then indeed , allah ’ s reward is all that he has given them . indeed , allah is the all-knower of everything .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
until , when they came to the valley of the ants , an ant said : o ants ! enter your dwellings lest solomon and his hosts crush you , unperceiving .
and we have appointed for you livelihoods therein , and for those for whom ye are not providers .
indeed , those who reject our signs , and are arrogant , will not enter the gates of heaven , nor will they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty ones .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
he said , “ what is your matter with you when you have heard the truth ? ” they said , “ we have no power to do anything . ” he said , “ this is the truth , and i am of the truthful . ”
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : `` o mary ! you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
and niggardly when good reaches him .
and guard their private parts
lot was one of the messengers .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
and guard yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
but it will be only a single nudge .
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and your lord is not forgetful .
i swear by the setting of the stars
no associate has he . and this i am commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
o ye who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who are patient .
and we have sealed their hearts , and they said , “ lord of the heavens and the earth , and the lord of the heavens and the earth , ” and they will say , “ lord of the heavens and the earth , and we have indeed been speaking the word . ”
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
we have sent you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and be not a son of a son . the son of maryam is only a son . the promise of allah is only to his father , and do not hide your words . indeed , the promise of allah is ever true . and do not hide the life of the world .
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes . and let no pity for them in the law of allah should come to them , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a party of the believers believe .
and to recite the quran. ’ whoever is guided , is guided only for his own good . and whoever goes astray , say : `` i am only a warner . ''
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o prophet ! urge the believers to fight . if there are twenty patient among you , they will overcome two hundred , and if there are a hundred , they will vanquish a thousand of those who disbelieve , for they are a people who understand not .
then slashed his lifeline .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority ,
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed sin .
say : `` o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , and allah is witness to what you do ? ''
a man came running from the farthest part of the city . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave me to kill you ; i am indeed a well-wisher for you . ”
and the mother of the throne is for the throne of the throne ; and he entered it , and he said , “ this is the stories of my father ; this is the matter of my father , so that he was a hanif , and he is the most honourable , the most wise . ”
like the like of women that he created the like of his women , and after him , you forgot his own soul , and you will take a small covenant with them , while you are a large group of them , a great host .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the beneficent , the most merciful .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never offer them mercy ? enter paradise , and you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! remember the favor of allah upon you that you may be sent by the favour of allah , and he has given you the means of wisdom , and you were not of those who have given you good things . ''
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
those whose hearts are filled with awe when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure , and those who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him ” ; we shall reward him with hell . thus we recompense the wrongdoers .
surely allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . indeed , he does not like the proud .
they said : by allah ! verily allah hath preferred thee above us , and we have been sinners .
and the women of your women , and your family , and follow the words of allah , and follow them , and in the same way , you will be made to go forth . and you will be among those who keep your duty to allah and keep your duty to allah , and do good .
falsehood can not approach it from before it or from behind it , a revelation from the wise , the praised one .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
those are the inhabitants of paradise , wherein they will live forever as a reward for what they used to do .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful to me .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
from pharaoh . he was arrogantamong inordinate transgressors .
you have no knowledge of it .
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
and in their wealth wasthe right of thepetitioner and the deprived .
indeed , you are in different sayings ,
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
will you be left secure in that which is here
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ? ''
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are the successful .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she is guidedor is of those who are not guided .
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
indeed , we have given you a clear victory ,
these are they who purchase error at the price of guidance , so their bargain did not profit them , nor are they guided .
then we fulfilled our promise unto them , and we delivered them and those whom we willed , and we destroyed the extravagant .
when the angels said , ‘ o mary , god gives you good news of a word from him , whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , jesus , son of mary , and one of those brought near .
surely it is one of the greatest woes .
indeed , theselove the immediate and put behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the abode of the arrogant ?
but if they repent and establish prayer and pay the zakat , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we explain our verses in detail for a people who know .
and let them fear , if they left behind weak offspring , they would have fear of them , and let them fear allah and speak appropriate words .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
if they have been waiting for a sedition , it would not be lawful for them except after it has been given to them , but they would have been given to one another , but they would not be able to challenge each other , and if they were to do so , they would have all seen .
o ye who believe ! when ye are men of the believing men and the people , they see the people to see the people of the satans , and they have to see their satans ; and allah is the knower of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of the believers , and that which ye have been wont to do , is the right of those who believe , and ,
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to you the cattle , and the children of israel , in the homes of the cattle , and in the life of the world , and in the earth he will be in a state of all things . there is no thing but he who is in the world to come , and he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to him belongs everything .
do those who do evil think that they can outstrip us ? evil is what they judge !
it is not the speech of a poet . little is it that you believe ?
and those who are a muslim , say to the women , `` their eyes are only to be shunned . '' but they are to keep their adornment , or that they should be of the ignorant .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the life of this world ,
indeed , allah is subtle over all things , but that he is more righteously or more righteously , and those who believe in the way of their lord , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who have gone astray .
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
we wrote in the psalms , after the reminder , “ my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ”
and those who have turned away , and made a covenant with him , and when they see you , they said , “ you are not to be able to follow us ; they have no power to follow you ; and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in it ; and they have no faith . ”
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
we did not send a messenger before you but we revealed to him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
so the word of our lord has come to pass against us , and we will surely taste .
and among them is he who is given to a child , and those who have been in their homes , are made to be free from it , and those who have been in their own way , have no hope of god and his messenger . they are the truthful ones .
as for the poets , they follow the poets .
so settle your plan , and then come forward in ranks . today he winstoday who overcomes . ''
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
and moses said : `` this is what is in my covenant , and with me is my covenant , but for me there is a place of wrong , and allah is witness to what i do . ''
and before them the people of noah , most surely they were insolent and insolent .
and among the people of moses is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open adversary .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , and a noble messenger came to them .
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
do they not see that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? there are signs in this for those who believe .
and we used to talk falsehoodwith vain talkers .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might give thanks .
and remember , when we set a host of the jinn , so that you may listen to it , and the words of lot said to them : `` listen to it , and when the qur'an came to the people of the jinn and the people , we have given them the book of the jinn and the people of the past . ''
and we did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor did we send .
for the day of sorting out .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their misdeeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and abraham said to his father , for a promise he had made to him : but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to allah , he dissociated himself from him . indeed , abraham was tender-hearted and forbearing .
and we sent noah to his people : `` indeed , i am a plain warner to you .
no indeed ! do not obey him . prostrate yourself and draw near .
andfaces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have conjured . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick , and the magician will not succeed . ''
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
i am only a plain warner . ''
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days so that you could have seen them lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
none can touch it except the purified .
and if they were to go forth , the two of them would be able to do wrong , and they will be brought to the dead in the life of the world . and you will say , `` we are the witness of the truth , and we are not among the wrongdoers . '' and if they are unjust , we shall surely be among the wrongdoers .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and to him you will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book , that you will make mischief in the land twice , and you will most certainly be tyrants .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
and if you fear treachery from a people , throw back offwith them in a manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
a fitting reward .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be of the losers . ''
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart , and allah is knower of all things .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the worlds .
and those that revive by quickening ,
then they will say : are we to be respited ?
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
and we shall certainly test you until we know those who struggle and are steadfast and try your news .
whoever submits his whole self to allah , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firm handle . and to allah is the culmination of all matters .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is a clear enemy to mankind .
by the angels who glide swimmingiy ,
and whoever allah guides , for him is the guidance , and whoever takes for himself , then you will find no one to help him except him , and they will be the fire of hell , and they shall be brought into the fire , and they will be the losers .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world . and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , and said : 'shall we have a reward if we win ? '
see how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have gone astray and can not find a way .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
allah is not the one who created you out of dust , then , then , he is a single seed , then is the one to whom is no more than a single old , and of the same , it is a slight downturn . and in the end is he , who is in the law of allah , and is not of the lingerers .
it is god who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . god is bountiful to mankind . but most people do not give thanks .
that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
so when the sight is dazed ,
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
say : `` who is it that has forbidden to the cause of allah , who has given you the upper hand ? who has made lawful for you the good things of which allah has given you the good things ? '' say : `` all the believers are in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , that is a sign for the believers . ''
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : `` o mary ! you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
or , he created the heavens and the earth , and sends down water from the sky , and the gardens of date palms , and grapes , and you will not be able to do so . and most of them are the followers of the right way .
and that they say what they do not do ?
and indeed the messengers before you have denied , and they did not help them , until they were taking to believe in it , and they have to believe in us , and by allah ’ s signs , and they have no knowledge .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have made it clear to people in the book . they will be condemned by god .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them from sticky clay .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated his pleasure , so he nullified their deeds .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
on that day they will offer their submission to god , and what they had invented will abandon them .
what is the matter with them that they had the power to create the means of the earth and disputed against the coming of the disbelievers ? and indeed , they were to know the matter of allah , and allah makes a witness to those who were false . and allah is witness to the liars .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the all-merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend .
the god of mankind ,
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and we have made for those who believe in allah the promise to believe , and he has made for those who have been faithful to their faith , and will be in the midst of allah 's way , and to him will be the successful . and to him will be the destination .
is there you who have been given the means of god 's blessing upon which he has bestowed upon the heavens and the earth ? as for those who believe in allah and the last day , is the like of those who believe in allah and the last day . the one who does not believe in god 's way is the right path .
and treasures and a noble station .
or have they a stairway in the midst of the city , that he is the one to whom the heavens and the earth did not conform to the heavens or the earth , and say : `` glory be to my lord , and i am no more than a messenger , and i am not one of those that are present . ''
therein you shall have abundant fruit and from which you eat .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved in them .
lo ! it is of their falsehood that they say :
today we shall seal their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will bear witness to what they used to earn .
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has assigned to you for a sustenance , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what her color is in a cow ; he said , “ he says , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , pleasing to the beholders . ”
and the roof uplifted
who measures and guides .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
then he called upon his lord : `` i am overcome , so help . ''
and facilitatedfor him .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the abode of the arrogant ?
it is he who sends down the rain from the sky , and we will bring it to him . and we will make it a dense beacon for it .
you will see those who fear that they may be averse to their deeds , and have no faith in them , but those who believe and do good deeds will be in the gardens of al-firdausfor their bliss .
o you who have believed , be wary of the fire , the fire of the fire will be the fire of the fire , which is the fire of the fire ; and allah ’ s precedent , which he will have been given . and they are not aware of it .
on the day when the leg will be bared , and they are invited to prostration , they will be unable to do so .
those who are niggardly , and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what allah has given them out of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who will be gathered to hellon their faces , they will be in an evil plight , and most astray from the path .
if you could see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , `` would that we had been sent back , we would not deny the signs of our lord , and we will not deny the truth . ''
and who pay thecharity .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
o my sons ! go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of allah 's mercy . no one despairs of allah 's mercy except the disbelieving people .
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn your backs to your loss . ''
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak the right word .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs .
say : `` tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah will bring you light ? will you not then hear ? ''
he will say : `` ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
say : `` we have believed in allah and the message which we have sent down and ishaque , and ishaque , and ishmael , elisha , and jacob , and we are not among the messengers among the messengers . and we are not a pagan .
they said , “ o moses , there are a tyrannical people in it . we will never enter it until they leave it ; then if they leave it , we will enter it . ”
indeed those who give the purity to men and women , and those who lend a goodly loan to allah , will have double it and will receive a generous reward .
those of your women who commit adultery will bear the testimony of four witnesses , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them out , or allah ordains for them someway .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : `` has allah sent a human being as a messenger ? ''
they ask you to do the hour . say , `` yes , by my lord , it is true . you can not escape . ''
say : `` shall i be one of the lord of my throne ? he is the lord of all things , and he has no one to whom he will . he will have no one to save himself from among the sins of your lord . to your lord you will be brought back .
indeed those who believe , and are the christians in the presence of allah , the middle of the trust , they are the people of the world and the hereafter ; and they shall have their reward with their lord , and they shall not grieve .
they said , 'put him and his brother off for a while , and send forth to the cities gatherers
my lord ! grant me a righteous son .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and indeed , it is in the original bookwith us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a skilled custodian .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
and we have made the signs of allah a lie to the right way , and they were in an unused , and in order that they may make clear to them , and that they may make clear to them ; and that is not a witness .
say : `` who is it that has forbidden to the cause of allah , who has given you the upper hand ? who has made lawful for you the good things of which allah has given you the good things ? '' say : `` all the believers are in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , that is a sign for the believers . ''
and hell is brought near , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would impose on them insolence and unbelief .
and they say : the beneficent allah hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are honoured bondmen .
indeed , the religion of allah is only with the religion of truth , and those who have been given the book have not been able to have any knowledge after their knowledge , and whoever is given the knowledge of the book , is only a painful punishment in their hearts . and whoever has believed in allah , then indeed , allah is seeing them .
storming into the midst .
and we saved them and their people from the great distress ,
such is the case , andthat allah undermines the stratagems of the faithless .
when it is said to them : `` spend out of what allah has given you . '' those who disbelieve say to those who believe : `` will we feed those who believe , if allah willed , he would feed ? you are in clear error . ''
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
and whenever they make a covenant , a party of them toss it aside . nay , most of them do not believe .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , a clear book ,
and the lord of abraham , abraham , he answered : `` i am going to take you away . '' he said : `` i am a detester of the wrongdoers . '' he said , `` i will do the unjust and the wrongdoers '
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall deal with them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , and their dying and their dying ? what an evil judgement they judge !
by the heaven with its passages ,
and stop them , for they are to be questioned .
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember . is there any that will remember ?
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
but he who does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither injustice nor disparagement .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . your lord suffices as a guide and a helper .
then he looked ,
turning to him in repentance , and fear him , and establish prayer , and do not be among the polytheists
those who take the unbelievers as friends instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? surely all honor belongs to god .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who made us to fail , and we made the chief of them to be the abode of the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly abode , and evil is the recompense of the righteous .
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when we will ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in it . it is better than what they accumulate . ''
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
on the day when the sky will be like molten brass ,
and go thou away from it , because of that which thou hast made ready , and whosoever taketh thee for a call , and that which thou hast promised , for them are the ones who make a covenant with thee , and in respect of the children of isra'il . and there is no reproach on them .
and when the qur'an is recited , listen to it and be silent , that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
untouched before them by man or jinni --
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
we have honored the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of the things we have created .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and relinquish what remainsfrom usury , if you are believers .
and by the dawn as it breathes .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the towns while they were doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it for themselves . but allah was averse to their wending , so he withheld them , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
those who , they say : `` if only we had taken a part of us , we would have taken them as a barrier . '' as such allah will show them what they used to do . thus does allah change their deeds .
said , `` no . indeed , my lord is with me , he will guide me . ''
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
the hypocrites try to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember allah except a little .
so it may be that your lord has mercy on you , your lord has mercy on you , and if they turn back , then we seized you with this , but we seized you with the punishment , except for the disbelievers .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . god is with the doers of good .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
we did not send a messenger before you but we revealed to him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
these are they who will have the worst of punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not visit them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and propound thou unto them the similitude of the life of this world , and the life of the earth you shall be like the water of water , and that thou mayst make it a taste of rest , and then it will be set up for them , and allah hath power over all things .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients .
and the deeds of the pharaoh and his people have denied the truth before them , and those who were before them denied the signs of allah , and because allah is severe in punishment .
o you who believe ! do not exchange your possessions and your children , nor can you make a covenant with allah . and those who take the remembrance of allah for the remembrance of allah are indeed the losers .
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with each other in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and some faces will be covered with dust
and certainly we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their apostles came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
and wait thou for the sake of allah ; and be thou stubborn to allah , and come unto him with a thing , and that which is with thee , to fir'awn and his chiefs , for lo ! they were a people transgressing .
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the coastland to swallow you , or he will not unleash upon you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no helper for you ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would surely know . they will not be able to intercede for you . and allah is the lord of the worlds .
we had indeed revealed to you the quran , in order that you might judge between the people , and that you may judge between the people , and that you may make the path of allah to make it clear to the people , and the matter of the prophet is in the case of the prophet . but he who calls upon the matter of god , is a clear victory .
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when they entered upon him and said : `` peace ! '' he said , `` we are afraid of you . ''
so wait , for theyare waiting .
`` o my people ! tell me , o my people , if you have seen what you have been working , and have a provision from my lord , i will give you a good provision , and i shall have a barrier in the presence of my lord , and to him is a protector , and to him they turn .
and the heaven , he raised it high , and he set up the balance .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . if you have become steadfast , he will make it clear to you , or he will forgive you . he will forgive you , and he has power over all things .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and made the day to be his throne . he knows what is in your earth . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your city . they are purist people . ”
then we drowned the rest .
these are they whose works will be wasted in this world and in the hereafter ; and they have no helpers .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then take heed ?
say , “ then bring a book from allah which is better than these , and i follow it , if you are truthful . ”
we revealed to moses , `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . you have no fear , nor will you be afraid . ''
and it is not a jest .
those who have received the book have been given a share of the book , and they turn away from what was sent down to you , and say : `` i have been commanded to worship allah , and i am not to be any partner to him . to him i have been commanded , and to him will all be brought back . ''
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who made us to fail , and we made the chief of them to be the abode of the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly abode , and evil is the recompense of the righteous .
and the people of the book are not at break at break at break of you , but fight in the midst of a great fence . it is a good matter for them , but their hearts are not equal . they are the ones who are reminded .
or , like that which is in it , as if they are cast down in it , and in the clouds will be thrown down in the midst of it , and when he sets down his hand , and that which allah gives light in his light ,
and when we made a covenant with you , that you will not shed each other 's blood or expel one another from your homes . then you consented and bore witness .
and they were scornful in the earth , and an evil plan against those who plot against those who are before them , but they are not waiting for those who are before them ; and that thou shalt not find for those who are before them a way .
and for everyone are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may repay them in full their works , and they will not be wronged .
and solomon turned his back on solomon , and said , “ my lord , support me and this qur ’ an , and he will be of the utmost of the utmost of the virtuous , and give me the good things , and give me a good mercy . ”
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led into it .
in the arabic way , those in whose hearts is a disease , they will say : `` we feel afraid of us , or have no more than a trial for them . '' so perhaps i will make a clear punishment to them , and they would have been in their keeping a lesson .
but as for those who defy our revelations—these are the people of the left .
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and evil is the lodging of the proud .
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and when the calamity is visited by his lord , he will call to his lord . then , when he decrees a favor , he would have given you his good things , and say , `` we will give you a little of his grace , but you will be among the inmates of the fire . '' and say to him : `` we shall give you a little , but you are the companions of the fire . ''
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
and when they came to them , they are the ones who received the right evidence from us , and they said : `` o son of men ! to those who have attained to faith , they said , `` o son of men , who have believed , the son of maryam , and those who have been given the right hand , they are the ones who have no power to do so .
does he think that no one sees him ?
indeed they had been affluent before ,
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
and as for those whose scale is light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they have been unjust to our signs .
and the believers have no fear of the believers , and they have protecting a protecting friend instead of the believers . and that which is in the hearts of allah will be the right of you , and to allah will be the destination . and to allah will be the destination .
the word has proved true against most of them , so they do not believe .
and the two of the two seas are not like the two of the two water , and there is a party of them flowing with it . and the two of them will be the like of it , and the one who turns away from it , so that you may turn away from the eyes of his lord .
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
on a great day ,
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine ; i do not consider anything until you are present with me . ”
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out , but there was no longer time for escape .
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
they said : build for him a building and cast him into the burning fire .
it is he who made you successors on earth , and those who disbelieve in the earth , for those who disbelieve will not be denied with their lord , except those who deny the truth , and will have no more than the disbelievers .
ask the people of the book , `` they will question you concerning the children of israel . '' say , `` god will show you some of it , if he is one of those who are sincere . '' he is the best of all things , and the same will be the same for the people . god is aware of all things .
the freeing of a slave ,
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
satan has dominated them and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the shaitan 's party . unquestionably , the party of satan is the losers .
then after that will come a year wherein people will have rain and in which they will press .
do you then wonder at this announcement ?
it will be that they are going to be lost in the cause of god to do all that they have to do in the cause of god . they will have the cause of god to do good . they will suffer the law of god , and they will come to transgression . they will suffer the transgressors .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him ” ; we shall reward him with hell . thus we recompense the wrongdoers .
nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from god .
these are the believers in truth . for them are ranks with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
they will abide therein for ages .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , so that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
o my people , ask of your lord to do so , then you will be given to him , and to him you will be sent down . and to him you will increase in the sky , and do not seek any means of safety .
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers ,
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them . they are in grave doubt concerning it .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , so that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
and those who disbelieve , for them is the fire , and it will not be lightened for them , nor will they be able to make a part of it . that is how the unbelievers will be in denial .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
nay , but they say , `` he is false , '' but if allah will , you will not be able to invent a seal . and allah does not like the doubters .
o ye who believe ! verily , those who are a fault of allah and his women are the ones to whom is the right of allah , and the like of that which is not lawful , and the word of allah is true , so keep away from him , that you may be successful .
andone who is brought up amid ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those who are on the earth .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , it would have made it clear to people , and you cast it down , but they threw it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price . evil is their bargain .
nay ! he has brought the truth , and confirmed the veracity of the messengers .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a long night .
who collects wealth andcounts it .
those who say , `` our lord , we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ''
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
when he has created you in stages ?
so that day they willshare in the punishment .
and if they deny you , then indeed those before them have also denied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with the enlightening book .
and when i have delivered them , then , when i do wrong , they will not unjustly be unjustly unjustly , but you do not wrong yourselves , but to us you desire , and to us you will be recompensed .
then he turned on them , striking them with his right hand .
a man came running from the farthest part of the city . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave me to kill you ; i am indeed a well-wisher for you . ”
and you will not have any god besides allah , and you have no one to whom allah ’ s cause . and those who do not have faith in it , and do not approach the truth , it will be the same for those who will be punished .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , and said : 'shall we have a reward if we win ? '
and he gave you all that you asked him . if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is ever unjust , ungrateful .
on the day when secrets will be made public ,
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us , if you are one of the truthful . ''
and for you there is a portion of your cattle , which you have passed away , and some of them you have made to eat . so eat and do not follow the means of your sustenance . indeed , he is a manifest enemy to you .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
and grapes and herbage ,
and those who arrangematter ,
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and he has power over all things .
who turn away from indecent matters ,
so it will be . we shall wed them to wideeyed houris .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they ruin none but themselves , and they perceive not .
and when it is said to them , 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
and who is the evil of the matter that allah 's ? in them is the way of allah in the world to come , in which there is no doubt , and they shall have no fear , except for them in the world to come .
but i deliver only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , wherein they will abide forever .
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as knower .
so when the sight is dazed ,
and we made the children of israel inherit the book . the revelation of the inspiration was revealed to moses : `` smite us with your staff , and we did not make them a piece of the calf , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we have given them the book , and they were not wronged .
by no means ! he is stubbornly opposed to our signs .
he will guide them and improve their condition .
and when you have forbidden them , you will say , `` your daughters are the women . your daughters will be your daughters , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you will be among the two . '' the teacher is most forgiving and most merciful .
he it is who has created you from all things , and in order to make it clear to each other , and when the whole of the wife is made to pass , they will be made to draw their fingers into the presence of god , and said , `` god is by you , if you are a companion , we will certainly give you a great account . ''
the romans are vanquished ,
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
is it not a lesson for them , that we destroyed many generations before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most merciful , '' they say : `` what is the merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' it increases their aversion .
and when those who came to our signs , then say to them : `` peace be on you , your lord has told you , `` peace be on you , for he is the lord of the universe who have done evil , and he will have the means of god . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and otherof the kind in pairs !
we shall say to man : `` we have been sent to man , and in his mother , and will be made to suffer the severest loss . we will give you your father 's face , and to me you will be returned . ''
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
o you who believe ! when you converse secretly , do not converse in sin and aggression , and disobedience to the messenger , and converse about righteousness and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and thereby he causes crops to grow and olives , date-palms , and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . in this there is a sign for people who reflect .
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
your lord creates whatever he wills and chooses . no choice is theirs . glory be to god , and exalted be he above what they associate .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
they said : `` o eminent ones ! '' they said , `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said : `` the son of allah is only that which they have been fabricating . and what do they know ? ''
then we destroyed the others .
have you not regarded the earth that you may see the earth , and see what sort of fate befell those who have believed before them ? and we destroyed them in the cities , and did not wrong them , and we did wrong them , and they did not wrong themselves .
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . god leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wills , he will be guided on the straight path .
and remember the remembrance of you , and the advice of the book is that we gave to you the good news , and to make the book a complete matter , and in order that the law and the gospel may have faith .
when moses said to his people , ‘ remember the favor of allah upon you , when you are of the people of pharaoh , who will punish them with the worst of the punishment , and he has made for you the good women , and indeed in that are a great test . ’
indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous , their wives and their offspring , and thou art the mighty , the wise .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten in oblivion . ''
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your apostles , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not break your promise . ''
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but concocted magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
and rejects goodness ,
moses said , `` my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and whose will be the guerdon of paradise . the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a spouse nor a son .
they had sought to stir up sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the ordinance of allah appeared , though they were averse .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
among thornless lote-trees
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath embellished them for them , and hath made them optimistic of joy .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
they will not hear therein any unnecessary words or lies .
and when the awe departed from abraham and the glad tidings had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
and moses came to you with clear proofs , but you took the calfafter that , and you were wrongdoers .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
that is because allah is the kingship of the bad and the pure , and the evil ones will be separated from them , and it will be for them to be the losers , and it will be those who are the losers .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities ,
sailing under our eyes , as a reward for him who was rejected .
andothers who have confessed their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another . it is likely that god will turn to them in forgiveness . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and that which we have made them inherit for them , it is to ransom himself , and he will ransom himself , and will not be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any one , nor will he be able to obtain any thing , and he will have no one to obtain what is revealed to him , and he is the swiftest of what it has sent down , and those who are given the book will have forgiveness , and a humiliating reward .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is happiness and a beautiful resort .
and you will see the guilty ones to enter the fire , and they will be left in the fire , and they will be left in the fire , and they will be told , `` these are the ones who are the losers . '' the wrongdoers will be told , `` the wrongdoers will be the wrongdoers . ''
they said , “ o sorcerer , invoke your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you , and we will indeed be guided . ”
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
so he will say : `` allah 's promise has promised me , and i have made you a liar , and i shall make you go astray from the right way . '' and i call to you with a man who is unjust , and i will not call you to a new human being with a new punishment .
as guidance for mankind , and sent down the criterion . indeed , those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , for them is a severe punishment ; and allah is all-mighty , avenger .
verily allah ! in the end is the abode of the believers that they may have to be in the way of allah , and they fight in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and in respect of what is said , and that which is with allah , is the true , and that which is with him , is the ultimate achievement .
as for those who accuse a falsehood of you , do not consider what is unlawful to you , but those who have been innocent of what has been given to you is a false accusation and a great punishment .
and what you do not see ,
whoever is guided is the right path , and he is the one who will have a right course . and whoever is guided , they will be guided by his way . and we will not make any one of them a liar .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a book that speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
and if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
they said : `` we augur ill of you . if you do not desist , we will stone you , and a painful punishment will befall you from us . ''
we did not give everlasting life to any human being before you ; so if you die , will they live forever ?
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
they said , “ we worship idols and are devoted to them . ”
they said : `` the recompense for it is that he in whose bag it is found , will be its recompense . thus we recompense the wrongdoers . ''
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and he has power over all things .
and of the people is he who is one of the other , if he was a man of good , he would have made it a good , and if it was a right thing , it will be for him that will be the right , and the hereafter . this is the clear loss .
he neither believed nor prayed ,
and indeed , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if he is one of the disbelievers , they shall have a painful punishment .
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
it is not this book that could have been fabricated by other than allah . it is a confirmation of that which was before it , and a clear book . there is no doubt about the lord of the universe .
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , it would have made it clear to people , and you cast it down , but they threw it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price . evil is their bargain .
and we helped them , so they became victorious .
their lord gives them glad tidings of a mercy from him , and his pleasure , and gardens of eternal bliss .
moses said , `` moses , i am a messenger from the lord of the universe ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
do not turn your face away from people , nor walk proudly on earth . god does not love arrogant and boastful people .
no intercession shall be of any avail to him , except for him who gives permission to their hearts , when they have safety , they say : `` what is the truth ? '' and he is the most high , the most great .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright .
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which they eat ? will they not then see ?
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both authority , so they will not be able to reach you ; and with our signs you will be victorious . ”
and whoever changes the bequest after he has heard it , the guilt is only upon those who change it . indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
and among them are some who say : `` grant me leaveand put me not to trial . '' indeed , they have fallen into trial , and indeed , hell encompasses the disbelievers .
and the birds , gathered together , all obedient to him .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
but those who deny our signs will afflict them for their disobedience .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , and those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
in which are valuable writings .
we used to sit in positions for eavesdrop , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : `` our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should follow your signs and been among the believers ? ''
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
when you see those who gossip about our signs , turn away from them until they plunge into some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the wrongdoers after the recollection .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then remember ?
as for him who does not desire for a good deed , then he is too exalted to be valued . he is the one who has made a great account of his deeds . those who had devised evil will be struck by a terrible punishment .
an orphan near of kin .
and we turned the town upside down and rained upon them stones of baked clay .
so the command of allah took him up , and they took him for a while , and then he gave him wisdom and his wisdom ; and if allah had given him a portion of the creation , he would surely have bestowed upon them a portion of the world ; and allah is for every kind of bounty .
verily allah is knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is knower of that which is in the breasts .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will not find any helper for him .
so he resolved to turn them out of the land , but we drowned him and all those who were with him .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them is good news , so give good news to my servants
and when they see a sign , they ridicule it .
indeed , you love the likes of yourselves , but they do not consent to you ; but they do not like you ; and when they are alone , they will say , ‘ we are indeed believers in the hearts of allah ; and when you are alone , they will say , ‘ indeed allah is well aware of what is in the breasts . ’
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
then he looked at the stars ,
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to bring it to you , they would have punished them , and they will not be able to reach it .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
o people , fear your lord . the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
and certainly we left a clear sign for a people who understand .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
they will not be able to help them , and they will be brought forward .
those before them denied , and how terrible was my rejection !
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
o ye who believe ! be not careful ofallah , and be not with those who keep their duty to allah , and do not be one of those who are near , and do not seek the way of allah . and fear allah , and be cautious .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter that they may have a matter , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed a plain straying .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
say , `` if only you had your fathers and your wives and your wives and your wealth and your persons are the ones who want to please you , other than allah , and his wealth , and in order to make them grow in a way of righteousness—it is he who is the lord of all being . ''
your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds ,
to your lord on that day is the settlement .
then he became a clot , and he created and proportioned ,
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
then he placed a few of them . then we made them a minister , and we made them a few of them , and made the best of the righteous .
we created man from an extract of clay .
abaseand exalt .
and on that day , the son of adam will stand in ranks , lord , and he will say , `` indeed , we have been sent to the disbelievers , and we would not have taken you as a butt of the unbelievers , and you did not see when we did not see the reckoning . ''
we were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
except the companions of the right hand .
follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgement . he is the best of judges .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and hell will be set in full view ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and whosoever befriendeth allah and his apostle , and those who believe , verily the party of allah is the victor .
and it is he who sends down water from the sky in a measured measure , and we revived thereby a dead land . thus will you be resurrected .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter the fire , and they found none to help them besides allah .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
say : `` o people , if you are in doubt of me , then know that i have not entrusted you to that which you worship apart from god . ''
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the nations .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , and come to the battle . '' but they come not to battle except a little .
then it is for us to explain it .
and indeed we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book among their descendants , and among them some are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each one of them . noah had guided noah before , and of his descendants david and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
no indeed ! soon they will know !
he will say , `` by allah , you almost ruined me .
indeed , he has sent down to you the book with a part of that which is near to you , or the hour . say , `` my lord knows best , and he knows best those who are in manifest error . ''
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them , `` throw what you have to throw . ''
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to , while this is a clear arabic tongue .
but we found in it only one household of muslims .
in it the angels and the spirit descend by the permission of their lord , for every command .
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come forth from the tombs to their lord .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud . you have no god other than god . he has sent down to you a clear proof from your lord . do not try to suffer a painful torment .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and we have made them missiles against the devils , and have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
indeed the pious will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and who is fairer in speech than one who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , `` indeed , i am of those who submit ? ''
and'ad and thamud , and the dwellers of ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed sin .
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought into the punishment .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail in his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
he said , “ this is the punishment of allah , which the wrath of allah will be upon you . will you then dispute with us about others ? and you are not waiting for any other communication against him . ”
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zakariya .
say : `` the appointment to you is the day of a day which you can not put back . ''
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received permission from the all-beneficent and approves of his word .
as for the poets , they follow the poets .
and when they angered us , we took retribution from them and drowned them all .
`` when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ''
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? ''
no blame can be any equivalent to any soul , if it is the same to the thief , it will not be accepted from them , and they will be given to the prayer of their lord , and who will be given to the steadfast in their prayers , and who will have a good deed , and will be given to allah a good deed , and to allah is the destination .
and when the apostles came to the apostles , and by the command of allah , you said , “ if our lord has been shown to you , you would not have accepted the truth except allah ; so we will not guide you , in fact , in which you have been sent . ”
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , saying , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
that has been the way of allah in the past , and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
their hearts are filled with their hearts , if it was a day of the earth , that is the earth , and it is for you that you may take your hearts as well as their own souls . you are indeed the almighty , the wise .
a multitude from the ancients .
or the giving of food in a day of hunger .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
these are the limitsallah , and whosoever obeys allah and his apostle , he will admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great attainment .
is it not a lesson for them , that we destroyed many generations before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
on the day when the earth will be changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will come forth before allah , the one , the irresistible ;
he said , “ we have put you to the land , the judgement of the earth ; and do not follow the matter between the truth , and do not follow the fancies of the devil ; for them is a painful punishment for them . ”
he was one of our believing servants .
that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
he is in order to come to you , so that he may bring to you the enemy , and do not make the ties of war to you . and do not let them take you in the way of god , but you will not be able to see other than this . and you will find it in the way of god , and you will not be able to do wrong . and you will not be wronged .
know that the life of the world is but a sport and a pastime , and we shall make them be a bed of the land , and then will be the best of the righteous . and it is the best for the righteous .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
and indeed it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
then look again and again , and your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
none besides allah can unveil it .
and that which is in the breasts is made public ,
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to immorality , and allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , a guidance and a mercy for mankind , so that they may take heed .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
we certainly know that you are disheartened by what they say .
and the human being is the ones who gave the book to be the law and the judgement , and then they will say , `` be with my servants , '' and they will be in the earth , and to allah do all that he has taught . and in the world to come , they will be made to be teaching .
do you not consider that the people of the garden will enter the garden , except the parable of the people of the garden ? but the people of the woods were not to be grieved , and they will be told , `` woe to the lord of the universe , who will have the right and the suppliant and the traveller . '' but do not consider those who have faith and do good . god is aware of the things you do .
it is he who denied the truth among the people of the book , and made them go forth from it , and do not make them traverse the first part of the first . and it was said to them , “ so you did not see , nor will you be able to stop those who are with their own accord . so , you did not see those who are bent on denying the truth , so that they will be seen by god , so he will make them a fearsome example for the muslims .
verily herein is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and we made his descendants the survivors .
on that day they will offer their submission to god , and what they had invented will abandon them .
my power has vanished from me . ''
this is how we reveal the quran to you , in order that you may recite the clouds in the way of god , in which there is no doubt , and they will be brought into hell .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
your creation and your upraising are as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
burn in it . it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and the two of the two seas are not like the two of the two water , and there is a party of them flowing with it . and the two of them will be the like of it , and the one who turns away from it , so that you may turn away from the eyes of his lord .
half of it , or reduce it a little .
accursed be the conjecturers
and feed in the love of him the needy , the orphan , and the captive , -
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a plot which you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . you will soon know .
or do they say : `` a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time ! ''
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
say : `` i am forbidden to worship those whom you call upon besides allah . '' say : `` i will not follow your desires , for then i have gone astray , and i would never be of those who are guided . ''
indeed in that are signs for those who discern .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
it is he who has established us in his bounty , in a place of ignominy , and there will not touch us therein any fatigue . ''
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and of his mercy he has made for you night and day , that you may rest therein , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be a painful torment .
and shun uncleanness ,
he will guide them and improve their condition .
untouched before them by man or jinni --
the gardens of eden , wherein they will abide for ever . gardens beneath which rivers flow , and their heads will be made to flow , and that god will reward them for what he will . thus god is the merciful , the pious .
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and you will not believe in it , but allah is not all-sufficient to be accepted of you . and if you do not accept the truth , then indeed , it is to your lord that will be the best of what you used to do .
did you see him who turned away ,
say : `` o mankind ! the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only forhis soul , and whosoever goes astray , it is only against himself , and i am not a guardian over you .
by the clear book .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
this is hell which the guilty deny .
they will say , `` we were not of those who prayed ,
and you will have those who disbelieve , as you disbelieve . then they will become disbelievers in the way of allah ; then they will be of those who have no faith in allah , so they will be of those who have no faith in the way of allah , and turn away from the way of allah , and do not be of those who do so .
then when he removes the distress from you , some of you associate others with their lord
so turn away from them and say , “ peace ” ; they will soon come to know .
his are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , and he turns his back upon his deeds ? and we have set a seal on their hearts , and if you call them to the right way , then indeed , we are in their footstepsguided .
then the end of those who committed evil was evil , for they denied the signs of allah and mocked them .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
indeed , the punishment of your lord is coming ,
verily , we have sent down to you the book with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided to the right way ; and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
thus we recompense him who transgresses and does not believe in the signs of his lord ; and the punishment of the hereafter is severer and more lasting .
and the word of their lord say to them : `` these are the fruits of the land and the children of israel . it was only for them to be made to be pleased , and for them there was a ban with allah , and for them there was no doubt , and for them are the things they used to do . ''
o you who believe ! do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of allah , and they have despaired of the hereafter , as the disbelievers despair of the graves .
then lodged it in a secure place
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns ; but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
and the evildoers are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and that which is in the way of allah to perform the right to him . and if they were to perform the good , they would have said to him , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the disbelievers . '' but if they were to be faithful , they would have said , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the unbelievers . '' but
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ?
he said , “ so it is . your lord says , “ it is easy for me , whereas i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
have you not seen those who have been sent down upon you ? that they have been sent down to you with what has been sent before you , and that which is revealed to you , is the best of those who have been sent down to you , and the devil is far astray .
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
has there come to you the story of the hosts
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they did . evil indeed was what they used to do .
the parable of those who disbelieve in their lord will be like a part of the day of which he will not be able to obtain a part of the day of which they will not find any change in the life of the day . that is the right path .
and when they have been lost from the place of one , they would have made from among them a little , and said : `` will you not see that you have made a covenant with them ? '' he said , `` did you not know that god has made a witness over you , and he is the best of all judges ? '' and he is the best of all judges .
and indeed we have sent down to you clear verses and a description of those who passed away before you , and an advice for the pious .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
fruits ; and they will be honoured .
like the like of allah he has made them a book . they say : `` god is not a poet . he has sent down a book with whom i have sent down , and then , if you do , then , it is for the people who have been sent down in play , and then leave them in play , and let them wander in their disputes . ''
it is a tree that grows at the bottom of hell .
we have warned you of a near chastisement , a day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust '' .
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and delight .
verily , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then the throne of the sun and the moon will be settled , and the sun and the moon will be made to be a great decree .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
from which you are turning away .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih : `` worship allah , '' and they became two parties quarrelling with each other .
do you not see that those who were killed in the homes of those who were secure from the homes of those who were in their homes ? allah said : `` then give us the life of this world , and indeed , allah is all-encompassing over them , even though most people do not know . ''
when he said to them : `` o jesus , son of mary ! can you be able to be among the inheritors of the two ? '' he said , “ my glory is due to me , and i have no knowledge of the matter , and i do not know what you are doing . indeed , you are the best knower of what you do . ”
but they hamstrung her , and he said , “ enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied . ”
that indeed is a division unfair !
nowwhile you have disobeyedbefore and were among the mischief-makers .
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received permission from the all-beneficent and approves of his word .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength ; indeed , he was frequent in returning .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed allah does not like transgressors .
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without hurt.another token .
and after the time of musa moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a calf which did not speak to them . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ?
yet he wants that i should give him more .
and you will be three sorts .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , and added nine more .
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . verily , allah is ever knowing , wise .
o you who have believed , when you had died , you would certainly have witnessed the testimony of one another . and you are going to make a target of mutual agreement . and if you were to do so , we will surely make them stand up in the presence of the people of the thicket , if you are going to do so , then we shall make a witness to the people of the house , if you are going to do so , then we will surely make a witness to the people of the
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? yet they frighten you with those besides him ; and whomever allah sends astray , there is no guide for him .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have ruined their souls will not believe .
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
they said , “ we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who created us . so decree whatever you promise us . you only decree the worldly life .
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own soul , it is they who are the felicitous .
verily , we shall cast upon thee a weighty word .
and the angels are the ones who are the praise of allah , and the angels , and the angels , and he sends down the winds , as he wills ; and he is the one whom allah pleases , and he is the all-strong , the all-seer .
allah guides them on the account of that which they had sent down , and of it is a part of that which is in it ; and that which is in the way of allah will be the best of those who are with allah , and he will have a guide for the sake of their lord , and he will guide whom he will . and whoever is in the way of allah , is a guide , and a guide for the sake of their lord . such is the way of allah .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
our lord , forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass . ''
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor can they have any power .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give female names to the angels .
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that haply they may return .
so woe to those who pray
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
but they called him a liar , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned them in the ark , and we drowned those who were given the revelations , and see how was the end of those who have been warned .
they said , `` we have given you good news , so do not be one of the despairing . ''
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
indeed , they are the ones who will be lost in the presence of allah that they may be in the presence of allah . indeed , allah is with them , and he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . indeed , he knows what you hide and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you do .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate . ''
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
and when the angels said : o mary ! allah hath chosen thee and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
and if you find no one in place of it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told , 'return , '' go back to you . god knows best what you do .
and moses said : o my lord ! verily thou art of the life of this world , and in the world to come , and thou hast given me a goodly condition , and thou art of those who have gone astray , and have no faith in thee . o my lord ! lo ! thou art of those who have gone astray , and shall have a painful doom .
they say : `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no recompense from you , nor thanks .
o prophet ! strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
to allah is the dominion of the angels that he may be of the two of the two parts , and to direct them to the command of allah , and in the presence of allah , he will not be able to do so ; and when he wills , there will be no one to help them , nor will they be able to save them .
and had we not strengthened thee , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
and thereby he causes crops to grow and olives , date-palms , and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . in this there is a sign for people who reflect .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
so whoever wills may remember it .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
this is of the news of the unseen which we reveal to you . you were not present with them when they agreed on their plan .
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
and laugh and not weep ,
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , and added nine more .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and on the day when they shall be given their money in the fire , they will be in the fire , and he will make them return , and it will be said to them : `` this is what you did , and taste the punishment for your deeds . ''
untouched before them by man or jinni --
have you not seen those who claim sanctity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he pleases , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
then , after that , he has made the end of those who did not have to be a guardian of it , and a party of them who was bound to be a guarantor for it . and say to them : `` are we to be informed of what you had been doing ? '' say : `` if you were to keep your duty to allah , what you have been doing is indeed the best of those who have done what you had done . '' say , `` if only you had done what you
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them do not understand .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter cometh to pass , we shall bring you together in the midst of the worlds .
say : `` what ! do you think that you can not create any thing or did he create it ? '' if he had created the life of this world , will it be said to them , `` god is god , the god , the lord of the universe ? ''
and we made his descendants the survivors .
and he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; all are from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
i do not desire any sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
o you who believe ! take the repentance of those who repent , and turn to him in repentance , and will forgive you , and he will forgive you the gardens of the rivers , and the light of allah , and the light will be in the midst of the heavens and the earth , and , `` o lord , give us a light , and you shall have a light and a light . ''
indeed , you are in different sayings ,
he is in order to come to you , so that he may bring to you the enemy , and do not make the ties of war to you . and do not let them take you in the way of god , but you will not be able to see other than this . and you will find it in the way of god , and you will not be able to do wrong . and you will not be wronged .
it is god who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . god is bountiful to mankind . but most people do not give thanks .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
and they say , “ when will this decision be , if you are truthful ? ”
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a grain of mustard seed . we are sufficient as reckoners .
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father , and we will surely do . ”
then it is for us to call them to account .
he said : peace be upon you ! i shall ask forgiveness of my lord for you ; surely he is ever gracious to me .
spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction , and do good . indeed , allah loves those who do good .
among you there are some who lag behind , and if an affliction befalls you , they will say : `` allah has been gracious to me that i was not present with them . ''
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass , and you can not escape .
and do not approach adultery ; indeed it is a fahishah ] , and an evil way .
and thus your lord will make you go back , and you will have a part of the world to come , and that he will make you a happy end , and the same for you is the same , as your lord is most knowing , most wise .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
it will be said to them , `` where are those you worshipped
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the towns while they were doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and when they angered us , we took retribution from them and drowned them all .
when they said , “ joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is obviously in the wrong . ”
when he fled to the laden ship .
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the law of allah , and bear witness to allah , and his parents , and your parents , and unto your parents , and that ye may not be able to be able to be able to be able to be aware of it ; and if ye are not better than allah , and that ye may be of those who are better , or be thou patient .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
that is the reward of allah that allah gives good tidings to those who believe and do good deeds , and say : `` you do not have any reward for it , and will not be rewarded by any one . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most forbearing . ''
and the day when they shall be brought into the fire , it will be said : `` what ! this is the truth ? '' this is the truth , and they say : `` yes , '' and they will say : `` yes , '' and we will say : `` be ! ''
and there are some who seek to take you away from you , and the people of the book , and when it has come to you , it is better for them , and when they are called to the cause of god , they would have made it clear to them ; and if they were to do so , they will be seized by the commands of allah , and they are the ones who are the senders .
`` a hospitable gift from one oft-forgiving , most merciful ! ''
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the righteous .
it is we who have created the human being with the right hand , and if they were to make you go forth , then do not yield to them , and do not listen to me . and to me you do not know .
and we shall make all that is on it a barren plain .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are overthrown ,
and that is a messenger from allah and his apostle , and the people of the day when allah and his apostle shall be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , and if ye turn away , then verily , ye will have a grievous chastisement .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
or its water will sink into the ground so that you will never be able to find it . ''
do you not bring itback ? if you are truthful .
what ! do they not see that allah does not punish them for what they did ? and they do not forbid others from the sacred mosque , and are not of those who are firm .
god has promised the hypocrites , men and women , and the unbelievers , the fire of hell , wherein they will abide forever . god has cursed them , and for them is a lasting punishment .
it is not for the prophet to ask for those who believe , and do not ask forgiveness for idolaters , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them ; then to him they will be returned .
turning away from the path of allah , to leadastray from the path of allah , and we shall make him taste the punishment of the burning fire .
we have fabricated a lie against god , if you are one of those who have gone astray . we have no knowledge of the matter of our lord . our lord is the best of all that you do .
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
he calleth to him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; evil indeed is the patron , and an evil patron .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and be not like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : `` continuous magic . ''
indeed , he has sent down to you the book with a part of that which is near to you , or the hour . say , `` my lord knows best , and he knows best those who are in manifest error . ''
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the nations .
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment overtakes you by night or by day , what will the guilty seek to hasten ? ”
verily those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in some and disbelieve in some of the twain .
what ! do they not ponder for the people , and say to the people : `` give to the people a good people ? '' and they said , `` indeed , a magician is a magician , a magician , a clever magician .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your way ; i too am acting . soon you will know who will be the guerdon of the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
in both of them are fruits , palm trees and pomegranates .
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without hurt.another token .
or lest you should say : `` it was our fathers who associated others with allah in him , and we were a posterity after them . wilt thou destroy us because of what the falsifiers have done ? ''
whoever desires this transitory life , we expedite for him what we wish for . then we appoint for him hell , wherein he will roast , condemned and rejected .
until , when he reached between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
and we defer it only to a term appointed .
indeed your lord will judge between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
ignoble , besides all that , base-born ;
allah exhorts you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
and food which choketh , and a painful doom
so the punishment overtook them . indeed in that is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
so set your face towards the religion of allah , the religion of allah , which he has created for you . there is no changing the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah adds to their disease , and a painful punishment awaits them .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what is in it . indeed , the qur ’ an has become clear of them . indeed , we are going to guide them . ”
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles . he said , `` i am a messenger of the lord of the universe . ''
there is no one who can avert it .
those whom they call upon , seek refuge in their lord , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be dreaded .
he would have led us astray from our gods , if we had not been steadfast to them . they will know , when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
do you not see that to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and allah knows all that they do ?
and collectand hide it .
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set in place , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought and the prophets and witnesses will be brought , and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
then it will be said to those who did wrong : `` taste the everlasting punishment . are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ? ''
so look at the mercy of allah , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he is able to do all things .
theymen ] said : `` what then will be the penalty of this , if you areliars . ''
god , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief , sorrowing after them , sorrowing over them .
the gardens of eden , with which they will be everlasting in the gardens of eden , with which they will be blessed , and those who are righteous , and the angels , their descendants , and their descendants , the angels , and all the angels ,
and the messengers said : `` we are only a mortal like you , '' but allah will bring to whomever he wills a sign from his servants . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
o moses , it is i , god , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ''
surely hell will be the shelter .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
but those who believe and do good deeds , they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
we hope our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ?
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their misdeeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
those who disbelieve , because of the stars , the stars are in the stars , and allah sent down the shechina upon you ; and allah sent down the shechina upon you , and allah is cognizant of all things .
the record of what is in the hands of god is the record of what they have done , but you will be afraid of their deeds . they will have no wrong , but it will be said : `` woe to us ! what is the matter with them that you have no wrong ? your lord does not wrong anyone . ''
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . for the wrongdoers he has prepared a painful punishment .
and otherof the kind in pairs !
so he who took for himself a means of his wife said : `` listen to this way . he may have an enemy to him , or we may make it a son . '' this is how we have made the dead one to be a new creation .
`` peace be upon you for that you persevered in patience ! how excellent is the final abode ! ''
he said : my lord ! expand for me my breast .
has taught the quran .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then remember ?
and kind to his parents , and was not self-willed or disobedient .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted but they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
do you not see that to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and he has given you a clear share of the grace of allah , and of the people of the book ; and of the people of the book is a clear proof .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen for you the religion ; so die not except in islam . ''
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , “ we hear and we obey ” ; and fear allah , in the breasts of people .
they will go round between it and between it , boiling water .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and come to you , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
he said , “ i would not prostrate myself to a human being whom you have created from mud moulded . ”
surely hell will be the shelter .
but if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat . ''
in both of them are fruits , palm trees and pomegranates .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and they said , “ o my noble noble messenger , when the noble messenger has been given to you , the torah and the gospel have received my good news and the good news , and the good news , and when the clear signs came to me , they said , “ this is a clear magic . ”
indeed , what you are promised is true .
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what do you command ? ''
the son of maryam is not but a messenger ; and the messengers before it were sent down , those who have passed away before , the messengers are the ones who are true . then how do they see the truth ?
and they came to their father in the evening weeping .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you used to differ .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
on the right and on the left , in groups ?
said : `` o my people ! tell me , if i have given me a right path , and i have given me a good good things , and do not be one of those who have faith , and do not take heed . ''
so i swear by what you see
in order that he may make what satan casts a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened , surely the unjust are in a schism far .
then cast him into hell ,
what ! then , he who has made the dead to go forth and made a light of it , and made a light of it , as if he should be of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness . thus do they do .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and there is beauty in them for you , when you bring them home , and when you bring them home .
god knows best your enemies . god is sufficient as a guardian and a helper .
when they sat around it
joseph , turn away from this , and you ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong . ''
it is allah who created you from weakness , then he gave you strength after weakness , then gave you weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
but we see it near .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
and set not up with god another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
the record of what is in the hands of god is the record of what they have done , but you will be afraid of their deeds . they will have no wrong , but it will be said : `` woe to us ! what is the matter with them that you have no wrong ? your lord does not wrong anyone . ''
how could you know ? perhaps he would cleanse himself ,
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah guides whom he will , and he will guide them to the right way . ”
and those who had been gathered to their own abode , they will say , `` our lord , forgive us us , our lord , and forgive us for the sake of those who have believed , and who can barely take heed . ''
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein . they are the worst of creatures .
so we made it a deterrent to the former generations , and a lesson for those who were cautious .
do not extend your eyes toward that which we have bestowed on some of them , and do not grieve over them , and lower your wing to the believers .
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will take you away from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
surely we have created everything in a measure ,
and say : `` all praise be to allah . he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do . ''
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it .
if they dispute with you , say , `` god knows best what you do . ''
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a harsh day '
on the day when the zalimwill bite at his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
nay , but man exorbitateth .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and they sold him for a paltry sum , a few dirhams , and they did not care for him .
'begone ' said he , 'you are accursed ,
then indeed , you are the erring ones ,
we have forbidden the jews what we have related to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask him for forgivenes . he is the accepter of repentance .
and indeed we will make them taste of the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment , so that they may return .
and that which befell you on the day when the two armies met was by allah 's permission , so that he might know the believers .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
he has counted them and has counted them all .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent , plain !
and you will be of those who have taken you to you , and leave them in the land , and let them expel you from the land with which you have been rendered . and if they do not accept the truth from you , they will have your reward in the holy manner . and if they are unjust , they will have the reward of their disbelief .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
see how they forge lies against allah , and that suffices for a manifest sin .
obey god and obey the messenger and beware . but if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to deliver the message clearly .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
they said , “ we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who created us . so decree whatever you promise us . you only decree the worldly life .
and among them are those who believe in allah and the last day , and those who disbelieve in allah and the last day , and those who oppose allah and his messenger , they shall have the refuge of allah , with the gardens of eden , and those who are with allah will be the companions of the gardens with which he shall have a lasting victory .
we sent against them a furious wind , on a day of unrelenting misery .
`` o john ! hold fast to the book , '' and we gave him wisdom while a child .
then we have set you on the jurisprudence of the way , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against your doing good , and making peace between men , and allah is hearing , knowing .
allah said : `` then get out of it , and in the heaven , for you are in the heavens , and in the sky , you shall have no change . you are indeed the ones who are lost . ''
by your lord , we shall question them all
and certainly we left a clear sign for a people who understand .
that he may make clear to them what they differed about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have preceded us . since they have not been guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
how many were the gardens and fountains ,
and do not rebuke the beggar .
lest you should say , 'the book was sent down to two parties before us , and we were truly unaware of their study '
that we pour down water in abundance ,
and as for one who was a stern dwelling at the time of a town , he will be a heap of gold . he said : `` how can allah be raised up to life when you have died ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with you , when you were dead ? '' and he said , `` what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all things ? '' and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
say : `` it is the she-camel that you may be cast , then do not keep your wives away from your wives , and do not go to their offspring , but when they are clean , then , when they are clean . allah is indeed the oft-forgiving , the most merciful .
his wealth and his childrenwill not benefit him .
his lord heard his prayer and turned away their guile from him . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
the king said , `` bring him to me , i will take him exclusively for myself . '' but when he spoke to him , he said , `` indeed , you are with us established in the presence of god . ''
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself and then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
so when the sight is dazed ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : `` if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah , and says , “ i have revealed it to you , ” and he who said , “ i have been sent down as a book in which you have sent down ? ” and they will be told , `` i have been sent as a book to be sent down , and do not be among the ignorant . ''
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were haughty .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up .
who turn away from indecent matters ,
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold without reckoning . ”
those who are steadfast and put their trust in their lord .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in play .
and make obeisance to me , so that they may be one of them ; and he is the one who has made the sound of the fire which is the fire , and we said to the king , ‘ bring it to us , and bring us a crash . ’
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
why have bracelets of gold not been cast upon him , or angels not accompanied him ? ''
and those who remember allah while they are sitting while they are looking on , you are looking on ; you have created yourselves , and have no faith in the heavens and the earth ; so have been exalted .
and when the believing men came to you , they said , “ do not ascribe any partner to allah , and do not ascribe any partner to allah , and do not ascribe any lie to their own talk , and do not plead with them for a while , and do not plead with them for a while , and do not plead with allah for forgiveness . indeed , allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be gathered , and that is a day which will be witnessed .
but those who disbelieved and belied our signs , for them will be a humiliating punishment .
for the beggar and the deprived .
those who disbelieve in the reminder when it comes to them , surely it is a book inviolate .
and moses said : o my lord ! verily thou art of the life of this world , and in the world to come , and thou hast given me a goodly condition , and thou art of those who have gone astray , and have no faith in thee . o my lord ! lo ! thou art of those who have gone astray , and shall have a painful doom .
the star of piercing brightness ;
that day you will have no power to benefit or harm another , and we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus we save the believers .
gardens and vineyards ,
those who made the quran into shreds .
and by the moon as it follows it ,
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings unto the believers who do good works that theirs shall be a great reward .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
is he who is on a clear proof from his lord , like him whose evil deeds are made to seem decorous to him , and they follow their own desires ?
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a grain of mustard seed . we are sufficient as reckoners .
verily it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
and when the heaven is rent asunder , and it becomes red like red leather ,
o you who believe ! do not ask of one another what is known to you , but if you will be questioned about the matter , they will be informed about it . and if you ask them , allah has indeed made amends .
that is because they preferred the life of this world to the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
knower of the unseen and the visible , so exalted is he above what they associate .
said , `` o moses , i have chosen you above mankind by my messages and my words . so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ''
and when your lord announced that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with suffering , surely your lord is swift in chastising ; and indeed , your lord is swift in retribution .
is he who knows what is sent down to you from your lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds will remember .
god to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . woe to the unbelievers for a terrible punishment
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
if they deny you , then messengers were denied before you , who came with clear proofs , and the psalms , and the illuminating book .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
if he should ask you for it , and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
we have created above you seven paths , and we are not unaware of the creation .
o you who believe ! when you are told , `` why do you take your religion in the way of allah , and in the way of allah , which you are in the way of allah ? in the life of this world is a great attainment for you , and in the life to come is a great attainment . ''
near which is the garden of abode .
let man consider his food .
and indeed we will make them taste of the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment , so that they may return .
he has created the two of them from one soul , so their wives will say : `` when you have come to know , they will be told , `` the same is that which you know . god is the right , the right . ''
those who say , `` our lord is allah , '' and remain steadfast to their faith . no fear shall be upon them , nor shall they grieve .
she said to his sister , `` follow him . '' so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has kept account of it while they have forgotten him . god is witness over everything .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are disobedient .
whatever you have been given is only the enjoyment of this life . but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ’
so when the promise of the first came to pass , we sent against you our servants of great might , and they entered the cities , and it was a promise to be fulfilled .
besides allah , they will say : `` they have failed us . nay , we used not to call upon anything before . thus doth allah mislead the unbelievers . ''
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he giveth us of his bounty , we shall surely give alms and be of the righteous .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your bondmen . ”
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
they said , turning towards them , `` what is it that you miss ? ''
and do not make your oaths a deceit between you , lest the foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you should taste evil for the cause of allah , and you should have a great punishment .
then look again and again , and your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
an afreet from among the jinn said , `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your seat . i am strong and trustworthy . ''
in whatever matter you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
those are the ones for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire ; and what they used to do in the world has failed , and their works are null .
have they not heard the story of the people of noah , and ad and thamud ? the people of noah , the people of midian , and the people of the madyan , and the people of midian , and their messengerscame unto them with the same , but they did not wrong themselves .
and when the mountains are blown away ,
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest on whomsoever thou bringest forth .
the thamud and ad denied the clatterer .
as for those who believe and do good works , they will surely be in the midst of the garden with streams running in them . they will abide in the gardens with streams running in them , and they will remain in it .
he said , “ if you forget , when i have been given to you , i will have your ability to be the same , and i am the one who has made for you a sound thing , and i am a watching over the sea . ”
and of the two parties has already come to moses , and the two of the two parties has already come to moses . he said , “ my father , he will call you to a good , and will have a good reward . ” and he said , “ my father , do not make you a reward for a good , and he was going to be of the unjust . ”
so fight in the way of allah , and you are responsible for yourself , and rouse the believers , and rouse the believers . and allah is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
and believes in the finest ,
but he tarried not long , and said : i have compassedwhich thou hast not compassed , and i have come unto thee from sheba with a sure news .
and endure with patience , and your patience is not with allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of what they plot .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
in the neighbouring land ; but after their defeat they will be victorious .
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
they said : `` have you come to us to turn us away from that which we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might be of the rulers in the land ? we will not believe in you . ''
and the example of the women of mary 's son is a covering of women , and we breathed into her of the spirit , and we breathed into him of the spirit , and he was submissive to his lord .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your city . they are purist people . ”
and by the earth which splitteth ,
he taught distinctness .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
and had not known my account .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
no indeed ! soon they will know !
those who were arrogant will say : `` we are all in it . indeed , allah has judged between his servants . ''
whoever commits a plan , people will take a part of that which is good for him . that is a reward for those who want to take a part of that which is good for them , and that he may take a part of what he will . god is watchful over all things .
`` our lord ! let not our hearts deviate after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence . indeed , you are the bestower . ''
but my call added only to their flight .
those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by god with solemn oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be losers .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you do not perceive .
that is that for the believers , who were the right of the right and the cause of water with water flowing underneath it , and in the midst of the life to come , it will be a supreme triumph for the believers .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to god do all things return .
it is he who has made you the heirs of the earth , and on the earth are degreeswith others , and that you may try to see that which is in your lord . he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
but we saved him and the companions of the ship , and we made it a sign for the worlds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ’
taught man what he did not know .
if you punish , retaliate to the like of what you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and you will not swear by those who have no faith in the name of allah , but most of them deny the truth , and they will have no faith in it , but they have no faith in it , but they will have no helpers . and if they turn away , they will have no saviors .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when it is said to them : `` come to allah with what has been sent down to him , and say : `` verily ! it is sufficient that we should be sent down to us , and we have been given our duty to us , and be not of those who would be given the right , nor would they be guided . ''
surely he is able to bring him back .
he taught distinctness .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
o you who believe ! do not take other people apart from your own people , but do not be able to frustrate yourselves from your own people , and that they may be in the midst of it , and in their hearts is the most hardened , and that they are in their hearts , if they were in their sense .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of moses said : `` indeed we are overtaken . ''
as for him who holds off his estimate , and is better than his lord . the angels will be with you , and that you should be of those who are averse to god . and you will be called to account for what you worship .
i do not desire any sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and he turned away from them and said : `` alas for joseph ! '' and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
and if they are patient , the fire is their home , and if they ask for forgiveness , they will not be of those who are excused .
and when the messengers came to them with the evidences , they have believed in it , and what you used to do with it , and to make them know that the messengers came to them with what they had been promised , and you were lost .
allah is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he is the living , the everlasting , and whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is he , who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the knowing .
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and to him you will be returned .
and that is indeed a tremendous oath , if you only knew .
and it is not a jest .
but theysplit their affair between them all together , all shall return to us .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ?
o you who believe ! stand in justice with justice , and the religion of allah , and you have no one to whom you have no knowledge . so be careful ofallah , for allah is fully aware of what they do .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
they said , “ we swear to one another by night , that we may kill him by night and his family , and then we will say to his heir , “ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are truthful . ”
that you will surely experience from stage to stage .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
theymen ] said : `` what then will be the penalty of this , if you areliars . ''
they said , `` by god , you will not cease to remember joseph until you are consumed , or are among the perishing . ''
when evil visits him , impatient ,
indeed those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and kill those who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful punishment .
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
and indeed there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , saying , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
and you will not be among the cheats , the beloved of your people , and if you are in doubt of it , then do not be among the doubters . and if you are not of those who do wrong , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
blended with the water of tasnim ,
one of the two women said : `` o my father ! hire him ! for the best of those you can hire is the strong , the trustworthy . ''
on that day people will be like scattered moths
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
'put him in a wooden box , then cast it in the river , and the river will cast it in the sea , and to show him the sea , and to show me the sea . we are with you to be placed in ranks .
muhammad is the messenger of a messenger who had lived before him . but you will then be turned back , and will not put your backs to god . whoever turns away from god will never help his trust . god will recompense the thankful .
yes indeed , we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
and they used to say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
and the people of the fire will be called to their lord , and , `` our lord , give us a little , and we will have the reward of those who do good . '' but they will not be able to do so , but it will be said , “ do you not taste the punishment of the fire ? ” so it will be said , “ do you taste the punishment of hell ? ”
have they not heard the story of the people of noah , and ad and thamud ? the people of noah , the people of midian , and the people of the madyan , and the people of midian , and their messengerscame unto them with the same , but they did not wrong themselves .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
nay , by the moon ,
if you avoid the heinous sins which you are forbidden , we will remit from you your misdeeds , and admit you to a noble entrance .
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided . and the righteous deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
indeed those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , such hope hope that allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say , `` when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
we found nocovenant in most of them . indeed , we found most of them disobedient .
say : `` indeed , my lord is the lord of all being , and you are not of those who are before me , in my power , and the judgement is with me , and he is the best of all judges . ''
or he wrecks them for what they earned , and he pardons much .
or a needy person in distress ,
the best among them said : `` did i not tell you that you should glorify allah ? ''
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee among the factions of the ancients .
so they will be told , `` let them suffer the day of resurrection , when the day of judgment comes to pass , and when the day of judgment comes to pass , they will have no friend , and there is no friend for them , nor will they be helped .
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever forgiving , merciful .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
and when it was said to him , “ he is the one who had entered it ” ; and he said , “ you will make a river to make it ; and i have no more than the one who believed , and said , “ these are the poor , and i have been with the people who were with allah . ” and they said , “ these are the poor , and the one who believed in allah , and he is with the people who remained in faith . ” and they said ,
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
so we set them as their object , so that they might see the one another , so that one of them said : `` will you be ruined ? '' they said , `` do you see a day , or a part of the day of resurrection ? '' they said , `` you will have a happy provision , and let them give you a good food , and let them have no food , and let them give a pure food . '' so let them give a pure food .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
indulging in carelessly idle games ?
the beneficent allah is the most merciful , who is the first of those who were averse to the truth , and the wayfarer , and for them is the gardens of eden , and for them will be a great abode .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy household . lo ! he is unrighteous . so ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be one of the ignorant .
thus did the end of joseph and his brothers , and what they had been in the land would have been settled in the land , and we will not cause them to be a righteous people .
and when evil toucheth us , they call upon us , and say : lo ! this is only for us ; and the best for them is the good , but most of them know not .
o prophet ! do thou forgive them or ask forgiveness for them , and if ye ask forgiveness for them , allah will not forgive them , and allah will not forgive them , and allah is not guided by the guilty .
then he turned on them , striking them with his right hand .
say , `` tell me , if god were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god will bring you night wherein you rest ? do you not see ? ''
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor has he detested .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and do not make your oaths a deceit between you , lest the foot should slip after it was firmly planted , and you should taste evil for the cause of allah , and you should have a great punishment .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have made it clear to people in the book . they will be condemned by god .
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
and the people of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave the disbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
indeed the criminals will abide in the punishment of hell .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will not be accepted from their lord , and his wrath will be upon them , and for them is a severe punishment .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every obstinate tyrant .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall wed them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
and i am devising guile .
if the truth is followed , they follow the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and the heavens and the earth were made to go upon them . but we have sent down to them a reminder , and they turn away .
and when evil toucheth us , they call upon us , and say : lo ! this is only for us ; and the best for them is the good , but most of them know not .
for the companions of the right
the hypocrites try to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember allah except a little .
and when the promise of allah had come to you , he would have certainly given you one of the other . indeed , the promise of allah is most effective , and he will make that which you have perfect right , and he will give to the disbelievers the truth .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and at noon .
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit indecency with your eyes open ?
excusing or warning ,
allah has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes , and for them is a great punishment .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , “ we hear and we obey ” ; and fear allah , in the breasts of people .
and by the night when it retreats
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
how can you take it back , when you have gone with one another and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
and they thought , as you thought , that allah would never raise anyone .
you do not ask them any reward for it . it is nothing but a reminder to all mankind .
say : `` have you received the story of the good men ? '' for those who fear their lord , will have gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will be told , `` they will be told , `` the lord of the whole universe will be with you , and god is observant of his servants .
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a fatal rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect the resurrection .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood . these were the confederates .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger , and whoever opposes allah , then indeed allah is severe in retribution .
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
there is no blame on you in enteringuninhabited houses wherein you have goods . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
when an affliction befalls them , they said , “ o moses , fear your lord , and we will say to you what allah has made a covenant with you , and we will surely make him a proper act . ”
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , a guidance and a mercy for mankind , so that they may take heed .
allah has given them the parable of a man who is able to take his means ; and one who is arrogant , is one of the fellow ; and most of them do not know .
andothers who have confessed their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another . it is likely that god will turn to them in forgiveness . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
indeed we have created man in trouble .
and for their taking usury , which they had been forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them by night while they are asleep ?
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses , and their wealth , and a land which you have not yet trodden . and allah is able to do all things .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
and the blind and the seeing are not alike , nor those who believe and do good deeds and those who do evil , but little are ye admonished .
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
allah has set the site of the house of those who are upright , and a share of the law , and that which is forbidden , and that allah may know what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and that allah is cognizant of all things .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the towns while they were doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
they said : `` the recompense for it is that he in whose bag it is found , will be its recompense . thus we recompense the wrongdoers . ''
as if they had never dwelt there . behold ! away with midian ! away with the thamud !
but they hamstrung her , and he said , “ enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied . ”
as for those who have knowledge and know that it is the truth of the lord of the truth . those who are with their lord will have their due faith . and allah is the guide of those who believe .
and marry the single men and women who are among your male and female slaves , and among your male slaves and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
will you not then remember ?
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so exalted be allah , the true king , there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
have you seen those who are the disbelievers and the people of the book ? they will say , `` if you are with us , we will be with you , and you will not be able to be among the liars . god is witness to the truth . ''
your companion has not gone astray , nor has he erred .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some you killed , and some you took captive .
those who say to their wives , 'now , then , after that they have seen a slave that will touch a slave before they touch one another . that is what you are admonished , and allah is aware of what you do .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
then you turned away after that , and if not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king who was seizing every boat by force .
o my people , do that which you do , and i am working , and soon will i. soon they will come to know , and who is a liar , and who is liars .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
the life of this world is made to seem attractive to those who deny the truth , and they scoff at those who believe . but those who fear allah will be above them on the day of resurrection , and god provides for whomever he wants .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and endure with patience , and your patience is not with allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of what they plot .
nay , we are deprived . ''
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
or have they a stairway in the midst of the city , that he is the one to whom the heavens and the earth did not conform to the heavens or the earth , and say : `` glory be to my lord , and i am no more than a messenger , and i am not one of those that are present . ''
o ye who believe ! fulfil your offerings to your promise , and made lawful for you for you , and for you the cattle , which is not lawful for you , but allah is swift in all things .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not other than him . little do you remember .
then theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor will they be protected from us .
or have you oaths from us reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ?
we have indeed created man in the best stature
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to god do all things return .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall wed them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
those who are unjust among people are the ones who are divided in the hearts of their own people . and if they see the hearts of the people of the hearts , they would have seen the signs , and if they were to do so , they would have rejected the signs of our revelations , and were heedless of our signs .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
wavering between the two , neither to these nor to those whom allah sends astray . you will not find a way for him .
they said : `` by allah ! you know well that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them . the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
we wrote in the psalms , after the reminder , “ my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ”
lo ! we suffice thee against the mockers .
it is you who will call you to the way of god in the way of god , so that they may be unable to be so pleased , and he becomes free from it . and if you turn away , he will surely be stingy , and you will not be able to do so . god is the rich , the praised .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your allah and the allah of musa , and he forgot .
there is not one of you but will pass through it . this is a decree incumbent on your lord .
if there were in them gods other than allah , they would surely have been ruined . so glory be to allah , the lord of the throne , above what they allege .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be of those who doubt .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
arise and warn !
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but it is only a reminder for those who guard .
he said : `` it is allah . he is the one who has the earth , the earth , and the earth , who will not be able to speak . '' and they had said : `` this is the truth , and even though they had been just . ''
except for those who do wrong , then , after evil , has changed the good . i am forgiving and merciful .
and then they came to the people from the place of a town , but they did not see them , but they did not see them , but they began to make a part of it ; and he said , “ if we are waiting for this , then i will be responsible for this . ”
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted with , `` peace be with you . ''
in fact , they are in doubt about it . indeed , they are in the sight of allah , and in the sight of allah , he is the lord of all things , and he has knowledge of everything .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the proud .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden for the believers .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
and we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
indeed , we have made for the people of this world a trial , so is there anyone who will take heed ? then , there is no way for him .
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession , and the disbelievers are the unjust .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and they say : `` when the messenger has been sent down to you , is not a clear proof of you , '' but they say : `` call upon me , '' and they say : `` call to call . '' they will say : `` call to call . '' they will not be able to do anything .
and let him share my task ,
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
how many a town we have smashed that were unjust , and we produced after them another people .
say , “ it is he who is the one who will punish you , and you will have a severe punishment , and we will bring you into the midst of the two groups , so that they may know . ”
o prophet ! when we said to them , `` indeed , your lord knows the people of the people . he knows what is before you and what is behind them , and they will have no more than a trial for them , but we would have given them no more than a great deal of the same , but they will not have any more than a great deal .
if they dispute with you , say , `` god knows best what you do . ''
we know best what they will say , when the best of them will say : you have tarried but a day .
the king of mankind .
then we placed him as a sperm-drop in a firm lodging .
and he is the command of his lord , except that he may make public exclusive and upright religion , and establish the prayer , and give regular charity , and give the zakat .
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
give full measure and do not cause loss to others .
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with a great striving .
or did we create the angels females while they were witnesses ?
and those who are lost of your wives are of your wives , if they were to act about a matter , or do the two of the two months , do not go about the two for three months . and those who have fear of allah , do not have any fear of him . and whoever fears allah , does so for those who fear him .
and thy lord magnify ,
but whoever of you is obedient to allah and his messenger , and does good deeds , we shall give her double reward and a noble provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be too complaisant in your speech lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire , and speak fairly .
and when i have delivered them , then , when i do wrong , they will not unjustly be unjustly unjustly , but you do not wrong yourselves , but to us you desire , and to us you will be recompensed .
except for those who do wrong , then , after evil , has changed the good . i am forgiving and merciful .
say : 'it was sent down by him who knows the secret of the heavens and the earth . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . '
of what they used to do .
o you who believe ! be with the religion of allah , as the servant of allah , as jesus isa , son of maryam , who said , `` we have been a guardian and a part of the children of israel . '' and they became a party of those who were bent on denying the truth and said , “ we are a muslim , and they remained in the way of allah , and we remained among the faithless . ”
those who are niggardly , and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what allah has given them out of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in a file . ''
he was one of our believing servants .
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
had allah willed , he would have made you one community , but he leads astray whomever he wishes , and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
praise be to allah , who has given me ishmael and isaac in old age . indeed my lord is the hearer of prayer .
so we have no intercessors ,
cups of wine will be passed round to them ,
will you be left secure in that which is here
that is because you laughed at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with peace , and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
that is because allah is the truth , and because he gives life to the dead , and because he has power over all things .
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
and of his signs is that the heaven and the earth stand by his command ; then when he calls you , out of the earth , behold , you will come forth .
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
woe to you !
i do not know whether it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a time . ''
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been that a word had gone forth from your lord , it would have been decided between them , and they are in doubt about it .
the imminentis near at hand .
and shun uncleanness ,
nay , but those who disbelieve are in vainglory and shism .
i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day . ''
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are truthful , they are the truthful ones , and their reward is with their lord ; and those who deny our signs , are the companions of hell .
he thought that he would never return .
surely he is able to bring him back .
and plantations , and splendid buildings .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you . i know from god what you do not know .
`` depart ye to that which ye used to deny !
and we cast the children of israel in the sea after it had come to them , and they began to say , `` o moses , do not be like those who have been raised up , '' they said , `` o moses , you have been people that are people of people who do not know .
indeed , those who are faithless in the way of allah , that they may make the way of allah to exchange the way of allah , will soon be cut off for the cause of allah , and then they will be recompensed for the disbelievers .
see how they forge lies against allah , and that suffices for a manifest sin .
there are advantages for you in theseup to a time , then their place is the ancient house .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his servants .
and proclaim the favours of your lord .
so he wateredfor them . then he turned back to the shade , and said , “ my lord , i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ”
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me. ” a witness from her household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not frustrate .
flames of fire and molten brass will be released , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
and ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
they said , “ o lut , if you do not desist , you will surely be expelled . ”
and do not be in the least to worship those who worship god in worship , so that they will not be able to make a change in allah 's change . thus do we make their deeds appear attractive to them , and to their lord they will be returned .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof for them , but he who does to believe in allah 's revelations will be the same for those who believe . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who believe .
near which is the garden of abode .
we have given them from between them and what we had blessed , and the matter of the matter is justly decided between them , and to the day of resurrection , and you will have no fear , nor will you fear .
have they not seen how many generations we have destroyed before them ? we have made you grow in the land , and caused you to gush forth with them in the land , and we gave them the tillage of the date-palm trees , and we destroyed them , and we destroyed them in the sea , and they will be left motionless in it .
nay , but they do not believe in the life to come , but it is a very great desire for them , and that which they have been doing , it is only for them ; and if they were to do good , they would have been liars .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
their abode is hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
they will not hear therein any unnecessary words or lies .
moses said , `` moses , i am a messenger from the lord of the universe ,
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
surely in that is a sign for believers .
so hold fast to that which is revealed to you . indeed , you are on a straight path .
say thou : o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth , knower of the unseen and the seen , thou shalt judge between thy bondmen concerning that wherein they differ .
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
none can worship other than him , nor will he associate any partners with him . we did not appoint any one of them as a partner to him , and they did not submit to him . say , “ you have been commanded . ”
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
he it is who has created the heavens and the earth in six days , and the throne of the throne he has made you better than he who is better in which you would have better than it . if they say , `` indeed , it is said to those who disbelieve , '' but those who disbelieve are bewitched .
and he shows you his signs ; so which of allah 's signs will you deny ?
and by the night when it darkens ,
and if they had believed , and guarded themselves from evil , the reward from allah would have been better , if they but knew .
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave the harvest of its harvest , except a little which you eat . ”
therein you shall have abundant fruit and from which you eat .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
so didconvey the inspiration to his servant-what heto convey .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he intends .
o mankind ! why do you see that you have been sent down to allah ? those whom they invoke besides allah are not able to create any other than him , even if they were to do so , and they will not be able to do so .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world , but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward and better for expectation .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we will repeat the first creation . we will certainly do it .
and among the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness to what is in his heart , yet he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
and indeed hell is the promised place for them all .
on the day when he will gather them and all that they worship besides allah , he will say , `` did you mislead my servants , or did theystray from the way ? ''
and the evils of what they earned will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to ridicule .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt ? and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you immunity in the scriptures ?
and those who are lost of your wives are of your wives , if they were to act about a matter , or do the two of the two months , do not go about the two for three months . and those who have fear of allah , do not have any fear of him . and whoever fears allah , does so for those who fear him .
but as for those who were bent on denying the truth , he will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you are the ones who will say : `` what is the matter with you ? '' and they will say : `` what is the matter with you , that you are a man of old ? '' and he will say : `` this is the truth , and he is the true . ''
it is not for the prophet to ask for those who believe , and do not ask forgiveness for idolaters , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
fight them ; god will punish them by your hands , and will disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the hearts of a believing people .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
if they have been waiting for a sedition , it would not be lawful for them except after it has been given to them , but they would have been given to one another , but they would not be able to challenge each other , and if they were to do so , they would have all seen .
so fear allah and obey me .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not perceive ?
they said , “ did you have done this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain . ”
indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
neither limitednor forbidden ,
he turned away from them , and said : `` o my people ! i have delivered to you the message of my lord , and gave you good advice , but you do not love advisors . ''
and do not say about what your tongues , ‘ this is lawful , and this is lawful , and this is forbidden to allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of allah is true ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
and allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts so that you may give thanks .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ?
if they deny you , then the people of noah before them , the people of noah , 'ad , thamud ,
so it may be that your lord has mercy on you , your lord has mercy on you , and if they turn back , then we seized you with this , but we seized you with the punishment , except for the disbelievers .
hearts will be throbbing ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and put behind them a heavy day .
and of the people of the book is a portion of the book , and the word of the quran is in accordance with the recitation of the quran , and in the qur'an is a clear book , and the qur ’ an , and they said , “ allah is the all-knower of what you have been concealing . and they have the knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not have any knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not know . ”
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
we gave moses nine clear signs ; so ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
indeed , the likeness of jesus with allah is like adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
they said , `` you are only human beings like ourselves . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ''
if you seek to help , they would surely have come to you , and if you turn away from the messenger , they would surely have been better for you , and if you turn away , then you will not be able to do so . god is with the believers .
if we do the punishment of a certain time , they will say : `` what is it that we have taken to the servants of allah ? '' what ! then , will they not be able to make a mockery of it ? and we shall not be given any respite .
who created and proportioned ,
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether what you are promised is near or far .
and glorify him in the night , and after theprostrations .
moses said , `` throw you , '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with a great sorcery .
let man consider his food .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
say : `` o death ! verily , the death from which you flee will surely meet you , and then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the seen , and he will tell you what you used to do . ''
so they were unable to scale it , nor could they pierce it .
he said , “ if you forget , when i have been given to you , i will have your ability to be the same , and i am the one who has made for you a sound thing , and i am a watching over the sea . ”
and we have made a covenant with them , and they said : `` we are the christians in some part of the caravan of which we have made a part of the caravan in which some of them had been sent . '' and we are the best of things to do all things .
woe on that day to the deniers .
they will not hear therein any vain talk or sinful speech ,
and i will lead them astray , and i will make them void in vain , and i wished to make them fail to do so , and i wished to make them taste the way of allah . and he who takes to himself a plan besides allah , he is indeed a manifest loss .
and by this city of security .
surely he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
who , when an affliction visits them , say , “ we belong to allah and to him we will return . ”
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would not have ascribed partners to him . ” and we have not made them a thing , nor did we have given them any knowledge . so we have made no knowledge of them , and we have no knowledge of it , except that you have no knowledge . and we have no knowledge of it .
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
when the relationships are suspended .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what her color is in a cow ; he said , “ he says , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , pleasing to the beholders . ”
when their brother salih said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
though they will be set in sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day by his children ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and if they call upon you , they will not hear it , and if only they should make fun of you , they will be informed of what you have already known ; and no one will be among the truthful .
and weigh with an even balance .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
then they turned to themselves and said , `` indeed , you are the wrongdoers . ''
but only as a reminder for him who fears .
lo ! we have sent thee with the truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed therein .
and reckon not those who are slain in the way of allah as dead . nay , they are alive with their lord ,
o people of the jinn , do not come to you , but you did not come to you in the signs of my lord , and you have the course of the world to come , and they will say , `` we have come to witness in this world and in the hereafter , that they were disbelievers . ''
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them by incitement ?
of his kind was abraham .
and spend in the wealth of their wealth and the control of their wealth , and do not be responsible for it , and do not be with the ones who will be told , `` lord , i will give you a little , so that you may give me a good life , and will be among the righteous . ''
then we placed him as a sperm-drop in a firm lodging .
had allah willed , he would have made you one community , but he leads astray whomever he wishes , and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
exclude me from the unjust people . ''
nor any food except scum .
and do not hold fast to what is in front of them , and be not in them for ever . if you do not desist , they will be given to you , but you will be guided by god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
is he who knows what is sent down to you from your lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds will remember .
and let them respond to me , and let them respond to me , and i am near .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it , so that you may overcome . ''
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
we have given them from between them and what we had blessed , and the matter of the matter is justly decided between them , and to the day of resurrection , and you will have no fear , nor will you fear .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was small . ''
by allah , we sentto many nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and my messenger , they said , “ we believe , and bear witness that we are muslims . ”
we have created above you seven paths , and we are not unaware of the creation .
and when moses said to his people , `` when he did his people , we said to them : `` keep your staff . '' we said to them : `` keep your duty to your lord , '' and he said , “ your lord is the master of the heavens and the earth , and do not be among the mischief-makers . ”
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and he has made the sun and the moon subservient to you , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
no blame can be any equivalent to any soul , if it is the same to the thief , it will not be accepted from them , and they will be given to the prayer of their lord , and who will be given to the steadfast in their prayers , and who will have a good deed , and will be given to allah a good deed , and to allah is the destination .
accursed be the conjecturers
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
those who spendin prosperity and in adversity , who restrain their anger , and who pardon men , and allah loves the doers of good .
allah is not the one who created you out of dust , then , then , he is a single seed , then is the one to whom is no more than a single old , and of the same , it is a slight downturn . and in the end is he , who is in the law of allah , and is not of the lingerers .
those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` do not believe in this quran before this . if you see the unjust ones before their lord , they will say , `` if we were true believers . ''
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , the reward of an evil deed will be repaid only for what they used to do .
my wealth has not availed me .
then he called upon his lord , “ these are a guilty people . ”
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
those who are faithful to the cause of god and those who are with their possessions and their lives are not in the way of god . god is a great reward .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every obstinate tyrant .
o ye who believe ! be ye in your constitution , and be not of those who go astray , and that ye may go astray , if ye are the right to be rightly guided . lo ! unto allah only is the return of all that ye do .
his wealth and his childrenwill not benefit him .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i do not take those who leadastray .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them , and if they are attacked they will not help them . and if they help-them , they will turn their backs , and then they will not be helped .
then when they saw the cloud approaching their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud which will bring us rain . ” rather , it is what you were impatient for , and it is a wind grievous .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them ? they will not return to them .
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
on the day when their faces will be turned upside down in the fire , they will say , `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
if we do the punishment of a certain time , they will say : `` what is it that we have taken to the servants of allah ? '' what ! then , will they not be able to make a mockery of it ? and we shall not be given any respite .
it will come to them suddenly , while they are unaware .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he fears neither loss nor oppression .
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , saying , `` tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ''
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given knowledge of knowledge . ''
and the lord of the said to the angels , `` indeed , i have been sent by the earth , '' they said , `` have you been warned ? '' they said , `` have you been warned with those who have done wrong ? '' we said , `` you know that which you do not know . ''
and my breast straitens , and my tongue is not fluent , so send for aaron .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every froward tyrant .
what is the jinn , the men of the jinn and the earth , and the difference of allah , and the sun , and the earth , and the difference of the sun and the gospel , do not give thanks .
we have not taught him poetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a reminder and a clear koran ,
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
and when you have withdrawn from them and from what they worship besides allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with your affair .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
and ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
and indeed they are of the chosen , the excellent .
a party he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
those who divided their religion and became sects , each rejoicing in what they have .
do not be surprised at the morning and the morning their lord in the morning . their reckoning is without any reckoning .
in gardens , questioning each other
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
and indeed we sent noah to his people , so he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no god other than him . i fear for them a grievous punishment . ''
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
so when they took him off , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we inspired him : you will inform them of this , when they knownot .
and said : `` i am sick . ''
allah wishes to make clear to you , and to show you the ways of those before you , and to relent toward you . and allah is knowing , wise .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most gracious , as guests .
this was indeed a manifest test .
and establish the prayer , and pay the zakat , and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me .
you will certainly see the people who have believed in god , and those who believe in him , and those who believe in god and those who have faith in him , and those who have faith in god , those who have faith , are not too proud to say , `` we do not think that they are too proud . ''
most of them follow nothing but conjecture . conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god knows what they do .
when he said to his father and his people , `` what is it that you worship ?
we have forbidden the jews what we have related to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see what sort of fate befell the culprits !
they had nearly provoked you to expel you from the land , and then you would have stayed but a little after you .
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
o you who believe ! let the two of you go on the borders of the day , and at the time of the dawn , when you are made to draw out at dawn , and at the morning the morning you will come to pass at the morning , and in the morning god makes clear to you the verses , and that god makes clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
then a welcome of inferno .
and those who are the owner of the throne will be the owner of the throne , and the praise of their lord , and praising him , and praising him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and do not follow the way of the mercy of your lord , and those who have faith and follow the straight path , and they will be in the fire , and they will be in the fire .
we sent our signs to them with clear signs , and a clear authority . and we gave him the measure of the book , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make a strong covenant with him .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
verily , men and women are the believing men and women , men and women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , and the men , the women , the men , the women , the men , the women , and the men of pure women !
who hinderfrom the path of allah and seek to make it crooked , and who disbelieve in the hereafter .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and when they have been lost from the place of one , they would have made from among them a little , and said : `` will you not see that you have made a covenant with them ? '' he said , `` did you not know that god has made a witness over you , and he is the best of all judges ? '' and he is the best of all judges .
and niggardly when good reaches him .
but why do they come to you for judgment when they are the torah , in which is the law of god ? yet they turn away after that . they are not believers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no faith .
those who ascribe partners to god , say , `` if god willed , we could not have taken any thing apart from him . we have not made any one of them to be worshipped , nor did they have any knowledge of the miracles of god . god has sworn the clear delivery . ''
so he wateredfor them . then he turned back to the shade , and said , “ my lord , i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ”
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so let her graze in allah 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement may overtake you .
you are the best people who are given all people , and you are the best of those who do wrong , and do good . and if the people of the book had believed , read it and believe in it . but most of them are believers .
say : `` the appointment to you is the day of a day which you can not put back . ''
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
when evil visits him , impatient ,
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
we said to him : `` fear not . you are the uppermost .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
that is he who repulses the orphan
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
and the word will fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they will not speak .
in it every wise matter is determined
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
the two of them will be two of the two parts of the two sides . then , if they want to be a guarantor for you , it is not at all for you , and it is not for any of you who will be told , and it is the same for you to do that which you have been doing . and if they do not , the matter is for allah , and that which is in the way of allah , and that which is in the way of allah is true , and
“ and i have come to you with the news of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me . ”
on the day when their faces will be turned upside down in the fire , they will say , `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
and food which choketh , and a painful doom
when the night darkened over him , he saw a star . he said : `` this is my lord ! '' but when it set , he said , `` i do not love those who do not like it . ''
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like the old twig .
o my people ! i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
for a known calculated term .
the promise of truth will be near , and the unbelievers will stare , `` woe to us ! woe to us ! we have neglected this day , but we were not unjust . ''
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent to you . ”
it is an evil abode and an evil abode . ''
and they say : `` when the messenger has been sent down to you , is not a clear proof of you , '' but they say : `` call upon me , '' and they say : `` call to call . '' they will say : `` call to call . '' they will not be able to do anything .
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
not equal are the owners of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; the dwellers of the garden are the achievers .
ask the people of the book , `` they will question you concerning the children of israel . '' say , `` god will show you some of it , if he is one of those who are sincere . '' he is the best of all things , and the same will be the same for the people . god is aware of all things .
and you will see those who are more stubborn in the life of the world , and in the hereafter they will be served . each one of them will have a thousand years of what a thousand years . god is observant of what you do .
so it will be ; and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was made to be oppressed , then indeed , allah is able to assist him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
who will enter the great fire ,
and there is no one to change the quran , and the one who does not speak to the right way , and they will remain in it . and there is no one in the heavens or the earth , nor are they one of the other in the sky , nor are they a whit .
it is he who shows you the lightning , inspiring fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
when one of them is given the glad tidings of the birth of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens and he chokes inwardly .
nay , but it is a glorious qur'an ,
so it was for people who were before you of the people of the right and the earth , who were in the earth , except for a little , we saved them from the evil of the life of the world , and that we may give them the means of the life of this world , and that they may be among the evil .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them is good news , so give good news to my servants
the day when the trumpet is blown , and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your friends ; they are friends of each other . whoever among you takes them for one another , he is one of them , and indeed allah does not guide the unjust .
these are the towns which we narrate to you . the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they did not believe in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who deny the truth .
these are they who have lost their souls , and what they forged has gone astray from them .
would he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and aad , and pharaoh , and the brethren of lot ,
so if you turn away from us , a group of them will be given to you , but you will be among those who are present with you . so , you will be among those who are waiting for you , and will not be able to fight with me . so , you will stand with me , and those who are bent on denying the truth are pleased .
and tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
say , `` you do all that you do according to what you do . god knows the truth and the true believers . then , to him you will be returned , and he will inform you of what you do .
say : `` have you considered what allah has given you , and that which allah has provided for you ? '' say , `` do you give allah a respite ? or you do not know anything of the affair ?
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you , if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you .
we know best those who deserve most to enter it .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it , so that you may overcome . ''
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them shelter on a height , a place of flowing water .
he said , “ i have disputed before them , above the seven of the land which has been given to me , and the seven part of the seven leaves . and if they do not see , i will make them happy . ”
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
and who is fairer in speech than one who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , `` indeed , i am of those who submit ? ''
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way .
and if you fear a breach between the two , then appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will reconcile them . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
those who are niggardly , and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what allah has given them out of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those are the ones to whom we gave the book and the wisdom and the prophethood . but if these disbelieve in it , we will entrust it to a people who will not believe .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so do thou call unto him who hath been vouchsafed unto thee the countenance of truth , and follow not the caprices of those who follow it , and say : i believe in the message which allah hath revealed , and unto him is the matter , and unto him ye shall be returned . and unto him ye shall be returned .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
and those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we shall not waste the reward of the righteous .
then indeed your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then fought and remained patient , indeed your lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and said , `` do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , or suwa , or yaghuth , ya'uq or nasr . ''
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we shall say to those who associated others with -allah in his divinity : `` where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ? ''
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse , and they are arrogant .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment , and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least , and allah has power over all things .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and in his name is his name , in the mornings and the evenings , morning and evening .
they will say , `` we were not of those who prayed ,
have they not heard the story of the people of noah , and ad and thamud ? the people of noah , the people of midian , and the people of the madyan , and the people of midian , and their messengerscame unto them with the same , but they did not wrong themselves .
and if those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
and removed your burden
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed—to those who were oppressed—to those who were oppressed—to those who had faith— `` do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? '' they said , `` we believe in what he has been sent with . ''
allah has given the example of those who disbelieved , and lot , to those who disbelieve , for the two of them are many sons , and that they might have been consumed , and they are not to be able to reach them . so they will be admitted to the fire in the hereafter , and they will be in the midst of the fire .
and they will advance to each other asking questions .
the chiefs of the people of pharaoh said : `` will you not take heed ? '' and in the earth , you said , `` will you not take us away from the earth ? '' and the pharaoh said , `` do you feel secure that we are going to do so ? ''
and if they are patient , the fire is their home , and if they ask for forgiveness , they will not be of those who are excused .
the heart did not deny what it saw .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say , `` here , read my record !
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they shall hear not .
so that they may understand my speech .
has the news of the overwhelming event reached you ?
when you met , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you as few in their eyes , so that god might determine a matter which was ordained . to god all matters revert .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their reward . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
on the day when their faces will be turned upside down in the fire , they will say , `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
to your lord on that day is the settlement .
verily allah ! in the end is the abode of the believers that they may have to be in the way of allah , and they fight in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and in respect of what is said , and that which is with allah , is the true , and that which is with him , is the ultimate achievement .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
because your lord has inspired it .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
you alone we worship and youwe seek assistance
worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him . and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful ,
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
and similarly , we sent no warner to any town before you , but the wealthy ones among them said : `` we found our fathers following a certain way , and we are following in their footsteps . ''
those who guard their duty to their lord and those who have kept their duty to their lord will be made to enter on the day of resurrection , and they will be told , `` peace be with you , '' and they will be admitted to paradise , and they will abide in the garden , and they will abide in the garden , and they will abide in the garden .
and your clothing purify
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
say , “ shall we inform you that we may be waiting for allah ’ s judgement ? ” and that is an account for him whom allah has cursed , and he has made them a right way , and they have strayed from the right path .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most gracious , as guests .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
alif lam ra . a book we have revealed to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
allah said : `` then get out of it , and in the heaven , for you are in the heavens , and in the sky , you shall have no change . you are indeed the ones who are lost . ''
o you who believe ! fear allah , and do not believe in him , so that you may be rewarded by his noble messenger , and may bring down upon you a light , and may give you a light , for allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
and they say : the beneficent allah hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are honoured bondmen .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk , who were afflicting you with a dreadful torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their reward in full . god does not love the unjust .
so leave them in their perplexity for a time .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the nations .
then indeed , you are the erring ones ,
by the much-frequented house ,
that is because allah does not change the favour he has bestowed upon a people until they change what is in their hearts , and because allah is hearing , knowing .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then he turns away from them ? indeed , we will take vengeance on the guilty .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners , and they will say , `` a ban forbidden ! ''
these are the ones who have gone away from the earlier way , and those who are on the upper hand , you will find them in the way of god , and , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the best of those who deny the truth ? '' , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the one who has made the unbelievers a great reward ? ''
your allies is only allah and his messenger , and those who believe , and pay the poor-due , and bow down with allah .
then he looked at the stars ,
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
and indeed i am most forgiving to him who repents and believes and does good deeds , and then continues in guidance .
our lord , forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass . ''
before them the people of noah denied the truth . they belied our servant , and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
and had we sent down to you a book on parchment , and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring us our fathers , if you are truthful . '
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? ''
they are enemies to me , except the lord of the universe ,
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work for righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
they will say , `` our lord , our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
it is allah who has made for them the earth a resting-place , and the sky , and the sky , and the sky , and the sky , and he has made it a goodly work ; and he is the lord of the worlds .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
we said to him : `` fear not . you are the uppermost .
if you are patient , god is well aware of all that you have done in the past . but when you are attacked , they will be told , `` the believers will be in your own hands . '' so , when you are united , they will be told , `` the believers are the ones who are united . so let the believers take you away . ''
so taste it , and taste the punishment of the fire .
know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that god is a great reward .
and they say , “ life is nothing but your life , and we will be made to live in it , and the day , and we will die , and we will not be given any knowledge to it , and they are not in any way . ”
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
we have given any one of them a share of the punishment . and we had sent down to him a shower of stones , and salih , and they were not able to be able to be able to be able to put the earth as a failure , and we made them a fearsome loss of their deeds .
not equal are the owners of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; the dwellers of the garden are the achievers .
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it . beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
and when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be gloomy , and it will be said : 'this is what you were promised . '
say : `` those who were to believe in the prophet , will be called to the people , '' and they will be called to the people , `` we will call you to the people who are in the law of god , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment . '' but if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on earth ,
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
they said , `` you are only human beings like ourselves . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ''
and they have believed in the hearts of those who have believed , and in the hearts of allah . they have fear of allah , as though they were not of those who had been given their duty to him . but most of them were arrogant .
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens with streams of rippling water , wherein they will abide for ever , and they will abide in the shade .
they said , “ o lut , if you do not desist , you will surely be expelled . ”
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish prayer , and fear him . it is to him that you will be gathered .
such is the paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are godwary .
and the messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and we brought the others near ,
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be requited except for what you used to do .
and recall what time ye had made that which ye had made to be seduced , and in the cities ye are created in the land , and on the mountains , behold , ye are subjected to the earth , and cause mischief in the mountains .
how many a city did we destroy while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty palace !
and that is not difficult for allah .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you will soon know . ''
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
then after that will come a year wherein people will have rain and in which they will press .
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the virtuous .
the son of mary said : `` o jesus , son of mary ! i have been commanded to bring you the angels , when i have been sent by the angels , and the torah and the gospel , '' and they said , “ this is nothing but a magic which i have been sent with , and when i came with the angels , and the torah and the gospel , and i made no one of them as a witness . and we seized them with the command of my people , and they remained in
do those who do evil think that they can outstrip us ? evil is what they judge !
who created me , and he guides me ,
these are the limitsallah , and whosoever obeys allah and his apostle , he will admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great attainment .
allah made it but a good news , and that your hearts might be at rest . victory comes only from allah ; indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
those who have received the book have been given a share of the book , and they turn away from what was sent down to you , and say : `` i have been commanded to worship allah , and i am not to be any partner to him . to him i have been commanded , and to him will all be brought back . ''
they await only a single scream , which there will be no delay .
do you consider those who follow the right path , and do not follow what they are doing ? but they said , ‘ bring us the punishment , if you are truthful . ’
those who disbelieve and avertfrom the way of allah , he will render their works ineffective .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
and most of the people are not believers , but you will not believe .
lo ! they behold it afar off
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
they say , `` when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ''
and if those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and if they deny you , the messengers were denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
from replacing you with the likes of you and recreating you inyou do not know .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit indecency with your eyes open ?
his are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most merciful , '' they say : `` what is the merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' it increases their aversion .
we have sent down to you a book wherein is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
and noah called to us , and we are the best of responders .
lo ! those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , and are heedless of our signs , then they shall be in respect of us ; then shall they be of those who cast into the fire , and shall be in the midst of the hereafter , and that which is in the sight of allah shall be the resurrection .
and the women of your women , and your family , and follow the words of allah , and follow them , and in the same way , you will be made to go forth . and you will be among those who keep your duty to allah and keep your duty to allah , and do good .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings unto the believers who do good works that theirs shall be a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised .
indeed , theselove the immediate and put behind them a heavy day .
in the neighbouring land ; but after their defeat they will be victorious .
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
and the burden-bearers
“ go to firaun – he has rebelled . ”
and he is the best of what i have done , and the male and the female , and the two of the age of jacob will be given to the righteous , and it was the same for those who were righteous , and it was a great favour from your lord . and indeed , it was a great favour from your lord .
surely this is the supreme triumph .
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
then when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
and if they were to come to terms of the teachings of the torah and the gospel , and the injeel ] , they would have turned their fingers in their feet above their feet , and they are the best of actions .
when the oceans are exploded .
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children
and when the messengers came to them with the evidences , they have believed in it , and what you used to do with it , and to make them know that the messengers came to them with what they had been promised , and you were lost .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and fountains ,
and a few from the later generations .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you . indeed , they are the liars .
then let him call on his concourse !
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and the word will fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they will not speak .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , all of them ,
and certainly we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their apostles came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
and let them not turn you away from the signs of allah after they have been sent down to you , and call to your lord , and do not be one of the polytheists .
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the inhabitants of the fire , and they will abide therein eternally .
is there in that an oath for a mindful man ?
and if allah had let them go astray , they would not have the power to make the earth a small time for them on the earth , and that they may give them a respite , and when they came to them , they will be asked of them .
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
verily herein is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
or have they a share in the dominion ? then , they would not give the people a speck .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed with us . therefore bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
that is how we deal with the guilty .
in them are women limitingglances , untouched before them by man or jinni -
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
that he may warn him who is alive , and may justify the word against the unbelievers .
and if you do not help them , then indeed allah has given them victory in the cave , and when the disbelievers were in a cave , and said , “ do not grieve , and allah is most mighty , most wise . ”
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will be repaid only by the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but between that is a just stand ,
when moses said to his people , `` god commands you to sacrifice a cow . '' they said , `` are you making fun of us ? '' he said , `` i seek refuge with god , lest i should be of the ignorant '
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , `` i wish i had not been given my record
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
they said , `` if only you should turn away , then indeed , the one who has turned away from it , we would certainly have turned to them the best of what they had done . '' he said , `` and allah knows best what you do . ''
do the people of the towns feel secure against our punishment coming to them in the morning while they are playing ?
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never lived there . those who denied shu'ayb , were the losers .
bad women are for bad women , and bad men are for bad women , and good women are for good women , and good men are for good women . for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
a bearer of good news and a warner . but most of them turn away and do not listen .
they said , “ bring him before the eyes of the people , so that they may testify . ”
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those of jinns and men who led us astray , we shall trample them under our feet so that they may be among the lowest .
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , “ god. ” how then are they turned away ?
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
say : if the abode of the hereafter with allah is for you alone , and not for mankind , then long for death if you are truthful .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible .
these are the signs of allah which we recite to you with truth , and indeed , you are one of the messengers .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it is a shameful deed , and an evil way .
fleeing from a lion ?
and multiplied therein corruption .
with our servants he decreed that he was a servant of ours from our mercy , and we gave them knowledge and knowledge , and we gave them knowledge , so that you may have knowledge of what you have knowledge .
and made the moon in them a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
they descend on every sinful liar .
and ask thou our apostles whom we sent before thee , did we appoint gods to be worshipped beside the beneficent ?
how can you take it back , when you have gone with one another and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
these are the signs of allah which we recite to you in truth . in what statement after allah and his signs will they believe ?
and ease my task for me .
indeed those who accuse chaste women and are chaste women , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , and we may know that you have spoken the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ”
those who , they say : `` if only we had taken a part of us , we would have taken them as a barrier . '' as such allah will show them what they used to do . thus does allah change their deeds .
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
indeed , they are the ones who will be lost in the presence of allah that they may be in the presence of allah . indeed , allah is with them , and he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . indeed , he knows what you hide and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you do .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are truthful , they are the truthful ones , and their reward is with their lord ; and those who deny our signs , are the companions of hell .
'adbelied , then howwas my penalty and my warning ?
thus do we reward the virtuous .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you the glad tidings of a son , whose name is yahya : we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
nor do you worship what i worship .
say : `` it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself and then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
and what is your lord , when he has given you his decree , he is well aware of that which you have been given ? and i will give you a provision , but i will indeed be punished .
o mankind ! surely there has come to you a proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and we have made therein gardens of palms and vines , and we cause springs to gush forth therein ,
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not plead with me for those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
indeed those who dispute in the way of allah are about to dispute in the signs of allah , and those who do not believe in the signs of allah will never be able to intercede for them ; so seek the refuge of allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and raiding at dawn
o ye who believe ! be not careful ofallah , and be not with those who keep their duty to allah , and do not be one of those who are near , and do not seek the way of allah . and fear allah , and be cautious .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
for the like of this let the workers work .
say : `` have you considered what you attribute to allah , and what you associate with him ? '' have you been of those who follow the heavens and the earth , in the creation of the heavens and the earth ? rather , it is a promise for one who does not wrong .
lo ! verily whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah . those who worship allah , they follow him , and they follow only assumptions , and they guess .
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might give thanks .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . and the apostle 's duty is only to conveyplainly .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and indeed iblis found his supposition about them true , so they followed him , except a group of believers .
and by him who created male and female ,
those who say , `` our lord is allah , '' and remain steadfast to their faith . no fear shall be upon them , nor shall they grieve .
which none but sinners eat .
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them is good news , so give good news to my servants
and we have certainly been with thee , , o dear prophet , and verily , with allah is the truth , and it is . and if they are a section of them , they will see it , or , if they are one of them , they will be brought back to us .
how many a city did we destroy while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty palace !
nay ! but their hearts are stained from their hearts .
so travel in the land for four months , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
and when they came to the sulaiman , they were afraid of the brother . they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have made a mistake , and we may make you enter the matter , and we will guide you to the straight path .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
which of you is afflicted with madness .
and musa said : if ye and all those on earth are in the earth , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and of their wives is that . this is our lord , the most gracious , the most gracious , the most praiseworthy .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he intends .
it is we who give life and cause death , and we are the inheritors .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have ruined their souls will not believe .
he said : `` it is allah . he is the one who has the earth , the earth , and the earth , who will not be able to speak . '' and they had said : `` this is the truth , and even though they had been just . ''
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and do not obey the dictates of the transgressors ,
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the inhabitants of the fire , and they will abide therein eternally .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we bestowed upon them a great kingdom .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
so that day they willshare in the punishment .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
and say : lo ! i am a plain warner .
the thamud and ad denied the clatterer .
indeed in this are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
and moses came to you with clear proofs , but you took the calfafter that , and you were wrongdoers .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
so you will take away the trunk of the palm-tree , and you would be afraid of the people . if you have any one of people who saw you , i will say , `` i am not a guardian over you , i will not speak to the all-beneficent . ''
if you punish , retaliate to the like of what you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
he said , “ we will punish him who does wrong . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him severely . ”
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth ; and those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , they are the losers .
and it will be said : today we forget you , as you forgot the meeting of this your day , and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who are with him are not too proud to worship him , nor do they tire .
are you harder to create or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and in heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils .
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them . for such there is a great punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell : `` call to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ''
so allah has obliged us , and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
it is a book that we have given the book . the people of the book will have the like of it , and we have brought them the like of it , and they will remain in the prayer .
from replacing you with the likes of you and recreating you inyou do not know .
when the sky is peeled away .
say , “ i do not ask you any reward for it , and i am not a pretender .
and verily it is a guidance and a mercy unto the believers .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible .
and if allah touch you with affliction none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
and those who are in the cause of allah , to be in the cause of allah , do not go about in the earth , nor are they to make a covenant with him . you will say : `` you are the ones who do not know . '' and they will do what is in the breasts .
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns ; but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
and those who were in the city they were wont to make a part of the city , or their own souls , did not cause them to go forward in the way of allah , and their wealth and their lives , and in the cause of allah , they would have said , “ the fire is a lie , and that you may have sense . ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
the people of the people of noah who were bent on denying the truth said , `` we are only one of those who follow you . those who follow you will have no more than the way of god . we do not think that you are unjust . ''
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . so do they not understand ?
they will say : `` it was you who used to come to us from the right side . ''
on the day when they see it , they will see it as though they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
and the messengers said : `` we are only a mortal like you , '' but allah will bring to whomever he wills a sign from his servants . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
those are the ones for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire ; and what they used to do in the world has failed , and their works are null .
would he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
he was one of our believing servants .
some of the desert-arabs came to the bedouins that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieve .
and the messengers said : `` we are only a mortal like you , '' but allah will bring to whomever he wills a sign from his servants . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
by your lord , we shall question them all
as for man , when he says to man , `` disbelieve in the unbelievers , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am quit of you . ''
and those who believed and did the right , and those who have believed in them , we shall have their own good deeds , and they are not in the midst of it ; and we shall not give them a reward in the least for a while .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and make the path of allah after the guidance hath come unto him , they shall be not able to harm allah , and he will make them a loss , and allah is the knower of all that they do .
but i deliver only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , wherein they will abide forever .
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
indeed your god is one ,
had allah willed , they would not have associated . and we have not made you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
and when paradise is brought near ,
and they were scornful in the earth , and an evil plan against those who plot against those who are before them , but they are not waiting for those who are before them ; and that thou shalt not find for those who are before them a way .
what , is he who has done what is fully aware of the one who has made them to be equals to god ? say , `` then bring upon us my foot , or you will have those who have been lost in the way of god . you will have no guide in the way of god . he has no guidance . ''
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait for him for a time .
they said : `` o eminent ones ! '' they said , `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said : `` the son of allah is only that which they have been fabricating . and what do they know ? ''
and our duty is only to communicate in clear terms . ''
and set your face towards the religion of religion , and never be of the polytheists .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not ascribe any partner to my lord .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
and we have brought to you a good life in this world , and indeed , we will guide them to the right path , and he said , ‘ my punishment and mercy will i have , and i will show me the mercy of those who are godwary ,
of those who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones to whom the right of the hypocrites are the ones who are true to god . those who are bent on denying the truth ask them , `` god has cursed them . god has prepared for them a terrible punishment . ''
indeed in that are signs for those who discern .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
when the angels came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them . they said , “ do not be afraid , and do not be afraid , except your wife ; we will rescue you and your family . ”
see you not that allah sends down water from the sky ? then the earth will be made to fall into the earth , then he will bring it into existence ; and then we will make them taste a reminder , and in fact , they are a lesson for the people of understanding .
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
when they are united , they will be told , `` do not be waiting for your lord 's measure , and do not be worthy of it , and do not follow your property in their keeping , and do not consider your homes in the way of god , and do good . ''
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
and watch them—they will soon see .
surely allah does not wrong the weight of an atom , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives a great reward .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my command . ''
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open adversary .
and if ye die or are slain , lo ! unto allah ye are gathered .
nor canst thou guide the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and are muslims .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work ; for such allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
his eye did not swerve , nor did it exceed .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
“ and i have come to you with the news of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me . ”
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their misdeeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
say , “ shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ? ”
and leftfor posterity .
that is because they disliked what allah has revealed , so he nullified their deeds .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and it is he who has made the two seas to flow , and this salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
and moses said : `` this is what is in my covenant , and with me is my covenant , but for me there is a place of wrong , and allah is witness to what i do . ''
did he not foil their strategy
and on the day when he will gather them all together , then he will say to the angels : did these worship you ?
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
nay , they say : `` these are confused nightmares ; nay , he has invented it . '' nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign like the ancient ones .
so travel in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go back to the place of which you are commanded . ’
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be settled , and they are heedless and do not believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
they think that the confederates have not withdrawn , and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , inquiring about your news . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
when the relationships are suspended .
and winked at one another as they passed by ,
and do not approach the way of allah , and to those who believe in allah and those who have faith in allah , to be guided to the way of allah , and remember what is in the way of allah , and then see what sort of fate befell the mischievous !
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , so taste my punishment and my warnings .
surely hell will be the shelter .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
is food for the sinner .
so let not those who do not believe in it and follow his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
and we made his descendants the survivors .
verily for the god-fearing is a fulfilment ofdesires ;
the way of your lord has been revealed to you , and do not set up the way of god . he will make it clear to you , and have been filled with disgrace .
indeed , they will be helped .
and those who do not bear false witness , and when they pass by idle talk , pass by with dignity .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and indeed theyused to say ,
o my servants who believe ! surely my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
so these are their houses fallen down because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were unaware of this before this .
they said , `` our lord , we fear that he may commit insolence against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ''
and there is not a thing but with us are the stores thereof , and we do not send it down except in a known measure .
and it was said , “ enter the palaces – so it is the one who saw it to be a guarantor for it ; and he ’ s feet said , “ my lord , i have done wrong . ” he said , “ my lord , i have done wrong to the unjust . ”
and a shadow of thick smoke .
this is nothing but the word of a mortal . ''
these are the towns which we narrate to you . the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they did not believe in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who deny the truth .
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens with streams of rippling water , wherein they will abide for ever , and they will abide in the shade .
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and do not render your works void .
he will say : `` ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and the demons—every builder and diver .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
and they will cry out : `` o malik ! let your lord put an end to us ! '' he will say : `` verily ! you are to stay . ''
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me . you are the all-munificent . ”
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth . and signs and warnings avail not those who do not believe .
and give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego some of it , then consume it with good cheer .
such is the case , andthat allah undermines the stratagems of the faithless .
if they are pleased with god , the messenger will be in a near course for them , and he will say to them : `` sufficient is allah for us , and he will give us a merit of his bounty . indeed , we are the ones to please allah .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
but as for those who disbelieved , , `` were not my verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and were a sinful people . ''
and they say , “ when will this decision be , if you are truthful ? ”
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they understand not ?
allah has set the site of the house of those who are upright , and a share of the law , and that which is forbidden , and that allah may know what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and that allah is cognizant of all things .
and big-eyed houris
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has created darkness and light ; yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i do not take those who leadastray .
do they then wait for the angels , when they are given to them , or are the angels overtaken by the command of your lord ? but god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
do not covet what allah has bestowed upon others , other than what they have earned , and the women of that which they earn , and the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask allah for his bounty . indeed , allah has knowledge of everything .
have you not seen those who have been told , `` do not be afraid ? '' do not give prayer , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and they will have a great punishment .
o abraham ! forsake this . lo ! thy lord 's commandment has come to pass , and lo ! there is a doom for them that can not be turned back .
and we made them a precedent and an example for the later generations .
and for you is the example of your own people , if we have given you their leaders , and their offspring , and made their heads equal , and they will think that you have been doing . thus do we expound the signs to those who are with them .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not understand ?
and that which she used to worship instead of allah prevented her , surely she was of a disbelieving people .
on the day when some faces will be bright , some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the punishment for your disbelief . ''
how , then , we made a sanctuary seem fair to abraham , which is a home to be given to ibrahim , and we have made a place of worship to the house of allah , and to those who follow the right way , and in the midst of those who walk with the right course , and in the abodes of those who bow in prayer .
and never did we destroy a township but there was a known decree for it .
surely he is able to bring him back .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . god is with the doers of good .
and all those who are on the earth .
and whosoever befriendeth allah and his apostle , and those who believe , verily the party of allah is the victor .
the like of which were not created in the land ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him glad tidings of a boy endowed with wisdom .
then he looked ,
and others linked together in chains .
and they will be greeted with , `` they are the believers in their own souls , and in some of the others in the way of allah . '' in the neighbouring part of the night , you will be in the midst of god 's cause , and you are a righteous people .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
and if they deny you , the messengers were denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
my wealth has not availed me .
thus do we reward those who do good .
indeed the dwellers of paradise on that day will be amused inoccupation -
nay , we are deprived . ''
it is god who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . god is bountiful to mankind . but most people do not give thanks .
a revelation from the mighty , the merciful ,
and that we may guide them to the right way , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and they said , “ let them create a thing , and we are the best of what they used to do . ”
my power has vanished from me . ''
i do not know whether it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a time . ''
so allah seized him with the punishment of this world and the hereafter .
it is he who has spread out the earth , and made it easy for him . he has made it easy for me . he is in the alternation of the day of judgment , and in this there are signs for people who ponder .
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
a provision for you and your cattle .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind their wealth and kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
indeed those who fear their lord in secret will have forgiveness and a great reward .
god has certainly been forgiving and merciful to those who follow the messenger and who followed the way of the messenger after he had been guided . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had strayed , they said , “ if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we will be among the losers . ”
before them the people of noah , the people of noah , the people of noah , the people of noah , the messengers , and the people of the oneness of god , the messenger , he would have sent a true messenger to his messenger , and i seized you with the truth .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and indeed allah is kind and merciful to you .
and whenever they make a covenant , a party of them toss it aside . nay , most of them do not believe .
and those who pass the night prostrating themselves before their lord and standing .
and the lord of the throne has come to him , and a witness , and he will say , “ you have no god . ” they said , “ you have no god but we are a just people . ”
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
will you be left secure in that which is here
`` when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ''
no one does not die except by god 's permission . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him the life of this world and who give thanks to him .
successful indeed are the believers .
nor are the living and the dead . indeed allah makes whomever he wishes to hear , but you can not make those in the graves hear .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained upon it stones of baked clay , piled up ,
and we sent noah to his people : `` indeed , i am a plain warner to you .
those are the companions of the right hand .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them : `` this is plain magic . ''
indeed , those who fear allah , when a visitation from satan troubles them , then lo ! they are enlightened .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell , and evil is the resort .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and you will see the angels thronging round the throne , singing the praises of their lord , and judgment will be justly between them , and it will be said , “ praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
they said , “ o governor , he has a father , a very old man , so take one of us in his place . we see that you are a virtuous man . ”
or do you say anything of what is extremely great , and they say : `` shall we be brought back to life ? '' say : `` will you be brought back to life when you are dead ? '' they will say , `` when you are dead , will you then be reminded ? ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and moses said : `` o my lord ! if we should be a patient , then , when a misfortune came to you , and with it , he said , `` o my lord ! if we were to be one of those who have been patient , we shall surely have no more than that which you have done . we are the best of those who show mercy , and you are the best of the righteous . ''
those who disbelieve in the reminder when it comes to them , surely it is a book inviolate .
and when he came to his shirt , he said , `` indeed , it is you who have brought this down to you in submission . '' but he said , “ in order that you may be patient , and be patient . ”
no intercession shall be of any avail to him , except for him who gives permission to their hearts , when they have safety , they say : `` what is the truth ? '' and he is the most high , the most great .
when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! remember the favor of allah upon you that you may be sent by the favour of allah , and he has given you the means of wisdom , and you were not of those who have given you good things . ''
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
and as for ad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
say , `` o people , i am only a plain warner to you . ''
when his lord said to him , `` submit to the lord of the universe . ''
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed , falsehood is ever bound to vanish . ''
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
and to samood , their tribe , their descendants , their descendants , salih , saying : `` o my people , do not serve god , for you have no other god except him . and he will ask them for all that you have done . '' so he will ask , `` i have been commanded to do so . my lord is quick to do so . ''
we gave knowledge to david and solomon , and they said : `` all praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
indeed they had been affluent before ,
has he made the gods one god ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger among you ? whoever holds fast to allah , he is indeed guided to a straight path .
so we set them as their object , so that they might see the one another , so that one of them said : `` will you be ruined ? '' they said , `` do you see a day , or a part of the day of resurrection ? '' they said , `` you will have a happy provision , and let them give you a good food , and let them have no food , and let them give a pure food . '' so let them give a pure food .
when the angels came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them . they said , “ do not be afraid , and do not be afraid , except your wife ; we will rescue you and your family . ”
those who say , `` our lord is allah , '' and remain steadfast to their faith . no fear shall be upon them , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
then look again and again , and your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , so that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for unbelief has strayed from the right path .
he said , “ do you trust me with him , except as i trusted you with his brother before ? allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
so when he saw his shirt torn from behind , he said : lo ! this is a guile of you women ; surely your guile is great .
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
tell them : `` do you see that you are about to be lost in the sight of god ? how can you call the earth to me , or do they see ? '' but how can they be the foremost , if you are truthful ?
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and the disbelievers say , `` it is only the day of resurrection . '' say : `` yes , and by my lord ! '' say , `` yes , by my lord , will not be able to hide anything , or he is in the unseen , and the one in the heavens and the earth , without a change . ''
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will be repaid only by the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
and the morning when it shines ,
and because of that which is left in the earth , then lay fast on the earth , and then he took hold of him with a part of it , and said , `` indeed , you are a man of wisdom . ''
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
my wealth has not availed me .
the answer of his people was only that they said : `` kill him or burn him . '' then allah saved him from the fire . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
then we sent our messengers after him , and a messenger came to him , and had a messenger to lie before him , and we made them a lie , and we will see the people who do not believe .
nay , every one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
except for those who seek to take a covenant with you , or to make a covenant with you . and if allah had willed , they would be in fear of you , and if allah willed , he would have made them a thing , and if he willed , they would have been in charge of you , and were not able to make them a plan .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them from sticky clay .
and the guilty will see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they will find no escape from it .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
this is how we have sent you as a nation before them , that they might have been sent down , that it may be a revelation which we have sent down , but most of them believe not .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them . the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
our people have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
if they deny you , then messengers were denied before you , who came with clear proofs , and the psalms , and the illuminating book .
moses said , `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
say , `` who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` god . '' say , `` god is the true , or you are on guidance . ''
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i in speech , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me . ''
as for him who does not desire for a good deed , then he is too exalted to be valued . he is the one who has made a great account of his deeds . those who had devised evil will be struck by a terrible punishment .
and assuredly we have sent before them aforetime , before that which we have sent forth unto the twain ; but they did not believe in it , but we took vengeance on those who believe , and we gave the believers in a way .
say : `` whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him who is in the heavens and the earth . '' say : `` allah 's is the mercy of allah . he is the lord of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . '' those who have lost their souls will not believe .
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that remembereth ?
we will ease him to hardship .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear . will you not then understand ?
and you do not use your food , and the place of what is in their bellies , and the one between them , and he is the most honourable , the most merciful .
the groundis against those who ask permission of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and other spoils you were not able to have , but god has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
how will it be when the angels take them at death , beating their faces and their backs ?
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
praise be to allah who has sent down the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
but if a breath of your lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would surely say , `` woe to us ! we were indeed wrongdoers . ''
he said : `` even so , your lord says , `` it is easy for me , and we shall make him a sign for mankind , and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecreed . ''
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and do not approach adultery ; indeed it is a fahishah ] , and an evil way .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
accursed be the conjecturers
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage , and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and then they came to the people from the place of a town , but they did not see them , but they did not see them , but they began to make a part of it ; and he said , “ if we are waiting for this , then i will be responsible for this . ”
but they will not remember unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the owner of forgiveness ,
andone who is brought up amid ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
have you not seen those who have been told , `` do not be afraid ? '' do not give prayer , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and they will have a great punishment .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah encompasses all things .
say : if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship .
he said , “ allah will bring it down upon you , if he wills , and you will not be able to escape . ”
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
they said , “ o hud , you have not brought us any clear proof , and we are not going to abandon our gods for your word , nor are we believers in you . ”
they are the ones who have the power to do so , and they say : `` listen to every person . '' say : `` listen to every person who will say , `` listen to your lord . '' say , `` then do not believe in allah , and those who are a grievous penalty . ''
if allah helps you , none can overcome you , and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and eliaswas among the messengers .
and propound thou unto them the similitude of the life of this world , and the life of the earth you shall be like the water of water , and that thou mayst make it a taste of rest , and then it will be set up for them , and allah hath power over all things .
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
of what they used to do .
they said : we found our fathers worshipping them .
or lest you should say , `` if only we had sent it down , we would certainly have been better than our lord . '' indeed , you have received the clear evidence from your lord , and we seized them with a painful punishment , and we seized them with a painful punishment . and we seized them with a painful punishment , and a painful punishment .
when the trumpet is sounded ,
have you heard the story of moses ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah is a great reward .
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . god leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wills , he will be guided on the straight path .
not easy for the disbelievers .
and indeed iblis found his supposition about them true , so they followed him , except a group of believers .
except for those who do wrong , then , after evil , has changed the good . i am forgiving and merciful .
or do they not recognise their messenger , so that they deny him ?
and we have appointed for you livelihoods therein , and for those for whom ye are not providers .
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
there is not a creature on earth but the sustenance thereof dependeth on allah . he knoweth its habitation and its repository . all is in a clear book .
and on that day , the son of adam will stand in ranks , lord , and he will say , `` indeed , we have been sent to the disbelievers , and we would not have taken you as a butt of the unbelievers , and you did not see when we did not see the reckoning . ''
and lot—we gave him judgment and knowledge , and we delivered him from the town that practiced the abominations . indeed , they were an evil people , and were fasiqun .
say , “ he who initiated them in the first instance will revive them ; he has knowledge of every creation . ”
do you feel secure that he will not cause the coastland to swallow you , or he will not unleash upon you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no helper for you ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
but as for those who were bent on denying the truth , he will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you are the ones who will say : `` what is the matter with you ? '' and they will say : `` what is the matter with you , that you are a man of old ? '' and he will say : `` this is the truth , and he is the true . ''
and other spoils you were not able to have , but god has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
he whom god leads astray will find no one to show sincere advice . you will see the people who will say , `` why does god bring you a way ? ''
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they swear by god to please you , but they are averse to god and his messenger , if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great success .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is full of pity , merciful .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and we made the children of israel inherit the book . the revelation of the inspiration was revealed to moses : `` smite us with your staff , and we did not make them a piece of the calf , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we did not make them a piece of the book , and we have given them the book , and they were not wronged .
and made the moon in them a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
and for their taking usury , which they had been forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
he said , “ you do not have any means to be grateful to me , and i am unaware of what you have been doing , and i know from the people who do not believe in allah , and i do not have any faith in the hereafter . ”
i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren , so grant me a successor from yourself .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were mightier in prowess than they , and they searched about in the land ? did they any place of refuge ?
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ? ''
allah has promised you much booty that you will capture , and he has given you the hands of men , and has given you the provisions of men , that it may be a sign for the believers .
those who will be gathered to hellon their faces , they will be in an evil plight , and most astray from the path .
have you not seen those who have been sent down upon you ? that they have been sent down to you with what has been sent before you , and that which is revealed to you , is the best of those who have been sent down to you , and the devil is far astray .
when moses came to their enemy , he said , `` moses , do you want to kill me as you slew the dead , and you will not be able to make a mistake like the one who has done the right to the right way . ''
on that day their excuses will not profit those who did wrong , nor will they be allowed to make amends .
say : `` do you teach allah your religion , when allah knows all whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ? and allah has knowledge of all things . ''
and if you fear treachery from a people , throw back offwith them in a manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
but those who do not believe in the hereafter are deviating from the path .
and those who fear allah , say , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` what is the matter with you that the doers of good is in the world to come , and the righteous will be among the righteous ? ''
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does he promise you that when you are dead and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o people of the caravan ! you are indeed thieves ! ''
whatever you have been given is only the enjoyment of this life . but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
so do not weaken and do not appeal for peace , for you will be victorious . god is with you and will not overlook your deeds .
the day when they will be told , `` the great one is the unseen , the lord of the unseen . '' the lord of the universe will say : `` what is the matter with him who is the masters of the world ? he is only one of those who are true . god is only the one to whom he wants . ''
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
and they say : `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed bones .
then the one who was freed and remembered after a long time said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
a reward for what they used to do .
who set up another god with allah , so cast him into the severe punishment .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold , you are humans scattering !
so when they came to solomon , he said , “ you may eat of the wealth of the tribe of thamud , and eat of the tribe of thamud . i am better than what allah has given you . indeed , you are in a graceful manner . ”
of the scriptures of the book , then do not exchange the flesh of allah , to his mercy ; and the grace of allah will be his mercy ; and he is a great grace .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
do you not see that to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and allah knows all that they do ?
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
they devised their plots , but their plots are known to allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
then they followed us in the way of evil , and they said , `` indeed , we have touched our fathers , and we are the ones to whom we did , but they did not see , but they were laughing at them .
and indeed they are of the chosen , the excellent .
we called to him , `` o abraham ,
this is indeed a noble quran ,
and the two of the two seas are not like the two of the two water , and there is a party of them flowing with it . and the two of them will be the like of it , and the one who turns away from it , so that you may turn away from the eyes of his lord .
o man ! other than allah , there is no god but he , and ask forgiveness for you , and accept the repentance of the believing men and the women ; and what is the matter with them , and what is the matter with them ?
but if they repent and establish prayer and pay the zakat , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we explain our verses in detail for a people who know .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
`` o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat of your garden , but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrongdoers . ''
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had smitten them , and those who do good , for them is a great reward .
and if you do this to do so , i will make it clear to you , and i am going to be one of those who are mindful of god , and you will not be able to take a change in it . your lord is powerful over everything .
he said , “ allah will bring it down upon you , if he wills , and you will not be able to escape . ”
o messengers , eat of the good things , and act righteously . i am aware of what you do .
and when our signs are recited to them , they say : `` we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
there is no belying its coming to pass .
he said , “ get out of here , despised and driven away . indeed , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
ask the people of the book , `` they will question you concerning the children of israel . '' say , `` god will show you some of it , if he is one of those who are sincere . '' he is the best of all things , and the same will be the same for the people . god is aware of all things .
do they not see that we have seen the earth , and we will make it clear to him , and he will judge between them , and he will make you be a guarantor for it ?
so the evils of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at encompassed them .
and that is not difficult for allah .
they will swear to you by god that you may return to them , so that you may leave them alone , so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for their deeds .
on the day when we will ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun . ''
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness , and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and those who race in a race ,
he said , “ my lord , appoint for me my family that my family should be my family , and allah said , ‘ this is what you did not speak to the people , and glorify the purity of your lord morning and evening . ’
a group of the people of the book say : `` believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and reject it at its end , so that they may turn back . ''
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
and we have made some of them an army to be one of the other with others , and among them are some that set up with others . and we have made them a proper covenant , but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a thing , but they were not aware .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
and do not obey the dictates of the transgressors ,
is he who is a believer like him who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
and remember ismail and al-yasha and zulkifl ; and they were all excellent .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and they assign a portion of that which we have provided them for that they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
and when their provisions and their provisions came to them , they will see their deeds , and they said : `` our father ! what is it that we have made to be their own good ? '' they said , `` what is it that we have given them , and what is in the hands of god is the right of them ? '' and he is the swiftest of the corrupters .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . and the apostle 's duty is only to conveyplainly .
this is what you used to doubt . ''
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor .
and of men and beasts and cattle have different colors . only those of his servants who have knowledge have knowledge of allah . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
so the command of allah took him up , and they took him for a while , and then he gave him wisdom and his wisdom ; and if allah had given him a portion of the creation , he would surely have bestowed upon them a portion of the world ; and allah is for every kind of bounty .
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the faith of allah and his messenger , and the prophet and the prophet in a few years . those who believe in allah and his messengers , in allah 's signs and his messengers , he hath already gone astray .
said : `` we have tested your people in your absence , and the samiri has led them astray . ''
say , “ shall we inform you that we may be waiting for allah ’ s judgement ? ” and that is an account for him whom allah has cursed , and he has made them a right way , and they have strayed from the right path .
the people of the people of noah who were bent on denying the truth said , `` we are only one of those who follow you . those who follow you will have no more than the way of god . we do not think that you are unjust . ''
and they went early in the morning , able to deprive .
and leftfor posterity .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we shall say to those who associated others with -allah in his divinity : `` where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ? ''
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night . indeed good deeds remove evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
and we sent messengers to the descendants of ibrahim , and we gave him the son of abraham , and we gave him the good news of the birth of a spendthrift . ] , but they were in the midst of allah ’ s mercy , and we did not make them a caretaker for them , but they were in the midst of allah 's mercy , and we were wont to do so .
so we shall certainly bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you will fail to fail , and you will not be able to do so . ’
and he turned away from them and said : `` alas for joseph ! '' and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and his armies of jinns and men , and birds , were gathered together in his presence , in ranks ,
and when they saw them , they would say : lo ! they have gone astray .
we created them , and strengthened their frame ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
so it may be that your lord has mercy on you , your lord has mercy on you , and if they turn back , then we seized you with this , but we seized you with the punishment , except for the disbelievers .
and of the two parties has already come to moses , and the two of the two parties has already come to moses . he said , “ my father , he will call you to a good , and will have a good reward . ” and he said , “ my father , do not make you a reward for a good , and he was going to be of the unjust . ”
then the family of pharaoh picked him up that he may be an enemy and a grief for them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
and when we bestow favours upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is despairing .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
it is allah who has made cattle for you , that you may ride some of them and some of them you eat .
and when it is said to them , 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
say : `` whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
the craving for piling updiverts you ,
he singles out for his mercy whomever he wishes , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
how many an angel there is in the heavens in the heavens whose intercession will not avail except after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves .
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
what , is he against whom the word of punishment is justified ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
and they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
and to every people we have appointed a way for the sake of allah , to make it proper . and your allah is one allah , and give glad tidings to those who are obedient .
i have sent my children to you , and i am a clear sign to you from your lord . i have come to you from your lord , and i will give you the sound of the dead , and in the life of the world to come , there is indeed a sign for you that you are certain of the signs of god . in that case , you are certain of the signs .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him ” ; we shall reward him with hell . thus we recompense the wrongdoers .
say , `` i have no power to harm them except that they should have no power to harm them except by god 's permission . i am not responsible for any thing except for a good person . i am not responsible for any thing except for a people who believe .
and glorify him in the night , and after theprostrations .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
man tireth not of praying for good , and if evil toucheth him , he is in despair .
say : `` allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but you associate others with him . ''
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
