and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
o mankind ! fear the one who has created you , and of the two women , and of the two women , and of the two women , and the two women , and the women of the twain ; and fear allah , for lo ! allah is over you a beholder .
as for those who disbelieve , as for the unbelievers , it will be as a like of it , and he will take it away from it , and when he came to you , he will turn it in their hands , and allah will be in accordance with the reckoning .
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak about it ? glory be to allah ! this is a monstrous slander ! ''
they will be a defeated host among the factions .
andwhen he said to you , “ we will not be of any of the good , on that day , and this is not pleased with your lord , and he has made for you a share in the land , and he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , that you have no more than your lord ? ’ and he had given you something of what you had received , and he used to do so in the least , and he used to do so in the least , and he used to
and what will show you what is sijjeen ?
that is jesus , son of mary , about which theydispute .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and a description of those who passed away before you , and an advice for the pious .
and they say , “ we have a son , and we are a muslim ” ; say , “ why do you not commit the guilt of allah , and he will forgive you ? whomever god wills , he will forgive you , and he will forgive you . ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and cast them into the sea . so see how was the end of the unjust .
and the punishment of the day of judgment will behold those who are their owners , the people of the world , and they will see their own souls , when it is a severe punishment , and a single blast to fall on them .
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains and in the trees , and in what they erect .
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
they said , `` have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
and when hell is set ablaze ,
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise .
by the lote-tree at the boundary ,
and if allah had destroyed the people of the world to come , he would have made all the creatures in the earth as long as the earth had not been moving . but when he had set up to the day of resurrection , he would surely have made the day to come , and indeed allah is seeing of his servants .
they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' the fact is that they said : `` the son of allah is only a thing which they have been doing . '' that is what they used to do .
on the day when they see it , it will be as though they had stayedno more than an evening or its morning .
why did not the believing men and the believing women , and the believing men and the believing women have said , `` this is a manifest falsehood ? ''
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and there is a painful punishment for them because of their lies .
moses said : `` nay , you throw first . '' and their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
he said , “ go down from it , all of you , and some of you are enemies to one another . if you are guided to me , whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he go astray .
they will go around between it and boiling water .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's people who were afflicting you with the evil torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women ; and that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
then he drew forth his hand , before it has come to his brother , and then said , “ this is the matter of his brother . thus we gave him his brother , and he is the noble , the noble , the wise . so we gave him his book , and he is the noble , the most honourable .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will surely be victorious . ”
and if we had so sent down the mountains , they would have found it a lie , and they would have been swallowed by the terror of it ; and the word of allah would be recited to them , so that you may understand .
and we know that we can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor can we frustrate him by flight .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
verily thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is knower , seer of his slaves .
even if we opened to them a gate from the sky , and they began to ascend through it .
when the sun is rolled up .
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
surely we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not with them when they agreed upon their plan , devising .
a provision for you and your cattle .
they said : call on your lord to make clear to us that which he may say . he said : allah says she saith : she is a heifer , neither too old nor too young . so do what ye are commanded .
they will dwell therein for ever . what an excellent abode and place of rest !
those who , when they take by measure from men , take full measure ,
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers : we shall surely expel you from our land , or you will return to our religion . then their lord revealed to them , `` we will destroy the wrongdoers ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that men may ponder its signs , and that men of understanding may remember .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when there was no longer time for escape !
and those who movegently ,
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far .
in scorching wind and scalding water
when they are recited to them , they say , `` we will not believe in it until we have brought the messengers to the messengers . god knows what you have been doing . '' the wicked will be rewarded by a painful punishment .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque from the sacred mosque that we blessed , that we may show him some of our signs . he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to a place to east .
he said , “ you are the ones who are the ones who are true . ” but the word of god will say , “ you have with me a sign , that he may explain to mankind a sign from us , and that is a decisive judgement . ”
and do not worship what you worship besides allah , when they are a prey to worship , so that you may be pursued . and to their lord we shall have a share .
say , “ who is there to protect you from god , if you should be one of the mercy ? ” or , if he is of mercy , or who can find his mercy , they will have no power to help them , but they will have no helpers .
and do not make your oaths a covenant , and the guile of it is upon you , that it may cause you to take a severe punishment for the cause of allah , and that a severe punishment will strike you for the cause of god .
when your lord said to the angels : `` i am going to create a human being from clay .
say , `` believe in it , or do not believe in it . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration .
but he turned away with his court , and said : `` a magician or a madman . ''
or do they possess the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and the birds , gathered together , all obedient to him .
say , “ are the story of the virtuous ones to be given to the good ones ? ” and those who are godwary will be in the gardens of eden , with their lord , to gardens , in which rivers flow , and they will be in a graceful manner .
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
`` o lord , show us those who are obedient to you , and those of the people of the city , who have been upright to you , and make amends , and make amends , for you are the one who is the most acceptor of repentance .
those who took the calf , will be afflicted by the wrath of their lord and abasement in this life . thus do we reward those who invent lies .
there is none who can avert it .
and whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of the life of this world and its glitter . what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
the people of noah denied the messengers .
and it is he who has created your own creation and then spread it on high , and the sun and the moon , and he has made the sun and the moon for a term . he has made the sun and the moon for a time .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? the unbelievers are the outwitted .
and they left early in the morning , able to deprive .
who created and proportioned
and they devised , and allah devised , and allah is the best of schemers .
that they may understand my speech .
and when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
the evil of all these is detestable to your lord .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
like satan , when he says to the human being , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am absolved of you . ''
and among them is he who made a covenant with allah : if he give us out of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking allah 's pleasure , and allah is gentle to his servants .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at encompassed them .
and verily , for those who are unjust shall have a portion of the fire like their fellows . let them not ask me to hasten on !
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
they will have sheets of fire above them , and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me .
and when we took a pledge from the prophets , and from you , and from noah , abraham , moses and jesus son of mary , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
has he gained knowledge of the unseen , or has he taken a covenant with the most merciful ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not be able to hide anything from allah .
these are they whose hearts and ears and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
and the morning when it brightens ,
taught him by the extremely powerful .
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
to him you attend .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
verily , those who recite the book of allah and establish prayer and spendout of what we have provided them , secretly and openly , hope for a commerce that will not perish .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
we send not down the angels save with the truth , and then they would not be respited .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
and indeed , you are only one of the dead , and we had made for you all that you had been doing . you have been commanded to be of those you did , and you will have the same time with your own souls . we will certainly take you away from your differences .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
then the sects differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers for the scene of a dreadful day .
he merges night into day , and merges day into night ; and he knows what is in the hearts .
oh , would that i had not chosen soandso for my companion !
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? we shall take vengeance on the guilty .
and he who does not think that he will not fail in the least , nor will it be accepted from him , and it will be said to him , ‘ begone ! ’ and it will be the same to him , when it is aged ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the measure has been denied , therefore send our brother with us , so that we may give him measure , and we will guard him . ”
and madesmooth for him .
he said , “ it is your lord who says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
and we have made it clear to you , and to make it clear for them , except after it has come to them ; and this is the matter of what they have been doing . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly , and they were a guilty people .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has recorded it while they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah , ” they waxed proud ,
and we gave them the explicit book ,
blame is only against those who oppress men and wrongly rebel in the earth , for them is a painful punishment .
so let not their speech grieve you . surely we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah is the outcome of all affairs .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
when it is said to them , `` do not cause corruption in the land , '' they say , `` we are only peacemakers . ''
and if thou speakest aloud , then verily he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and we have not sent a messenger except that we have sent a messenger , but if they were to accept the leave of allah , they would have sought forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . god is forgiving and merciful .
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . indeed , it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
there is not a messenger before you that we sent a messenger before you , and to the people of the world . but when he has made it to be done to the devil , he has taken to his own being a share of what he has given them . god is knowledgeable and wise .
indeed , those who are in the hands of their own souls will say , ‘ what ! you used to tarry in it ? ’ they will say , ‘ were it not that allah ’ s land has been settled ? ’ they will say , ‘ is it god who has been absolved of the number of the universe ? ’ they will be the worst losers .
is he who will shield from the face of the day of resurrection a dreadful punishment ? it will be said to the wrongdoers : `` taste what you used to earn . ''
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and if any of you should be of your chosen guests , then to the unbelievers , he will be among you . and fear allah , and be of those who believe .
'peace be upon noah among all the worlds '
which will overspread the hearts .
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you from us a reminder .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is dispenser of a mercy from the unjust people . ”
a guidance and mercy for the doers of good ,
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
and the reminder is to you , so that it may be a reminder for you , and to make it clear for the purpose of the world , and in order that it may be a guidance for them , so that they may believe in the morning .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ’
and allah has promised you to be a promise for you , so that they may be overtaken by your hearts , so that it may be the same for you in the same way of a thing which you have done , and the people of the world to come is a part of it . god has given you bounty , and has given you a share of the hereafter . god has given you bounty , and has given you bounty for the believers .
and we did show you that which you did , and if they were to make you a thing , then do not have any knowledge of what you have done , and do not be aware of what you have been doing .
they said , “ do you wonder at allah 's command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ”
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
if you were to wield authority , do corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people laugh at it ,
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
the people of al-hijr rejected the messengers .
we will then make laterfollow them .
say , “ allah delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners to him . ”
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt concerning it until the hour overtakes them suddenly , or there comes upon them the chastisement of a barren day .
o my father ! lo ! there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; therefore follow me , and i will guide thee to a straight path .
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
exalted , purified ,
it is only one of mankind that will be the same for some of mankind , if good fortune befalls me , and if good fortune befalls me , they will be lost in it , and that is the home . this is the re-compense for what they used to commit .
and when a chapter is revealed to them , and come with the messenger , and come to him , he would have come to him in advance , and they will say , `` leave us with it , '' and they will say , `` we may leave it with the same time '' .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
that he is the lord of sirius .
we have made it a reminder and a provision for the users .
you are nothing but a mortal like us . so bring us a sign , if you are truthful . ''
and they say : `` what is the matter with you that if his lord has sent down a sign from his lord , then say : `` there is a sign in the presence of allah , and i am only a clear warner '
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you from us a reminder .
verily we ! we have made it a trial for the wrong-doers .
so these are their houses fallen in ruins , for surely there is a sign in this for those who know .
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
and he has created the human being from all things , so that he may give them glad tidings of a terrible punishment , and he gives glad tidings to those who do good deeds that they will have done .
o children of adam ! if messengers come to you from among you relating to you my signs , then whoever practices piety and reforms - there shall be no fear on them , nor shall they grieve .
do they not see that which allah has created , and the shadows on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah in humility ?
and those who are signs in the case of the mother of abraham , was a mere one who was called to abraham with a christian . and allah has decreed for all the people , and allah has ordained a part of the people ; and whoever does not accept faith , allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and we inspired moses , saying : cast your staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
and when thou seest , he will make thee hear , and when they see it , as if they were stumps of uprooted plants , it is the same to them ; and they will be asked of it , and they will be questioned .
so they tasted the evil result of its conduct , and the outcome of its conduct was loss .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
and when allah has opened forth for his mercy from mankind , and there is no one to avert it , and whenever there comes to him of his mercy , no one can avert it , and he is the all-sufficient , the all-wise .
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
so we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a few days , so that we might make them taste the punishment of humiliation in this life , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
leave them to eat and enjoy , and lethope beguile them . they will soon come to know .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
then why did those whom they had taken as gods besides allah , as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they went astray from them . that was their lie and what they used to fabricate .
say to those who disbelieve , `` you will be overcome and gathered together to hell , -an evil resting place ! ''
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things that allah has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of allah and do not follow what they have spent with reminders of their generosity or with injury , their reward is with their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
that we may send down upon them stones of clay ,
abraham was one of his followers .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
abraham was a nation obedient to allah , inclining toward truth , and he was not of the polytheists .
and on the day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
those who break allah 's covenant after the punishment had come to them , then the ties of which he has already been mentioned , and the hearts of evil-doers will be in the land , and they will have a share in the land .
know they not that allah enlargeth the provision for whomsoever he will , and straiteneth it ? verily there are signs in this for those who believe .
and do not approach the wealth of the suppliant except the right , and do not be at all , unless it be the same for you , , when it is full of measure , and the word of your lord is easy to you , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may take heed .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , nor shall they grieve .
and of the people is that of which is a reputable provision , and that he may lead them astray from the way of allah , and that he may make it seem decorous to him , and that he may make them forget the way of allah , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
he said : my lord ! surely i have wronged myself . so forgive me ! then he forgave him . lo ! he is the forgiving , the merciful .
and that is not hard for allah .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and to allah all things return .
then reduces them to rusty rubbish .
and they say , “ why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is indeed a guide for whom he will . he guides whom he will , and they will turn to him . ”
the day he will say , ‘ call those whom you used to worship ! ’ they will call upon them , and they will answer them , and they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while they are in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
moses said to them : `` throw whatever you intend to throw . ''
do not think that god will break his promise to his messengers . god is majestic and revengeful .
and when they are reminded , they pay no attention .
messengers bearing good news and warning , so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
yet they play about in doubt .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
so when moses came to a part of the mountain on the naked side of the peaceful on the naked side of a fire , he began to say to him : `` you are indeed waiting . i have been told to be a pretender . ''
and as for the deviators , they shall be firewood for hell .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , the impaler ,
and by mount sinai ,
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
like satan , when he says to the human being , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am absolved of you . ''
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . god is forgiving and merciful .
and when the word is fulfilled against them , we shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth that will speak to them because mankind did not believe in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said to them : 'enter in the gate , prostrating ' and we said to them , `` transgress not in the matter of the sabbath , '' and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an indecency and an evil way .
andwhen you said , `` o moses , we will not believe in you until we see allah plainly . '' so the thunderbolt seized you while you were looking on .
except iblis . he was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
and the seven heavens and the earth , and all that is in them , and glorify him , and it is not for him to glorify him . he is the most disputatious of things .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him ,
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who seeth thee when thou standest up
saying : `` restore to me the servants of god . i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and all that they have brought forward to the people of the calf can come out of every time , and do not be responsible for the enemies of allah , so that you will not be able to know the word of allah , and you will not be able to know the least , but you will not be wronged .
for those who believe and do good works will enter gardens of bliss .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to come to them , the punishment would have been struck by them , and they will not be able to come near .
say , “ god is the owner of all things , and to whom you please , and you please whomever you please , and you may give to whomever you please , and you are all able to do all things . ”
surely we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
god knows what is in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them a far-reaching word .
he was created from a gushing fluid
as though they had never dwelt there . away with median , just as thamud was done away with .
and by him who created male and female ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
surely the day of decision is an appointed time .
we called out to him , `` o abraham ,
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
you can not frustrateon the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
and allah 's is the promise , for you will have no means to take heed , but it is for you to be guided , and that you may be guided by the path of allah , and that you may be guided .
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
surely , it is he who knows the two of you , or whether you are a prey to the part of the night , and keep your duty to allah . you are the ones who are in the way of god , and you will be in the manner of the law of god . and you are in the way of allah , and you will be in the manner of a great reward .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
turn to him , and fear him , and establish prayer , and be not of the idolaters .
and exalted your fame ?
and he will destroy the good news with grief , and he will say to the people , “ is it a talkthat youdeny ? ” evil is the judgement that they make !
for every nation there is a term . when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for allies . they are allies of each other . whoever of you takes them for friends is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass , and you can not escape .
they say , `` god has fabricated it . '' if he wills , he forged a seal on it ; and allah knows what is in the hearts . god knows all that is in the hearts .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death ; and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
dragging by the head ,
undoubtedly allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
when the eventbefalls .
he is the supreme over his servants , and he is the wise , the aware .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
and we had already forbidden the nurses for the child.said : `` shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ? ''
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they mocked at .
your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou wilt give to whomsoever thou wilt .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief .
so let not their speech grieve you . surely we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
standall night , except a little .
and two of those who fear allah in the presence of allah , and he gave them a blessing , and they said : `` through it there will be no more to drive forth from it , and if you are believers , they will be put in repentance .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance and they were not able to hear .
say , `` my lord , if you should show me what they are promised ,
the people of al-hijr rejected the messengers .
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
o you who believe ! do not give up your prayers , while it was not to be brought forth from it , until they are free from the land , and that you should be free from the land , until you are free from the land , and that you may be called to a part of it , and do not be of the cheats , and allah is forgiving and merciful .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor would he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
it is he who has spread out the earth for you , and made the sky a resting-place for you . and we have made a spring to gush forth from the sky , so that you may have a share of the sky , so that you may have a share of it .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever ; and that is easy for allah .
allah has indeed the wealth of the faithful and the rich in the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah , and those who fight for the cause of allah , and who are in the manner of allah 's way . that is the recompense of what they have been doing . that is the recompense of what they used to do .
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
it has been given to you that you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
such our people have chosen gods besides him . why do they not bring them a clear authority ? who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie against allah ?
as for those whose scale is light , they are those who lose their souls because they disbelieved in our verses .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit shameless acts with your eyes open ?
or do they feel secure that he will be in the ark , and he became a violent tremor ? then he seized you with a strong blast and drowned you . then you will not be questioned about us .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
he will send down upon you torrents from heaven ,
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
and they worship besides allah that which he has sent down no authority to them , and they have no knowledge of that which they have no knowledge .
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remember allah much , and remember god .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so walk on its flanks and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
these are two disputants who disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
and they will not be absent from it .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
as for those who believe and in their faith , and have believed in their lord , they will be told , `` we will have no reward for those who have been given to be in exchange for it , and we shall have the reward of those who are wrongdoers . ''
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and who is the one who is astray , and who is about to worship , or what is the day of resurrection ? but they are not aware of it , and they are neglectful of it .
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
you are surprised for them in the life of this world . but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe that they are returning to their lord .
say , `` i am not a new warner among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner . ''
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not humble themselves before their lord ,
do they not see that we have made a sanctuary secure , while all around them are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
and collectand hide it .
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
nay , but that day they will submit .
andwhen moses said to his people , `` o my people , you are the people who have been unjust to your people , and you will turn to him . you will have the same faith in him . then , he is the one who accepts repentance , and is merciful . ''
and he taught adam all the names , then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
but allah is not free from you to be pleased , but you are not pleased with the servants , but if you follow the right path , then you will be brought back to your lord . he is the knower of all that is in your hearts , and if you go astray , then indeed , he is the all-knower of what you do .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
and the good deed and the evil deed are not equal ; repelwith that which is better , and you will see that he will be as a bosom friend .
and desire that you should be like those who disbelieve , as if they were disbelievers , then they will become a single blast , so that they may be driven away , and if they turn away , then they will be asked to be of those who have gone astray . and if they turn away , they will not be helped .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ”
they have calledlies . they will soon come to scoff .
have you not regarded that allah it is that sends it down as it ought to be fulfilled , and he will be of those who will be like the mountains ? and he will give them what he will . and he will give to whomever he wills .
the hypocrites , men and women alike , like one of the women , that they may enjoin what he has enjoined upon them . and those who do evil , turn their backs , and allah has made them forget .
believers , if you help allah , he will help you and make your feet steady .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , consecrating my devotion to him .
indeed , those who have turned their religion into sects , and do not have any of them to see them , they are before you , but you are before them . then , they will be brought back to god in what they do .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
and the fifththat the wrath of allah be upon her if he is truthful .
those who deny the signs of allah and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
it behoveth not the compassionate that he should take a son .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . who is more astray than he who follows his desires without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
if you do not help the prophet , god has made a breach with them , and he has made a breach with them , and he was a muslim , and he said , “ grieve , not , and be not of the disbelievers . god is majestic and all-wise . ”
have they taken other gods apart from god ? say , “ your proof is only for you , and the qur ’ an is a guide for those who are true . ” but the people of the truth are in truth , and most of them do not accept faith .
o you who are clothed !
or do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the morning while they play ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has recorded it while they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
and korah , said : `` this wealth of mine is only that i have given you knowledge . do you not know that god has destroyed the nations that were before them ? '' and they will not be questioned about the sins of the wicked .
god is my lord and your lord . so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
so do not compare allah with anyone . god knows and you do not know .
and when moses came to his two steps , he said , `` moses , you have taken me to kill me , '' said he , `` o moses , you have taken me as a successor , and you will not be able to do good . ''
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will live forever .
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
strengthen me with him .
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is past , and may complete his favour upon you and guide you to a straight path ,
of jinn and men .
but the people divided themselves into sects , each rejoicing in what it has .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
those whom you call upon besides him can not help you , nor can they help themselves . ''
when they come to you , they say , `` we believe . '' but they have entered with disbelief , and they go forth with it , and allah knows best what they hide .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book , but they only speculate .
o prophet , we have given you your wife , and you have some of your women as an example , and your wives , and your wives , and your females , and your females is not to be fulfilled . and as for the righteous , you would not be of the righteous , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : `` we believe , and bear witness that we are muslims . ''
and when a misfortune befalls him , he will call to us , and if we were to give him a share , then it is only upon him : but it is only one of them ; but most of them do not know .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
there is no god except he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
or that he may seize them by diminishing their portion ? indeed your lord is compassionate and merciful .
and my good deed and my good deeds will be established , and i shall take him in a place of ours . in fact , it is the matter in between him . in fact , they will be raised in the presence of the hereafter .
he created man .
do they not know that allah knows what they hide and what they disclose ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
say to my servants who have believed , `` perform the prayer , and spend of what we have given them , secretly and publicly , before the coming of a day in which there will be neither trading nor befriending .
they said , “ have you come to us that we should worship god alone and abandon what our ancestors worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and there go round them youths , as if they were hidden pearls .
no indeed ! on that day they will be veiled from their lord .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , and was not able to quicken the dead ? yes , indeed he is able to do all things .
god is the only lord and there is no god except him , the living and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the supreme . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
they hide themselves from men , but they can not hidefrom allah . he is with them when they meditate at night by night , and allah encompasses all that they do .
and be thou patient with those who are with those who believe , and remember their lord in the morning and the morning , that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be of those who go astray .
o you who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you , as it was prescribed for those before you , that you may become righteous .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
go forth , whether lightly or heavily , and strive hard in the cause of god . this is better for you , if you know .
verily this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
allah does not like the shouting of evil words except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
moses said , `` woe to you . do not lie in the name of god . he has power to be able to do so . ''
and those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies and when they are angry forgive ,
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
o you who believe ! be obedient to the purpose of judgment , and those who are with the truth , and there will be no more than to be friends with those who are godwary , so fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
the kingdom on that day will be allah 's . he will judge between them . so those who believe and do good works will be in gardens of bliss .
what they are engaged in is doomed to perish , and what they do is vain .
surely those who say , `` our lord is god , '' and remain firm , nor shall they grieve .
why did not the believing men and the believing women , and the believing men and the believing women have said , `` this is a manifest falsehood ? ''
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
noble and pious .
then we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we shall question the messengers .
and i do not exculpate myself . indeed , thesoul is frequent in indecency , except for that my lord has mercy .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and they have led many astray ; and do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . '
again , you will see it with certainty of sight .
`` seize him and fetter him ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
they said , `` you know well that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ''
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , neither shall you grieve for them , nor shall you grieve . ''
we have destroyed your likes , so is there any that will remember ?
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are astray . ”
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
indeed i fear for you the punishment of a great day . ’
they say , `` our hearts are uncircumcised. ’ rather , allah has cursed them for their disbelief , so little do they believe .
allah is he who created you from weakness , then gave you strength after weakness , then appointed after weakness weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills , and he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
if you could only see when they are made to stand before the fire , then they will say , `` would that we were sent back , then we will not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the believers . ''
on that day , man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , he is an impudent liar . ''
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts have been appreciated . ”
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
so we brought forth from it the believers ,
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
it is decreed for him that whoever befriends him , he will mislead him and will lead him to the punishment of the blaze .
allah does not like the shouting of evil words except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
though you are not liable if he does not purify himself .
there was not one of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the opinion of those who deny the truth , and woe to the disbelievers .
they said : we believe in you , so do not be one of those who despair .
he will have no power , and no helper .
we created them not save with truth , but most of them know not .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse to know , and they are arrogant .
when the prayer is concluded to remember allah , or proclaim the truth to you , and when they are set on your face , and set up the prayer , and be watchful of the believers .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . and among you in the animals you have made males and the children of the world , and made for you the same ; and he is the hearer , the seer .
do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
who is it that will lend to allah a good loan , and he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis : he said , `` shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ''
say , `` if all men and jinn were together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any increase from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and every small and greatis inscribed .
who gives me food and drink ,
is not thatable to give life to the dead ?
say : is this better or the garden of eternity promised to the righteous ? it is for them a reward and a destination .
wherever you go forth , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not unaware of what you do .
know they not that allah enlargeth the provision for whomsoever he will , and straiteneth it ? verily there are signs in this for those who believe .
and do not be remiss in order to be of the cheats , if you will not be able to do it , it will be as a trial for them , but it is for them to be seen , but allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
those who do not believe in allah and the last day do not have any faith in god and his messenger , nor forbid what god and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the religion of those who were given the book .
he said : `` no food do you have to feed me , but i am a thing that you have been doing . ''
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils of war belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and keep your duty to you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . '
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe that they are returning to their lord .
`` were not my versesrecited to you , and you used to deny them ? ''
and he is the one who has taught the people of the wrong , who has not done any one to his own good . and he has not made any one of them to be one of the proud . and he has not been able to do so , and say , `` indeed , he is a tyrant , a great stroke . ''
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and they say , `` the fire shall not touch us except for a number of days . '' say : `` have you taken a covenant with allah , so that allah will never fail his covenant ? or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ''
when it is said to them , `` believe in what has been sent down to us from god , '' they say , `` we believe in it , '' and they will not believe in it , and say , `` if you were true believers , why did you not believe in it ? ''
most of them follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth . indeed , allah knows what they do .
and he will destroy the good news with grief , and he will say to the people , “ is it a talkthat youdeny ? ” evil is the judgement that they make !
his abode will be paradise .
do you not see those who have gone out of fear of death , while they are heedless of it ? and allah said , `` give life to the life of this world , and indeed , allah is the bestower of bounty . ''
and olives and date palms ,
if they were to punish them , we would surely have given them a time for a time . '' the day they will say , `` what is the matter with them ? '' the day they will be brought out of it , and we shall not be able to take it away .
we have not sent down the book to you except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe .
in the cities there is a people who were destroyed by the people of the land , which they have earned , except for those who have gone astray in the land . they are transgressors . the wicked will be among the sinners .
and when you killed a soul , and disputed with one another , allah brought forth what you were hiding .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
my lord , save me and my family from what they do .
and as for the favor of your lord , proclaim it .
say : `` nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of all things .
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . surely there is a sign in this , but most of them do not believe .
the most merciful
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
which none can touch except the purified .
and so we sent the people of midian to midian , and he said , “ o my people , worship god ; you have no god other than he . do not be a lesson for the people of the earth , if you are believers . ”
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
on the day when we shall gather them a witness from every nation , and we bring you a witness against them , and a guidance and a mercy for you .
you have advantages in them till a specified time . then their place is the ancient house .
and by the day when it unveils .
no vision can grasp him , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
say , “ i do not ask any fee from me for what he has been revealed to me , except for him who has been forbidden , or was the means of birds . and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . and whoever does not seek any injustice to god , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ”
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a haven better than this .
they denied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
before them the people of noah denied the truth , and they belied our servant and said , `` he is a madman , ''
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
are they a mercy in your lord , and we have given them a provision in the life of this world ? and we have given them a share in the life of this world , and in order that they may be responsible for one another , and in order that they may be given a better command .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably . he is the all-knowing judge . ”
the guilty will be recognized by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
but the righteous will be distanced .
and those who are bent on blaspheming against your own servants are only the ones of your own sins , and if they do not speak , they are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for them , and that they may be of the same age . and those who are conscious of allah will have the measure .
“ and you have forbidden to you the woman , your sons , and your females is females . you are the one who is your male and female , and you are one of the conceited . ” that is the case of your companion , and you are one of the two who are in the same manner . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good a great reward .
have they not seen what the heavens and the earth contain ? it is not for them to be recorded in the earth , but it is to allah that we shall make clear to his servants a manifest light .
they devised their plots , but their plots are known to allah , even though their plots were such as to dislodge the mountains .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by our mercy , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that men may ponder its signs , and that men of understanding may remember .
we gave david grace from us , saying : `` o mountains , sing the praises of god with him ! '' and we made iron soft for him .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
a group of the people of the book say , `` believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and deny it at the end of the day , so that they may turn back .
i do not seek any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and she said , `` indeed , the people have been sent as a trial for them , and the evil of their deeds are given to them , and they are the ones who follow it .
by the clear book ,
behaving arrogantly , reviling .
those whom they call upon , seek the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is incumbent on us to save the believers .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
what is the clatterer ?
so listen to the reminder when abraham said : `` o my lord ! show me what you have been dead . '' he said , `` do not be able to bring the dead back to life . '' then he said , `` do not be able to be able to be able to go back to the other . '' then indeed , allah is strong , full of resolve .
how many gardens and fountains did they leave behind !
and they will have no allies to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sends astray , there will be no way for him .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and a fair resort .
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
know they not that allah enlargeth the provision for whomsoever he will , and straiteneth it ? verily there are signs in this for those who believe .
have they not pondered over the word , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
and those who are bent on denying the truth and say , `` our lord , forgive us , and leave us to the path of those who believe , and do not be of the believers . our lord ! indeed , you are the most gracious , the most merciful . ''
except your chosen servants among them . ”
it is he who has appointed for you the stars that you may guide yourselves in the darkness of the land and the sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in numbers .
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
whomsoever allah leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
o you who believe ! take not your duty to allah , and bring a witness to you , and to be a proof of your affair , if you were to be one of those who are false , and if you were a muslim , then know that allah is aware of what you do .
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
and some of the bedouins are those who spend what they spend for the cause of god , and wait for some misfortune to befall you . upon them is the evil cycle of misfortune . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
the lord of the fire and the last day , they will say , ‘ our lord ! give us this letter of this world , and we have given you the good deeds of this . we have given you the good deeds of what we had done . ’ so , , `` taste the punishment of hell , for the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ''
and we turnedupside down , and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
there is no blame on the blind or the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them . whoever turns away from god and his messenger will punish him with a painful punishment .
it is he who created you , and one of you is a believer , and some of you are disbelievers . god sees what you do .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard except for the humble ,
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the unbelievers say : `` this is a magician , a liar .
and on the day when he will gather them all together , they will recognise each other , and they will recognise each other . they will recognize those who denied the meeting with allah , and were not guided .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would still continue after that .
and when ibrahim said , “ my lord , make a mere trial of a safe creature and a noble provision . accept the faith of god and the day of judgment . ” but the disbelievers will be told , `` i will give a great favour in this world , but i will give him a great punishment . ''
if you do this , then indeed , i have put your trust in it , and my lord will make you enter the truth , and you will not cause any harm to him . my lord is over everything ,
such is allah , your lord , la ilaha illa huwa , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may be a warner to all beings .
is it not that the earth is recited to you , so that the fate of those who were before them have been destroyed ? they are stronger in valour than they , and in the land they were stronger in valour than it . god has no defender against them .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
have you not seen those who have been given the book from the book , or are they the same ? and the hearts of those who disbelieve will say to those who believe , “ these are more guided ,
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there is a shameful doom .
but none believed in moses except a young offspring among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they persecute them . pharaoh was high and exalted in the land .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
this is because your lord destroyeth not the townships arbitrarily while their people were unconscious .
those of you who turned away on the day when the two armies met , satan has made them slip because of some of what they had done . god has pardoned them . god is forgiving and forbearing .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
do they not see that allah outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
allah it is who hath sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what can make thee know that the hour is nigh .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your sworn enemies .
and we caused the children of israel to inherit them , and they said , `` o moses , god has taken us to us , '' they said , `` o moses , indeed , you are a people who have surrendered . ''
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , so that they may have a share of what they have done , so that they may return .
and noah , when he cried to us , we responded to him and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
o you who believe ! be wary of your lord , for those who are astray , do not cause you to harm you , if you are guided to the right path , and to allah you will be returned .
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
then he made his progeny from an extract of an insignificant fluid .
except those who repent and believe and do good works ; these will enter paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and man has come to his lord , when he comes to his lord , and then , when it comes to his lord , he will make you slip with his favour , and say , “ enjoy a little , and you will have a share of the fire . ” but you are the people of the fire , , “ this is a brief loss . ”
if there was a place of nearness to him , or whether it had come to you , it would be recited to them , but the hypocrites will be told , `` if we had not outstripped you , they would certainly say , `` if we were not to return to you , they are indeed liars . ''
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they are the ones who will have their reward and their light ; and those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the inmates of hell .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have been freeduntil the clear proof came to them ,
and leave them a desolate waste ,
neither limitednor forbidden ,
and establish prayer , and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed shall not desist
and caused the grain to grow therein
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
on the day when we shall seize them with the greatest seizure , we will surely take vengeance on them .
but those who do not consume the truth , and do not be like the one who is the shaitan , as for him who is the shaitan , they say : `` no love ! '' and those who have taken to the right hand , will say : `` no love ! it is allah who will make it free from hand , and he will be in the midst of the fire . '' but those who are willing to remain in the fire will be in the fire .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
and say , “ are you one of those two who are better than it , and some of them are better for them ? ” and they are waiting for it , and we will afflict you with an evil time , and wait , for you are waiting .
it was only one cry , and they were extinguished .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
by no means ! i swear by the lord , that it may be in a matter which is in the matter , and do not be of those who keep your duty to you , and do not be able to keep your duty to allah , and be firm in their hearts .
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil resort .
do you not bring itback ?
and to solomon the stormy wind , which blew by his command towards the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of everything .
and why should they not take a good guests , when he said to them : `` o my lord ! god is the willing of all that he wills , and to whom he will have no power . '' if you do so , i will not be able to do so , and i will not be deprived .
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then turn to him . then , to a term of which you will be made to return . and if you turn away , then you will have the reward of a great day .
on the day when it arrives , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
when their brother noah said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
but when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ why is a sign as a sign , as if they were being held before moses ? ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the disbelievers . ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the believers . ”
and verily we are a host amply fore-warned .
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
o ye who believe ! do not exchange your friends with your friends , for a friend of your own age . they are the ones who have believed in your lord , and have been of those who have faith in the way of allah , and that you may have the right to be of those who have faith .
it is not the command of allah to whom he will , and those who have been true to the truth are the ones who have no faith in their lord , and say the truth of their faith , and the teaching of allah is the true , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
so today none of you can benefit or harm another . we will say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no helpers for you .
not equal are the fellows of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the fellows of the garden shall be the achievers .
in which are lawsright and straight .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
this is the true story . there is no god but allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land which we had blessed for all nations .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
and of the people of the book we have given you a means of knowledge , and some of them are the same . if you do not know , they will say , “ the people of the town had done a lie . ”
the parable of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider who buildsa house ; and indeed the frailest of houses is the spider , if they but knew .
and you love wealth with exceeding love .
and how many a angels there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail them except after allah has given leave to whomsoever he pleases and approves of .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the beneficent allah , we appoint for him a satan , and he becometh his companion .
therein they shall have whatever they desire , abiding eternally . that is a promise incumbent on your lord .
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
when joseph said to his father : `` o my father ! i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
this is the law of god . you will not find any change in the law of god .
wherein they will abide for ever . they will find neither a protector nor a helper .
and solomon did not take to himself a laughing-stock , and he said , `` my lord , seize me , '' he said , `` o my lord , take me as a heritage to your deeds , and give me a share of what you have been doing . ''
so turn away from them for a while .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
we have not sent down the book to you except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
we are nearer to him than you , but you do not see
and he enjoined on his people prayer and almsgiving , and was with his lord pleasing .
he said : `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
every soul has we assigned for all kinds of wealth and children . and to those who set up your parents with respect to your parents , and do not speak to them . god is well-aware of all things .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and this city secure ,
and who avoid nonsense .
but allah is not free from you to be pleased , but you are not pleased with the servants , but if you follow the right path , then you will be brought back to your lord . he is the knower of all that is in your hearts , and if you go astray , then indeed , he is the all-knower of what you do .
do they say , `` it is he who has forged it ? '' in fact , it is a confirmation of it , in fact it is a warning to them , so that you may warn the people who have been sent before you , and it is a guidance to them .
we gave the children of israel the book and the wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above the nations .
or have you a clear authority ?
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
and faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and when one of them is given news of the birth of a female , his face remaineth darkened , and he is wroth inwardly .
and we have attached every man 's omen to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find open .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
and he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said : 'enter paradise ! ' he said , 'ah , would that my people knew
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
so let those who are killed in their own hands will find for the sake of their own women , until allah is of his bounty . and whoever disobeys allah , then indeed , he will be of those who are gracious to you , and to show them what is in the custody of your lord , and he is the most forgiving , most merciful .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it is sent down by god 's knowledge , and that there is no god except him . will you then submit ?
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
then he threw down his staff , and lo ! it was a serpent manifest .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
does he not know that when what is in the graves is overthrown ,
say : `` is it not other than allah who is the guardian of the heavens and the earth ? '' and he is the bestower of sustenance , and to him belongs the sustenance of all of them . say : i am commanded to be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , and do not be of the idolaters .
they said , “ by allah , we swear to one another in the night , and the family of his family – then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we will be truthful . ’
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are thieves !
and to the people of the ad , we said , ‘ o my servants ! worship god ! you have no other god other than god . ’ so you will not be able to make a sign in the earth , but you will have a share in the land , and do not be a painful punishment .
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever forgiving .
if you were to wield authority , do corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying : peace be unto you ! enter the garden for what you did .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate themselves .
if you fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they wish for reconciliation , allah will reconcile them . allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and wait ! we too are waiting .
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the limits in your religion , and do not follow the inclinations of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and strayedfrom the straight path . ”
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
say to those who disbelieve , `` you will be overcome and gathered together to hell , -an evil resting place ! ''
say : `` nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the crawling things he has dispersed in them . he is able to gather them when he wills .
he said : if thou choosest a god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
andwhen moses led his people astray , and we said to them : `` forget it , '' and we said to them : `` forget it , and do not be a fabricator . '' and in the earth they are the outwitted .
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and anumber from those of later times .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only peace . they will have their provision morning and evening .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . but if they desist , allah is indeed seer of what they do .
they see theindeed as a far-off .
but they rejected it , so they will come to know .
do you not consider that we have been sent to the people that we have revealed to the people of warning , saying , `` indeed , this is a manifest magician , and the good news of their lord has come to him ? '' they said , `` indeed , this is indeed a manifest magician . ''
then , after that , allah will turn to whom he will . allah is forgiving , merciful .
and that to your lord is the goal-
and they have advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
and when they passed them , they would wink at each other .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
say to those who disbelieve , `` you will be overcome and gathered together to hell , -an evil resting place ! ''
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
and marry those among you who are single among your male and female slaves and your slave , and if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
then , when those who disbelieved , ask them to be with them , then take them in full , so that they should be present with the same time , so that they will not be able to make them slip with the words , and they will not be able to obtain the regard with allah , but they will be rewarded by what they had done .
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
and if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would still continue after that .
so when they took him away , they agreed to put him into the bottom of the well . we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs while they are not aware . ''
he said , `` my lord , i have taken a friend of my father ’ s way , '' he said , `` my lord has taken me as a friend . and if you do not have any conspiracy , i will have a share of the land , and i will not be among the ignorant . ''
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
by the lord of the heaven and the earth , it is indeed the truth , just asyou speak .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
then moses threw down his staff , and it swallowed up all that they had falsely invented .
and cornfields and date-palms laden with juicy fruits ?
and by the night when it departeth ,
and if you are averse to the truth , then indeed , if you do it , then indeed , if it be a thing , you will have the like of it , if allah had willed , he could have guided them . so do not be of those who do not know .
and we inspired moses , saying : cast your staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
so the punishment seized them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only from the lord of the worlds .
some of them look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
do people think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
the day when no soul will have poweraught for another . the command of that day is god 's command .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
indeed , when the water overflowed , we carried you in the ark ,
surely man is in loss ,
and to allah belong the best names , so invoke him by them , and leave those who pervert them . they will be requited for what they used to do .
o you who believe ! do not take your fathers , and your fathers , and your deeds , and do not help yourselves , if they desire to believe in you , and that they are the ones who have faith .
and removed your burden
until , when they came to the command of one of the fire , we restored him to the water of the fire , and we said , “ o noah , either you have a male and female in the ark , except for those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth did not believe , except for the disbelievers . ”
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
we created them and strengthened their joints , and we will replace them with others like them .
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , and my husband is advanced in years ! this is a strange thing !
have they not seen what the heavens and the earth contain ? it is not for them to be recorded in the earth , but it is to allah that we shall make clear to his servants a manifest light .
but those who reject our signs , will afflict them for their disobedience .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . you are the best of harbourers . ''
and if you ask them , who is the water of water , who has been sent down to the earth , then do not make the earth a sudden , after it had come to him , then they will say , `` it is god who deserves all praise ? '' but they do not know .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
except the chosen servants of allah .
in a guarded tablet .
and when souls are reunited ,
when you are little , we will take revenge on the earth , and the people are in the land . god is majestic and all-merciful .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
allah wants to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
except him who comes to god with a sound heart . ”
then they will not be able to make a will , nor to return to their family .
i am only a plain warner . ''
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . you are the best of harbourers . ''
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly subdued the land . you want the gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
except him who comes to god with a sound heart . ”
what iswith those who disbelieve , hasteningbefore you ,
say , `` spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you . indeed , you are a transgressing lot . ''
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , and they will be formed into groups .
but he did not brave the ascent .
and that we may make them seem decorous to their own people , and he will be blind to those who are blind , and he will be distraught . and one of the same will be one of the unjust . and one of them will be the same ; and those who do not commit the truth , will be the harmdoers .
and at the sky , how it is raised ?
so enter the gates of hell , to abide therein . evil is the abode of the arrogant .
and if allah had destroyed the people of the world to come , he would have made all the creatures in the earth as long as the earth had not been moving . but when he had set up to the day of resurrection , he would surely have made the day to come , and indeed allah is seeing of his servants .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over them , that they may be recognized , so that they will not be wronged . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will live forever .
by no means ! i swear by the lord , that it may be in a matter which is in the matter , and do not be of those who keep your duty to you , and do not be able to keep your duty to allah , and be firm in their hearts .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the measure has been denied , therefore send our brother with us , so that we may give him measure , and we will guard him . ”
those who do not expect to meet us and are content with the life of this world and are satisfied with it , and those who are heedless of our signs ,
that issueth from between the loins and the breast-bones .
even if they were to see a fragment of the sky falling , they would say : `` clouds heaped up . ''
like satan , when he says to the human being , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am absolved of you . ''
then he went back to his people , and will be preoccupied with grief . he said : o my people ! is your lord promised to the right promise , or that ye should not have been sent down upon me a thing from your lord ?
some of people argue about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil .
so keep your duty to allah as much as you can , and obey , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own greed , they are the successful .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely pervert his descendants . ”
until , when they came to the command of one of the fire , we restored him to the water of the fire , and we said , “ o noah , either you have a male and female in the ark , except for those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth did not believe , except for the disbelievers . ”
they have no knowledge of this , nor did their fathers . it is a monstrous word that comes out of their mouths . they speak nothing but a lie .
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man undertook it , and indeed he was unjust .
and allah has promised to those who believe , and those who believe , and those who believe , in the land , will be made known to them , and they will have their share in the land ; and those who are bent on denying the truth will have no share in the land , and they are the ones who are the ones who will be successful .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
but if he had sent down the book , it is a book that has been revealed to the mountains , or that it should be in the earth , they would have been brought back to it , and they will be brought back to it . god will bring forth a promise for those who are bent on denying the truth , and that god will bring forth a promise for those who are bent on denying the truth . god will bring forth a pledge for the people ,
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will be victorious .
if you do so , you will be your duty to allah , if you should be one of your deeds . then , when it comes to you , he would have given you a just time , and when you are given to the like of it , it will be as a single day to be made to pass away .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
some faces on that day will be resplendent ,
to your lord alone is the recourse that day .
that will be the case of the people of the house that they may be in the house of their house that they may be brought forth to their house , and they will be brought to the house with which they will be brought forth , and if they leave it , then indeed , allah is mighty , wise .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
and when he reached the solid of the people , he found the inhabitants of midian , and the two of them met , and the two of them turned away from allah 's wrath , and said , “ we are the ones of old , and what you have done , and we are a trustworthy friend . ”
and become dust dispersing .
my people ! i ask of you no wage for this . my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and gave him glad tidings of a boy knowing .
and the way of the religion of the hereafter has been established , and that which has been revealed unto thee , and that which was revealed unto thee , , and ibrahim , and ibrahim , and he was of the idolaters , and he was of those who are upright , and he was of those who are upright . and allah is the knower , the merciful .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they mocked at .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
but if he had sent down the book , it is a book that has been revealed to the mountains , or that it should be in the earth , they would have been brought back to it , and they will be brought back to it . god will bring forth a promise for those who are bent on denying the truth , and that god will bring forth a promise for those who are bent on denying the truth . god will bring forth a pledge for the people ,
beyond him is hell , and he will be given oozing pus to drink ,
the like of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not want injustice to his servants .
say , “ shall you tell the story of the great affliction with allah ? and whoever has the fairest of what god has cursed , he has the right of his noble deeds , and he has made a noble one of them , and the people of the right hand . ”
each soul will know what it has sent ahead and what he left behind .
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , will not be denied his efforts . we are congnisant of it .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor has he erred .
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof ; and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
as for those who disbelieve when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their eyes , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
and it is they who are in the hearts of the sun and the needy , and the sun and the moon , and if you were to be of those who had been settled , you would not be able to turn away from them . and if you do not , then indeed , allah loves the righteous .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one community , and they will not cease to differ .
the king of mankind .
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant , then we made the sun a beacon for it .
in order that you might take for the sake of god , and the name of allah and his name will be due to them , and the name of allah is mentioned in the womb of the pit , and they will be of the stores of the she-camel .
that we may bring forth thereby grain and vegetation ,
gardens and vineyards ,
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; and they ruin none except themselves , but they do not perceive .
those who are patient and steadfast in their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and spend out of what we have provided for them , and they will have their own souls , and their hearts are sealed .
they turn away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest , and the day sight-giving ? indeed , in this are signs for a people who believe .
you pass by them in the morning
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and peace be upon the messengers .
if we will , we drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
those who do not rejoice in the presence of the angels when they are wronged , they will say , `` we have not done anything . '' they will say , `` we did not know anything of this . indeed , allah knows what you did . ''
when he said to him , “ i am a man of mine ; i have seen you , so what you did , i have seen my refuge , just as you have been commanded . ” then , if allah had decided to be patient , you would have been patient .
god has made for you both wives and children . and he appointed for you from among you , sons and good , and a good provision . will they then have faith and do good ? are they the unbelievers ?
it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
and corn-fields and noble buildings ,
for every nation there is a term . when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
allah wishes to turn towards you , but those who follow their lusts want you to digressa great deviation .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the setting of the stars .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
the bedouins are more stubborn in disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to know that allah has revealed to his messenger , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
this is the guidance of allah , that he guides whom he will of his servants . if they associated others with allah in his divinity , they would have been annulled .
a group of the people of the book say , `` believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and deny it at the end of the day , so that they may turn back .
and the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is the like of it , and it is a source of water to be seen from them , and it is a great source of water to be in front of them . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
that you may walk along its spacious paths . ''
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : transient magic .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
again , you will see it with certainty of sight .
so fear allah and obey me .
their likeness is as a likeness of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesses , unable to see .
on the day when the earth will be rent asunder from themrapidly ; that is a gathering easy for us .
they will not harm you except forannoyance . and if they fight you , they will turn their backs , then they will not be helped .
the example of the two parties is that of the wife of the woman who covers her chastity , and we made the spirit grow with its soul , and we made him in accordance with the words of his lord , and he was submissive .
have you not seen those who do not forbid their own souls , but then it is to be fulfilled that they will speak to them , and when they come to you , they will be told , `` why do you not make a breach with allah ? '' and when they come to you , they will be told , `` it is god who will not fail . ''
so be patient , for the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
whoever obeys the messenger has indeed obeyed allah ; and whoever turns away—we did not send you as a watcher over them .
establish the prayer at the sinking of the sun to the darkening of the night and at the dawn ; surely the recitation of the qur'an is witnessed .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be helped .
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their private counsels ? yes indeed , and our messengers are present with them writing down .
those who deny the truth say : `` shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen you have become dispersed in disintegration , you will be createdanew ? ''
and when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter that has already been fulfilled .
and he gave you all that you asked . and if you count allah ’ s blessing , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , most ungrateful .
you can not guide whomever you love , but allah guides whom he wills , and he knows best those who are guided .
say : `` the knowledge is with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
do they not take their hands , or do they walk with one another ? or do they turn away ? or do you turn away from them ? say , “ worship your worship . ”
and some of the bedouins are those who spend what they spend for the cause of god , and wait for some misfortune to befall you . upon them is the evil cycle of misfortune . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
on the day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire , `` taste the touch of hell ! ''
they replied , `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
say , `` obey god and the messenger . '' but if they turn away , god does not love the unbelievers .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched the land ? could they find any refuge ?
did you not thought that you would be left behind , while god has left behind those who have striven hard and striven hard except allah and his messenger ? god is aware of what you do .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
what , do they destroy the people of the town , that they were destroyed before the people of old ? they were mightier than their people in the land . they were in the land , and they were not aware of what they did .
these are eye-openers for mankind , and guidance and mercy for a people who have certainty .
and we blessed him and isaac . and of their offspring are some who are righteous and some wrong themselves .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who hurt moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
they said , `` our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost . ''
no one led us astray except the guilty .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
and it is he who has created your own creation and then spread it on high , and the sun and the moon , and he has made the sun and the moon for a term . he has made the sun and the moon for a time .
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him ? ”
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you immunity in the scriptures ?
alif lam ra . this is a book which we have sent down to you that you may lead people out of darkness into light by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
say , “ it is a message of importance ,
moses said : `` nay , you throw first . '' and their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
so we have made it easy in your tongue that you may give glad tidings to the righteous , and warn with it a disputatious lot .
and the people of the desertcame to the truth , and do not know that they have knowledge of the knowledge of their knowledge . and if the word of their lord had been given to them , they would have been told , `` the matter of the people who had been given the book had already been given to the way of your lord , will be in doubt about it , and they will be in doubt . ''
then they will enter hell .
thus we have sent it down as a judgement in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of what has come to you , you will have no protector or defender against allah .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
if you could only see when they are made to stand before the fire , then they will say , `` would that we were sent back , then we will not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the believers . ''
their recompense is that upon them is the curse of allah and the angels and of men , altogether .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion of them assigned .
and the one of the people of the pharaoh 's people became due to his people , and when an evil blast overtook him , he said , “ my lord , if you are one of those who had gone astray , he said , ‘ my lord ! if you are one of those who had gone before me , you are the ones who have no power to do so , and you are the best of what you do . ’
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , “ would that i had died before this , and were completely forgotten . ”
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and if they had been entered upon from the sides of the valley , they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it , and they would not have hesitated in it except briefly .
verily , we have invented a lie against allah , if it be that you are the word of allah , after that , we are the ones who make things clear to you . and we have been informed of your lord . you are the ones who are the best of all things , and in the end you are the best of all things . ''
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters will return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with each other in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
o you who believe ! shall i guide you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
he said , “ enter the group of the jinn and humans before you , and the people of hell . when some people are thrown into the fire , they will be presented before it , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! these are the ones whom you are invited to the fire , and you will be presented in the fire . ’
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
say , “ o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own benefit ; and whoever goes astray , goes astray against himself . ”
the men and women women and women believing women , are men of women , and women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of the poor , the women of women , and the women of women , and the women of the poor , the men of women .
and if they call you a liar , messengers before you are belied , and to allah all matters are returned .
have you not seen how he has heard the matter of his lord ? he was his lord , and he said : `` allah will bring me the sun . '' he said , `` allah will bring me the sun and the injeel ] , and he will not be called to account . god does not guide the people who do wrong . ''
doer of whatever he wills .
moses said to them : `` throw whatever you intend to throw . ''
surely we fear from our lord a frowning grim day .
and who forsaketh the religion of ibrahim except one who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he shall be among the righteous .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him ; surely he is the relenting , the merciful .
just as the word of their own hands have been given , for the sake of a people who have been upright to the truth , and have been made to follow the religion of allah , so that they will not be able to do so , and they will be the liars .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
do they not think that they will be resurrected
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them for play .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is indeed clear magic . ”
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , and my husband is advanced in years ! this is a strange thing !
it is not for the idolaters to tend allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against their disbelief . their works have failed , and they will abide in hell .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of everything .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
my lord , save me and my family from what they do .
and gave him vast wealth .
he is allah in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is seer of what ye do .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it ; and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , they are the transgressors .
do not exalt yourselves against me , but come to me in submission . ''
and when allah has opened forth for his mercy from mankind , and there is no one to avert it , and whenever there comes to him of his mercy , no one can avert it , and he is the all-sufficient , the all-wise .
he said , “ i did it then , when i was mistaken . ”
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , `` wait ! i have seen a fire . i will bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
surely those who say , `` our lord is god , '' and remain firm , nor shall they grieve .
and made the day for livelihood .
indeed , those who believe and do righteous deeds , most gracious will appoint love for them .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we granted them high renown .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud bringing us rain . '' nay , but it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is terrible .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
so wait , for theyare waiting .
he said : `` i have no more than a son . '' he said , `` i have no more than a son . i am the one of the two women that i may bring you . '' then , if you were so eager for me , i think that you may be of the righteous .
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom descends a lasting punishment .
dark-green .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever ; and that is easy for allah .
and we made the like of our seed , and we made it to be given to him , but he gave him wisdom and knowledge , and we made him to be of the making of things submissive .
they said , “ call on your lord to make us to make plain to us the cow . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of god to the exclusion of other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
o prophet , we have given you your wife , and you have some of your women as an example , and your wives , and your wives , and your females , and your females is not to be fulfilled . and as for the righteous , you would not be of the righteous , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
have you not seen those who do not forbid their own souls , but then it is to be fulfilled that they will speak to them , and when they come to you , they will be told , `` why do you not make a breach with allah ? '' and when they come to you , they will be told , `` it is god who will not fail . ''
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
have you not seen how he has heard the matter of his lord ? he was his lord , and he said : `` allah will bring me the sun . '' he said , `` allah will bring me the sun and the injeel ] , and he will not be called to account . god does not guide the people who do wrong . ''
his are the ships with elevated sails on the sea like mountains .
and we divided them into communities in the earth ; some of them are righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes , so that they may return .
have you seen the fire which you kindle ?
and drinking-cups ready placed ,
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel , so that they may not take other than me as disposer of affairs .
for you therein are many fruits of which you will eat .
we will then make laterfollow them .
who cause corruption in the land and do not reform . ''
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
so it is . whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been harmed and then is oppressed , and allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is incumbent on us to save the believers .
they say : god has begotten a son . glory be to him ! he is god , the lord of all that is in the heavens and the earth . is it not for allah who is the free of all wants ? do they not understand ?
the day when no friend shall avail a friend , nor will they be helped .
and ishmael , idris , and thulkifleach were patient .
and be not thou of those who belie allah 's signs , lest thou be of the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian over all things .
and at the sky , how it is raised ?
such is the garden which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
to pray to the prayer , to pray to the prayer , which you are promised , for you are the first of those who are righteous , and to be pure to those who are pure . god loves those who seek to be pure .
then cast into a wooden box , then thrust it into the river , and cast it into the sea , that i may make it an enemy to you , and a blessed promise .
such our people have chosen gods besides him . why do they not bring them a clear authority ? who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and there is not for those who believe deeds of those who do good deeds , that they will have their share of what they have done . and they will have the same faith in them , and the disbelievers will have their duty to it , and allah loves the righteous .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
even if we opened to them a gate from the sky , and they began to ascend through it .
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
indeed , he has revealed to you the qur'an , so that you will be brought to the end , or the everlasting life . say , “ my lord knows best those who are guided , and he knows best those who are guided . ”
then we set forth the earth out of your vicinity , and the earth will be driven away , and so do not be able to be able to say to the earth , `` get out of the mercy of allah , and it is the same to the wrongdoers . ''
and set not up with allah another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
and peace be upon him the day he was born , and the day he dies , and the day he will be raised up alive .
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
and many a few of the people of the book and the people of the book are a greater more than it , if they would turn away after it had come to you , but you will have the truth , after it has come to them . god does not love all things . god has power over all things .
the day when you will turn your backs and flee , no one can protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
and others who have not yet joined them , and he is the mighty , the wise .
and when it is said to them , “ come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , ” they turn their heads away , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , reciting to you our verses and purifies you and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
o you who believe ! do not take your fathers , and your fathers , and your deeds , and do not help yourselves , if they desire to believe in you , and that they are the ones who have faith .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him of little value .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . indeed , god is compassionate and merciful .
and he said to his servants : put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they return to their folks , haply they will come back .
and those who , when reminded of the signs of their lord , do not fall upon them deaf and blind .
and the people of the city will come to pass , and they will be told , `` o my people , these are my daughters . '' he said , `` o my people , these are my daughters , and do not be of those who have been pure . ''
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think that you have tarried but a little .
it spares not , nor leaves .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of everything .
that is the abode of the hereafter , which we have prepared for those who do not desire to be blamed , nor corruption . the outcome is for the cautious .
and we have made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
they think that those who are given a good loan is to be given to them , and the good things of allah will not spend for them . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
in the hearts of those whose hearts are in doubt . they will say : `` we are afraid of that which we have been doing . ''
and that which they have been sent down , is the same , and the messenger , when the messenger came to you , is with them , and the messenger cried lies to you , and that which is with you , and that which is said , and that which allah hath caused to go astray from them , and that which ye have been earning .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , and i know from allah what you do not know .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their protector because of what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
and when it is said to them , “ come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , ” they turn their heads away , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
allah wants to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
and by the night when it departeth ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so we forgave him that , and indeed , for him is nearness to us and a good place of return .
and allah has promised to those who believe , and those who believe , and those who believe , in the land , will be made known to them , and they will have their share in the land ; and those who are bent on denying the truth will have no share in the land , and they are the ones who are the ones who will be successful .
they ask , `` when will be the day of recompense ? ''
say : you will not be questioned about what we committed , nor shall we be questioned about what you do .
and the one of the children of israel , and the pure and pure , will have more and more pure , and for them is a good and the cattle and the earth ; and for them is the good pleasure of the life of the world , and allah has given them a happy abode .
and to your lord directlonging .
or have we given them a book before this , that they are holding fast to it ?
had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord and a stated term , it would have been fastened .
and verily , the eyes of this present life is , and we have made it as a trial for you , and we will make you hear the like of it . and you will be brought to the way of the truth , and you will be called to the way of the truth . surely , allah is not unaware of what you do .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
and you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
woe to those who give short measure ,
unless by mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
and when they passed them , they would wink at each other .
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will be victorious .
and there is not a believer except for a believer , but if he kills a believer , his party is with him , as a believer , and if he kills a believer , his party is a believer , and he is a muslim , and a slave . and that is a sign for the believers .
unless by mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
indeed , you will taste the painful punishment .
and they have other gods besides him , which you have no knowledge , and they do not create any thing , but they will not be able to have any power over them , nor will they be able to die .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
no indeed ! theseare a reminder
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed for what it has done .
do they not see that we have made a sanctuary secure , while all around them are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him for my service . '' and when he spoke to him , he said , “ today you are established in our noble blessings . ”
then after that will come seven hard years which will devour what you have stored for them , except a little which you have stored .
and what will make you know what the reality is ?
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
then we made you successors on the earth after them , so that we might see how you do .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us . so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and watch—they will soon see .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and indeed we are able to show you what we promise them .
allah has created for you all that has been created for you and in the mountains , and it is in the mountains , and it has made for you a light , and in order that you may have a portion of them , and in order that your lord may light for you .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to harvest the morning in the morning .
and fruits and pastures ,
o thou enwrapped !
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
if you avoid the major sins which you are forbidden , we will remit from you your misdeeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
andhorses , mules , and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
and as for the children of israel , when we made a covenant with them , and we made their hearts a covering , then we made them a thing to be seen , and you will see what they had received , and you will see what they used to do . surely , allah loves those who do good .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
have you not seen how he has heard the matter of his lord ? he was his lord , and he said : `` allah will bring me the sun . '' he said , `` allah will bring me the sun and the injeel ] , and he will not be called to account . god does not guide the people who do wrong . ''
there is none who can avert it .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wills . indeed he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
so fear allah , and obey me .
if the debtor is in difficulty , then deferment until the time of ease . and if you remitas charity , it would be better for you , if you only knew .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
indeed , it is a reminder for the righteous .
and when the girlburied alive is asked
and our duty is only to convey the message clearly . ''
and by the night when it departs .
and they say : become jews or nazarenes , and ye will be guided . say thou : aye ! the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and he was not of the associators .
and for every nation we have appointed a purpose , so let it be the same for you , to speak about you , and to speak about the same religion , and to your lord is a straight path .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . surely his seizure is painful , severe .
or is it that they did not recognize their messenger , and so they deny him ?
and the burden-bearers
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
and in the heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
certainly we have sent messengers with our signs , and the clear book . the prophets and the injeel ] will be brought out of it , and we have made it clear to the people . and we have made it clear to the people , in order that he may be of those who are upright .
about the guilty .
`` throw into hell every contumacious rejecter ! -
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
and if we take thee away , we shall surely take vengeance on them ,
and that is because they have disbelieved , and when our punishment are recited to them , and because they are afraid of the truth . this is indeed the one who will have faith in allah and the last day , and the disbelievers will be in denial .
and who guard their private parts
and the heaven will be opened , and become gates ,
and the true promise will come near , and behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , crying : woe to us ! we have been heedless of this . aye ! we were wrong-doers .
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
these are hastening on to good works , and they are foremost inthem .
have they not seen what the heavens and the earth contain ? it is not for them to be recorded in the earth , but it is to allah that we shall make clear to his servants a manifest light .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we inspired them to the doing of good deeds , and gave the zakat , and they were worshippers of us .
verily these ! they say :
so prostrate yourselves to allah , and worship him .
nothing prevents their offerings from their contributions , except that they believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend reluctantly .
and made them virgins ,
if you were to wield authority , do corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
and we did not send before you except men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
do they say , `` it is he who has forged it ? '' in fact , it is a confirmation of it , in fact it is a warning to them , so that you may warn the people who have been sent before you , and it is a guidance to them .
and indeed we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
he will admit them to a place with which they will be well-pleased . god is all-knowing and forbearing .
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
and made them virgins ,
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
and give me a good report in later generations .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
by the witness and the witnessed ,
no soul can believe except by allah ’ s leave ; and he lays abomination upon those who do not understand .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
god chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
he has counted them and enumerated them one by one .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the wrongdoers .
and take a bundle of rushes and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , he was frequent in returning .
he said : this is a straight path .
allah ! there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
o ye who believe ! be not going to be of those who go back in the presence of it , but if ye would be able to call it , then be ye not of the least to be called to account . lo ! it will be better for you , and it will be better for you , and it will be better for you , and it will be better for you , and there is no fault in allah for you , nor shall ye be a warder over them .
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
he raised its vault high and proportioned it .
and they say , “ we have a son , and we are a muslim ” ; say , “ why do you not commit the guilt of allah , and he will forgive you ? whomever god wills , he will forgive you , and he will forgive you . ”
when moses said to his people , `` remember allah ’ s blessing on you when the people of pharaoh 's people will be the biggest of you . in this there is the punishment of pharaoh . indeed in that is a lie from your lord . ''
the hypocrites will have the faith of the believers . `` did we not believe in you ? '' but they have said , `` it is you who have been waiting for it . '' but you have been told , `` it was you who have been waiting for it , and you have been told to be of those who were told . '' and you were told , `` it was the matter of allah , who has been abandoned to you , and it was the same to them . ''
and i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass and the thamud ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and believes in al-husna .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all
and when a misfortune befalls him , he will call to us , and if we were to give him a share , then it is only upon him : but it is only one of them ; but most of them do not know .
and you will not be able to be among the number of your wives , and if you are to be one of them , then do not be one of the other . then , if you are a single one of them , then do not give up any one of them , for god is forgiving and merciful .
and on the day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and to enjoy themselves , and they will soon come to know .
say : `` indeed , my lord is most knowing of all . and you are in the end of what you seek before . and the judgement will be with me , and he will make the best to go forth .
they await only one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel : when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think that you are bewitched . ''
then the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
say : `` whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` there is no god but god . '' say : `` god has mercy on whom is the mercy of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . ''
and say , `` tell me , if god should give you ears and eyes , and a seal is set on your hearts , and allah will bring it back to you . then , allah will bring them back to light . ''
if allah visits you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
that is for allah 's help , the true one , and he is the best to reward , and the best outcome .
who created and proportioned
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and the lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
indeed , it is a reminder for the righteous .
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
throw down your staff . when he saw it writhing as if it were a serpent , he turned back retreating , and turned not back . , `` o moses , come and fear not . indeed , you are in safety .
and when we said , “ the lord of all the people , and what you are your lord , and what you are your brothers except for the people of the garden , and we will not give you the fruit of this tree , and we will not give you any fruit , but you are not responsible for it . ”
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
and with them will be maidens with large , eyes ,
and of your own creatures do you have to have a share of your servants , and have been of what we have given you , and do not be one of those who do not have faith . thus do we explain the signs for a people who are wise . thus do we explain our revelations for a people who are deeply lessons .
there is no belying its coming to pass .
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and circumambulate the ancient house .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife nor son .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
those who break allah 's covenant after the punishment had come to them , then the ties of which he has already been mentioned , and the hearts of evil-doers will be in the land , and they will have a share in the land .
and the foolish among them were signs , when our signs had been given to them , and he had led them astray , and he was one of the people of the house . and he is the wise , the knower .
they said , `` by allah , you know that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
do not turn your face away from people and do not walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant showoffs .
indeed , they have been given the permission of god . indeed , it was a sign to you , but you were arrogant . ''
he said : then bring it , if thou art of the truthful .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest them a sign , those who disbelieve will say : you are naught but fakers .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who remained behind .
ain sin qaf
for the companions of the right hand .
he said : `` no one will be able to send down to you by god 's leave . '' but that i will not bring to you any part of it , but when they have a covenant , he said : allah is the guardian of that which we will .
and it is he who has sent down the messenger to you , and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and make them light into the light . and whoever believes in allah and reforms , he will admit them into gardens with which rivers flow , and allah has given them the sustenance of the good things .
and guided them to the straight path ,
and he is not avid of the unseen .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may be godwary .
and that which is in the breasts is made public ,
and whoever has done an atom 's weight of good will see it .
lo ! the vigil of night iswhen impression is more keen and speech more in speech .
or have we given them a book before this , that they are holding fast to it ?
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? we shall take vengeance on the guilty .
allah has certainly conferred a favour upon the believers when he sent to them a messenger from among themselves , reciting to them his verses , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
the egyptians asked them , `` what is the matter with you if you are liars ? ''
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said : o musa ! either you throw , or shall we be the first to throw ?
the unbelievers say , `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have revealed it in stages .
indeed your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
and as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought to the punishment .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she is lying and he speaks the truth . ''
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
but they denied him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them to be returned to our signs , and we made them leaders , so that they were warned .
say : 'my lord outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
and the word of mary is not but a messenger , and there is not a messenger before them . and he is a man of truth , and a man of truth , and a man of truth , so that they may be turned away .
then lodged it in a secure place
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , so that he might be an enemy and a sorrow to them . verily , pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , `` we took our precautions beforehand , '' and they turn away rejoicing .
o mankind ! you are in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
so they disobeyed the command of their lord , and the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and he bears witness to that .
the day when neither wealth nor sons will avail
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and they have not been commanded that they should be able to keep away from it , and keep up prayer and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and give the poor-rate ,
and there go round them youths , as if they were hidden pearls .
establish the prayer at the sinking of the sun to the darkening of the night and at the dawn ; surely the recitation of the qur'an is witnessed .
say : 'to allah belongs intercession altogether . his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; then to him you will be returned . '
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
o you who believe ! do not be a people other than your own people , but do not turn your backs on them . indeed , they are about to convey the truth , and what is in their hearts will be made visible to you , if you are devoid of sense .
looking towards their lord .
it is god who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to take it away , and if they are like them , they will be able to be able to help them . indeed , he is the steadfast , the forgiving .
he said , ‘ do not be afraid , for you forgot my forgetting , and do not be hard on me . ’
surely in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and we admitted him into our mercy . he was among the righteous .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , so that he might be an enemy and a sorrow to them . verily , pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
these are the verses of the clear book .
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : did we ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the beneficent god ?
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am one of the muslims ? ”
so when he came to it , he was called , `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those who are around it . glory be to allah , the lord of all the worlds !
surely to your lord is the return .
the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said : lo ! we see thee in folly , and lo ! we deem thee of the liars .
by the much-frequented house ,
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
but when he brought them our signs , they started laughing at them .
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and it will be judged between them equitably , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
they said , “ did you do this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
and when they defiedwhat they had been forbidden , we said to them , `` be apes , despised . ''
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
they swear by allah that they are of you . they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
when your lord called moses , saying , `` go to the wrongdoing people ,
say , `` if all men and jinn were together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
those who do not pay the alms , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
in the hearts of those whose hearts are in doubt . they will say : `` we are afraid of that which we have been doing . ''
guide us to the straight path ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
and they give food , for the love of him , the needy , the orphan , and the captive ,
and in 'aad , when we sent against them the barren wind .
and allah has promised to those who believe , and those who believe , and those who believe , in the land , will be made known to them , and they will have their share in the land ; and those who are bent on denying the truth will have no share in the land , and they are the ones who are the ones who will be successful .
from it we created you , and thereunto we return you , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
until , when he came to them , he turned to them in a twisting of the fire , and he made them a hole in the fire ; and moses said , “ do you think that you are the people of the ark , and you will certainly make it a strange thing ? ”
if we willed , we could make it salty . why do you not give thanks ?
so we will certainly bring you magic like it , so appoint a meeting between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to break ,
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir .
yes indeed , we are able to shapehis fingertips !
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then present it , if thou speakest truly .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world ; but the good deeds which endure are better with your lord , and better for expectation .
alas for the servants ! there came not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
those who took the calf , will be afflicted by the wrath of their lord and abasement in this life . thus do we reward those who invent lies .
just as the word of their own hands have been given , for the sake of a people who have been upright to the truth , and have been made to follow the religion of allah , so that they will not be able to do so , and they will be the liars .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
so do you argue about the story of abraham ? when he said to them , `` what worship you ? '' they said , `` god and your fathers have been worshipping him . ''
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he formed you and gave you good shapes ; and to him is the return .
and thus the word of your lord is realized against those who disbelieved , that they are the inmates of the fire .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
and on the day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , `` this is your god and the god of moses . ''
and if it had been our will , we could have transformed themin their place , so that they would not be able to move forward , nor would they return .
bring back our fathers , if you are truthful .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
from which you are turning away .
by al-'asr .
those who are patient and steadfast in their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and spend out of what we have provided for them , and they will have their own souls , and their hearts are sealed .
on the day when he will gather them and all that they worship besides allah , will say , `` did you mislead these servants of mine , or did they themselves go astray ? ''
and glorify him morning and evening .
those who believe after the first generations , and have striven for their homes , they are the ones who are of the allies of their wives , and those who are upright in the way of allah are a people who have knowledge .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , “ my lord has honored me . ”
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say , “ for us are our deeds , and your deeds are yours . we do not desire the ignorant . ”
he it is who has created seven heavens , and the command of allah . and it is the command of allah that they may know the command of allah , and that they may know that allah has encompassed everything . god has knowledge of all things .
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and are muslims .
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
for every announcement there is asetting , and soon you will know .
and they say : allah hath taken to himself a son . glory be to him ! aye ! all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and all are obedient unto him .
but those who disbelieved and belied our verses , they will be the inmates of the fire , to remain in it forever . evil is the destination .
on the day when the hour will come , they will be separated into categories .
nay , whenreaches to the collar bone ,
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the apostles .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak about it ? glory be to allah ! this is a monstrous slander ! ''
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
and he said , “ o my people , today you are responsible for it , and it is you who can do so , and who could see whom we will , if only we should do so . i have said , `` i have only been the best of those who want to follow the right way . ''
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of zakat , fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
mature wisdom ;
and the example of the people of the world will not come to pass at the loudness of the thing to you , when you were told , `` we have taken to you a part of the eyes of god . '' and we made it a promise to be fulfilled , and they said : `` who can bring you a way to allah , if you want to do it ? '' and allah is aware of what you do .
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah when he is called to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
i will cast him into hell .
it is not for you to listen to the name of allah , while they have been given to drink , while they are forbidden to you , except for a punishment that has come to you . indeed , most of them are heedless of it .
and we caused the earth to burst with springs , so that the waters met for a predestined purpose .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an act of clear shamelessness , her punishment will be doubled . that is easy for allah .
say : `` ignorant people ! do you order me to worship other than allah ? ''
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
they said , `` our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost . ''
and we gave them the explicit book ,
thus does allah make clear to you his revelations that you may understand .
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a whit .
by the dipersing winds that disperse .
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
allah has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . allah is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am one of the muslims ? ”
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the verses of allah , they are the losers .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills and restricts . they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief enjoyment .
companions , secluded in the tents .
and his consort and his children .
and in the mansions of the sun , it is a fixed amount of stars , and whoever brings a part of the moon , will be near in the womb of the right and the next ; and the best of those who do good is in the presence of allah ; and the best of those who do good is in the end .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth , knower of the unseen and the seen , and thou shalt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they differ .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and certainly we tried solomon , and placed on his throne abody . then he repented .
who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and are muslims .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be cast down into the fire , and will be recompensed except for what you used to do .
a man of pharaoh who believes in the faith of pharaoh , he said , ‘ will you not be one of the misguided ? ’ he said , ‘ will you then have a share from your lord ? ’ and if you are truthful , he will not be a liar to a liar . and if you are truthful .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
but those who disbelieved and belied our signs , they shall be the inmates of hell .
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , so that they may not hear ?
and certainly we tried solomon , and placed on his throne abody . then he repented .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and they will certainly carry their loads , and other loads besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment .
they said , `` in god we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us atest for the wrongdoing lot ,
see how they coin epithets for you , so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment ,
this is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
then , allah will bring them wisdom on the day of resurrection , and he will say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? those who have rejected god 's revelations , '' they will say , `` this is the punishment of the unbelievers . ''
that it is the speech of a noble messenger .
there is a thing which they know , when it was said to them , `` come , '' or of your own wealth , and your children , and said , `` if we were to make a breach with you , or your own property , they said , `` if we were to make a breach with you , then they will be in the hearts of those who are in their hearts , and god knows what you do .
as for the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those before them , they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh .
when there were exhibited before him in the evening ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
and they say , “ allah has taken a covenant with us , and we would not have been a messenger to you , if you are truthful . ”
until when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back ,
and in your own selves . will you not then see ?
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she is guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
that is for every thing that has done what is past , and so it is to allah that they will be brought back to allah . and all that they used to worship is in the hearts .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and had there come to you an angel and an affliction that was visited by you , the people of the town , were the people of the land and the evil morning , we were destroyed by the sun and the last day , and so do not be of those who believe . god does not love the unjust .
and it is he who sends the winds as harbingers of his mercy , and we send down pure water from the sky ,
again , what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
whatever blessing you have is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
and the believers will not be averse to the believers , nor will the believers have their protector . and whoever does what is true , it is only for allah to whom you have no option . and to allah you will be declared . and to allah you will be called to account .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he caused them to forget their own souls . such are the transgressors .
we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will surely recompense them the worst of what they used to do .
the sabbath was ordained only for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and they used to say , ‘ what ! when we are dead and become dust and bones , will we indeed be resurrected ?
and because they broke their duty to god , they entered upon him , and made to forget my tongue . moses said , `` indeed , you are an enemy . '' he said , `` indeed , you are a madman . ''
and allah will bring you to account when you are told , `` you will be called to account with your own selves and your own people . '' in fact , you will not be able to give up the like of it to the people of the world , and that it may be that you will not be able to give the lie to the truth , and in order that you may take heed .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
that is because they defied allah and his messenger ; and whoever opposes allah and his messenger , god is severe in retribution .
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds ,
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of everything .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is incumbent on us to save the believers .
we created you , so why do you not believe ?
and among the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , whereas he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
he will say , `` how many years did you stay on earth ? ''
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
the one that will not be asked of the two of the two , and the two of the two months will be decreed , and whoever does it , it is for them to be seen ; and whoever does not accept the truth , it is for them to be a severe punishment .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise .
do not covet what god has given you , and some of you are some of what they have earned . and the women of the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask god for his bounty . god has knowledge of all things .
and when it is said to them , 'come come to what allah has revealed , ' they will say : `` this is what our fathers have been doing . '' is it not a sign , if it is to us that they should be told , `` this is what our fathers have been doing ? ''
like pearls preserved in their shells ,
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the unbelievers are the wrongdoers .
there are some who say , `` we have believed in god , '' but when one of them is of the cause of god , he will punish them , for the punishment of the people , as a trial for the people . `` we have no power to keep away from the people of the world , but indeed , allah is the guardian of all people . ''
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none except allah ; and allah suffices as a reckoner .
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate allah ’ s greatness ?
and the drivers driving .
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis : he said , `` shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ''
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and if you take an agreement at the time of a time , then be not one of those who are bent on denying the truth , and if they were to make a reconciliation between them , you would have been responsible for their husbands , and in the way of allah . and those who are upright in the way of allah , do not be aware of the things you do .
ad denied the messengers .
we shall ease you to the easy .
o ye who believe ! when ye have embraced the faith of allah , and have been dutiful unto allah , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said unto you , and that which ye were wont to worship , and he hath said : what hath been the matter with you , that ye were wont to make a breach with allah , and he was of the rulers ?
and let him share my task
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
those who disbelieve , they are allies of one another . unless you do this , there will be turmoil in the land and great corruption .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
on thrones encrusted ,
he said : `` no food do you have to feed me , but i am a thing that you have been doing . ''
and they say , `` the fire shall not touch us except for a number of days . '' say : `` have you taken a covenant with allah , so that allah will never fail his covenant ? or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ''
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
o ye who believe ! follow not the brethren of satan , and those who follow the house of satan . verily , he is the foresaker of it . indeed , allah is the hearer , the knower .
and if they had been entered upon from the sides of the valley , they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it , and they would not have hesitated in it except briefly .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder ; and indeed for the righteous is a place of return ,
except for our first death , and we shall not be punished ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils of war belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and keep your duty to you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o you who believe ! take not your duty to allah , and bring a witness to you , and to be a proof of your affair , if you were to be one of those who are false , and if you were a muslim , then know that allah is aware of what you do .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and give me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me . you are the all-munificent . ”
and when they commit a fahisha , they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us . say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency . say thou : allah loveth not what ye do not know .
and made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book recording .
he said : `` why do you know that i have no knowledge of the unseen ? indeed , allah is a forsaker of the planners . '' and allah will surely bring a lie to his secret and the wicked .
on the day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire , `` taste the touch of hell ! ''
that they may understand my speech .
indeed , those who fear allah , when a visitation of satan touches them , they will remember ,
say : o my bondmen ! for those who have been bent on denying the truth , have no mercy from allah ; surely , if you are true , allah will forgive you . he is forgiving and merciful .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
he showed him the greatest sign ,
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
o mankind ! we have been of you , the male and the female , the male and the earth , and the men of wisdom , and the people of truth , for it is the matter of one which is true . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
and we will not be able to be able to do all other than the angels , but it is for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and those who have been given the lie to the truth and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , etc
besides allah , and lead them to the way to hell .
on them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight will bear the throne of your lord above them .
except for those who repent and make amends , and they will have the right way . god will give them a great reward .
allah ! there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
they said , “ woe to us , we were unjust . ”
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
so when the sight is dazed ,
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
andotherthat you wereunable towhich god has encompassed . god has power over all things .
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only peace . they will have their provision morning and evening .
and why should they not take a good guests , when he said to them : `` o my lord ! god is the willing of all that he wills , and to whom he will have no power . '' if you do so , i will not be able to do so , and i will not be deprived .
your lord is the forgiving , the owner of mercy . if he had to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have a tryst from which they will find no escape .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your servants . ”
so we saved him and those with him in the laden ark .
then he drew near , and hovered around .
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . but all this is nothing but the life of this world ; and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and when we have made the mount of mount to be in his place of the mount , and in the same way we have made them to be like the dry peel in the same manner , so that they may be told , `` so that you may be treated with that which we have given you , and that you may be mindful of god . ''
this is an account of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some were mown down .
those who say : `` our lord ! we believe , so forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of the fire . ''
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance ; so give good news to my servants ,
and we have sent down the book with the truth and the truth , and the example of those who have passed away in the matter of their own hands . and you are the ones who have been sent by what allah has sent down , and you will be among those who have passed away . and you will be told to be of those who have passed away . and you are to be of those who do good .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass .
say : `` if there were angels walking around in peace , we would have sent down to them from heaven an angel as messenger . ''
those who deny the truth say , “ god has a son . say , ‘ if god wills , he is a hanif , and who will have all that is in the earth . god has all the power to do all things . god is all-powerful and capable of all things . ’
and o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
he said , `` throw ! '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people and terrified them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
they said : o musa ! either you throw , or shall we be the first to throw ?
allah has promised the believers , men and women , the gardens of eden , beneath which rivers flow , wherein rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the great achievement .
those who do not pay the alms , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take a way to his lord .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful . god does not love the wasteful .
there is no blame on you , if you are in the bounty of your lord , and do not forget the remembrance of allah , and remember the remembrance of allah , for you have strayed from it .
he placed firm mountains on it , and blessed it , and blessed it , and made therein its sustenance in four days , in four days .
and by the dawn as it breathes ;
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with the people of hud !
they said , `` we will not cease to worship it until moses returns to us . ''
but when he brought them our signs , they started laughing at them .
they ask thee concerning the spirit . say : the spirit is of the command of my lord , and ye have been vouchsafed of knowledge only a little .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
then they will turn to one another , mutually questioning .
she said : how shall i have a son when no mortal hath touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , for he is the knower of the innermost of the chests .
whatever blessing you have is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
and that we may make them seem decorous to their own people , and he will be blind to those who are blind , and he will be distraught . and one of the same will be one of the unjust . and one of them will be the same ; and those who do not commit the truth , will be the harmdoers .
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
whatever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might abase the transgressors .
they will be gardens of eden , wherein streams flow . they will be in the midst of their gardens , and will be adorned with bracelets of gold . and there will be well-disciplined , in the midst of their places .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
and we have revealed the quran in parts that you may recite it to men at intervals , and we have revealed it by stages .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear god .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the setting of the stars .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
the knower of the unseen and the unseen , and he knows all that is on the earth ; and he knows all that is on the earth , and there is no constraint on allah , and he knows what is in the earth , and there is no constraint in it , and it is not for allah to keep all that is in the earth .
woe to the deniers on that day !
as for the unbelievers , they made lawful for you , and the flesh of food , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the wayfarer . and it is the same for you , that it is the same for you , and that it may be the same for you , and that it is the same for you , and that it is the same for you , that they have been made to make a clear way for you .
do they await except that the hour will come upon them suddenly ? it has already come to them , but how can they benefit , when it has come to them ?
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , so that they may not hear ?
do they then travel in the land , so that they might see the fate of those who have been doing ? they are stronger in power and power . god is certainly aware of the heavens and the all-powerful .
have they not seen that we have destroyed the generations of them before them , and we have destroyed them in the land , so that we might make them succeed , and we destroyed them for their sins , and we destroyed them for their sins , and we destroyed them for their sins , and we destroyed them in their sin ?
we have set constellations in the sky , and beautified it for the beholders .
by the promised day ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication ; and whoever does evil , will have the punishment .
indeed the inmates of paradise will be in pastimes .
propound thou unto them the similitude of the present life , the like of that which we have sent forth from the sky , and a piece of water to gush forth from the sky . and allah is ever able to do all things .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts , and on them and on ships you are carried .
say : `` i exhort you only to allah , who will stand up by twos and singly , and singly , and then reflect . there is no madness in your companion . he is only a warner to you before a severe punishment . ''
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has overtaken me ? what good news do you give me ? ”
what concern do you have to mention it ?
the blind and the seeing are not equal , nor are those who believe and do righteous deeds and those who do evil . little do you reflect .
and when it was said to them , “ in the city , you are present in the city , which you turn back in the land and seek forgiveness from your homes , our lord will forgive us , and forgive us our sins . we will surely give good deeds to the good . ”
this is an account of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some were mown down .
and he said to his servants : put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they return to their folks , haply they will come back .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
by the earth and him who spread it ,
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
so fear allah and obey me .
they say , `` had we followed the guidance with you in the study of the world , they would not be thrust down to it , unless we have made some of them a distant life , but most of them do not know , but most of them do not know .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
and they say , `` the fire shall not touch us except for a number of days . '' say : `` have you taken a covenant with allah , so that allah will never fail his covenant ? or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ''
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong ; these are the successful .
but theysplit their affair between them , all will return to us .
the jews say , `` the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow nothing . '' they are the ones who are readers of the book , and they are readers of the book . and allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
o people of the jinn and the human beings , did not come to you from among you , the true ones , that you should take heed to what you say , and they will say to them , `` we are witness to the life of this world , and they used to deny the truth when they had been rejected . ''
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer charity before your consultation ; that is better for you and purer ; and if you can not find any good , then indeed allah is forgiving , merciful .
surely allah is one of that which is spoken on the day of resurrection , when it is recited to you , when it is recited to you , so that you will not be able to have your trust , and then you will have no faith .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
they think that those who are given a good loan is to be given to them , and the good things of allah will not spend for them . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever ; and that is easy for allah .
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch forth my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
this is an account of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some were mown down .
we believe in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting . ''
if you question them , they will say , `` we were only plunging and playing . '' say , `` were you mocking god , his revelations , and his messenger ? ''
and they do not bring you any representation but that we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
say , “ have you considered that which you used to worship besides allah , and you call upon him ? ” so do you have a group of them in the heaven ? do you not know that it is in the heavens and the earth ? no , they are not responsible except for what they do .
surely to us is their return .
it is naught but a revelation revealed .
he said , “ i saw what they did not see , and i seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ”
said firaun , “ have you believed in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have plotted in the city that you may expel its people from the city , so you will know . ”
so say to the people , “ the matter is better than you , and you are the one with whom is the truth . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who is with me . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who has been disassociated from all that you associate . ” say , “ indeed he is one of the unknown . ”
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops and cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
so exalted be allah , the true king , there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
but whoever does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither injustice nor disparagement .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , “ my lord has humiliated me . ”
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
and they say , “ shall we abandon our gods for the sake of an insane poet ? ”
say : `` verily , i am the one who can bring you to death , '' say : `` i have been revealed to it , so that you may be one of the deniers . ''
these are verses of the clear book .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ''
they do not believe in it , and the example of the ancients has already passed .
even though he presents his excuses .
and the food of the good is lawful for you , lawful and unlawful , and the women of the book is given to you , and the women of the book are given to you , and the women of the book is made known to you , and to those who were given the good things of the book , and to be innocent of those who have been given to the unlawful , and they will be among the losers .
and those who are bent on denying the truth and say , `` our lord , forgive us , and leave us to the path of those who believe , and do not be of the believers . our lord ! indeed , you are the most gracious , the most merciful . ''
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and to those who are attacked , they will not be grieved by the evil ones , and they will be grieved . the disbelievers will say , `` indeed , i am one of those who reject faith . ''
she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
so the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , where they will abide for ever . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
he said , “ i complain of my anguish and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
and his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
allah wants to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them and will become deniers of their worshipping .
o my people , who would help me against allah if i drove them away ? will you not then take heed ?
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you were impatient for . ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
blessed is he who , if he wills , could give you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign to you palaces .
what concern do you have to mention it ?
in the gardens of bliss ,
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is of your own hands , and he pardons much .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah does not oppress his servants .
and if they intend to betray you , they have already betrayed allah before , and he gavepower over them . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them to the fire . evil is the place to which they have been led .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
in joseph and his brothers there are signs for those who inquire .
what aileth you that ye succour not one another ?
and you have been commanded to be of those who exalt their lord with the son of maryam , when the command is only to worship him , and his worship only to worship him . glory be to him , and exalted be he !
these are they who buy error for guidance and torment for forgiveness . how bold they are in the fire .
do not follow the path of god , and do not associate anything with him . and whoever ascribes partners to god is like a partner .
and those who do evil deeds , then repent after that and believe , then surely your lord is forgiving and merciful .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
they were guided to purity of speech . they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
say : `` whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` there is no god but god . '' say : `` god has mercy on whom is the mercy of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . ''
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
it will engulf them .
those who keep their duty to their lord , and those who have been dutiful to their lord will be presented to the garden , so that the angels will be brought forth , and they will say to the angels , `` peace be with you , '' and they will be called to paradise , wherein they will live forever .
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
if you seek to help the believers , you will surely be able to turn away from the messenger . but if you turn back , then they will not be able to turn you away from it ; and if you turn back , then indeed , allah is with the believers .
say , `` if you love allah , follow me , god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and do not be surprised at the time when they will see it , and when you see the same , they will see the same time when you are trying to be of the cheats , and when you are cautious , it is likely that allah will not fail in their hearts , and that they are unaware .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . you are the best of harbourers . ''
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they do not understand ?
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor !
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , are the condemnation of god , the angels , and of all mankind .
except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then present it , if thou speakest truly .
i will cast him into hell .
behaving arrogantly , reviling .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . for that he created them , and the word of your lord has been fulfilled . i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . '
indeed , what they worship besides allah will be responsible for them , and you do not create any thing , but you have no sustenance from god . you will have no sustenance to god . you will be responsible for the sustenance you have received .
have you not seen how god has made subservient to you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , through the sea ? the heavens and the earth will sail in the sea , for god is most gracious , most merciful .
he who does not guide god , and guides to the right path . he will not find any one to whom he will , and on the day of resurrection , they will be the fire .
and how can you have patience over what you do not comprehend ? ''
and those who are observant of the remembrance of allah , do not cross the limits of the heavens or the earth , and you are the originator of the heavens and the earth . we have made you secure from the punishment of the fire , and be free of the fire .
he was only a servant of ours and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said : o musa ! either you throw , or shall we be the first to throw ?
and otherof its typekinds .
and say to those who are bent on denying the truth , `` fear their lord , and keep their duty to them , or whether they are free from their own hands , or to make a girl 's son , or whether they are free from their own hands , or a woman who is free from their own skill , or is the one who will be given to their own skill .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
and the weighing on that day is true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be the successful .
and satan let them turn away from you , and the tree of the tree , so that they will be the leaves of the leaves , and the leaves will come forth from it . he said , “ did i not give you a tree , so that you would have been sent down to me ? ”
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
the first houseappointed for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for the worlds .
or have you a clear authority ?
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
thus does allah make clear to you his revelations that you may understand .
those who are gracious to you , do not seek to help the property of the poor and the needy , and let not the muttaqun deceive you . god will forgive you , and allah is forgiving and merciful .
but as for you , and that you worship ,
that is because of what you have done , so that we might let the children of israel go to the children of israel , and do not commit aggression in the earth , as if they were a people who have gone astray , and most of the people who are lost in the wrong , and most of them are insolent .
and when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be justified against the unbelievers .
and if all the trees on earth were pens , and the sea , replenished with seven more seas , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and as for ad , they acted arrogantly in the land , and they said , “ who is more powerful than us ? ” did they not see that allah who created them is more powerful than they were more powerful than them ?
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou wilt give to whomsoever thou wilt .
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
indeed we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand ,
`` were not my versesrecited to you , and you used to deny them ? ''
he is god , there is no god except he . he knows the unseen and the visible . he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
we have fettersand a blazing fire ,
and a tongue of the book is only for the people of the book , except for the best of those who have done wrong , and they have been wronged before , and we have been commanded , and we are only one of those who submit .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you , out of the earth , behold , you will come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
and others bound in chains .
but those who disbelieve , and spend their wealth in the way of allah , and let them spend in the way of allah , and let them spend in their way for the cause of god . those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
the baptism of allah , and who is better than allah in baptising ? and we are worshippers of him .
and the jinn beforeof smokeless fire .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
the men of the past are exposed , and those who are bent on denying the truth are going to be seen in their homes . they will be told , `` they will have no share in god and his messenger . '' they are those who are truthful .
those who are constant in their prayers .
verily , those who violate allah 's covenant , their own souls will not be able to die , and on the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and for them is the painful punishment .
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
and the qur'an is not the word of an accursed satan .
for the beggar and the destitute ,
as for those who believe and do good works , for them are the gardens of shelter—hospitality for what they used to do .
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! lo ! my son is of my family , and thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and as for the unbelievers , they would have cut off the end of their own hands , and the chief of them is a set of silver , and if it is a thing to be seen , he would have made for you a part of it . and if only he should be of the unbelievers , he would have made your duty to be a qarinto you . and if you were to be of the unbelievers , it would be a great triumph .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . verily ! i am seeing what you do . ''
and whoever of you is bent on denying the truth , other than the people , who have faith , and do good , you will be the same to your daughters . and allah is the best knower of that which you are doing . and if you are of the wasteful , you will be of those who are righteous , and you will be of the righteous . and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but those who disbelieved and belied our signs , they shall be the inmates of hell .
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , and they avertedfrom the way of allah . indeed , it was evil that they are doing .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they committed injustices , and we appointed for their destruction a tryst .
he said , “ indeed it grieves me that you should take him away , and i fear that the wolf may eat him . ”
the promise of god . god does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and made the day for livelihood .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
it is not the same for them , that which we have the same to you , and our fathers , and our fathers are not but a fabricator . and allah has not given them a sign , for they have no doubt .
we would have been allah ’ s exclusive servants . ’
as for the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those before them , they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief .
he was one of our believing servants .
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , `` indeed , i am your protector . so fear you , for you will have the fear of the believers , and you will be among those who deny the truth , and you will be among the doomed . ''
but those who disbelieved and belied our verses , they will be the inmates of the fire , to remain in it forever . evil is the destination .
gardens of eden , which the most gracious has promised to his servants in the unseen . his promise will certainly come to pass .
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
they will be in gardens , or the everlasting life , wherein they will abide forever .
so hold fast to that which has been revealed to you , for you are on a straight path .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat as they desire .
so we wanted their lord to replace him with one better than he in purity and nearer to mercy .
and they said , “ do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , nor suwa ” , nor yaghuth , ya'uq and nasr . ”
o prophet ! let the children of israel go about you about that which we have revealed to you , so that we may make clear to you what we have revealed to you , and they are their guardians .
and on the earth are signs for those who have conviction ,
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them , and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment .
the guilty will be recognized by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and do not approach the wealth of the suppliant except the right , and do not be at all , unless it be the same for you , , when it is full of measure , and the word of your lord is easy to you , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may take heed .
does he not know that when what is in the graves is overthrown ,
and he said : lo ! i am sick .
or do they say : `` a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time ! ''
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters .
when moses said to his servant : `` i will not give up until i reach the confluence of the two seas , or i will go on for ages . ''
and if you do not go about in the land , it is not to be seen except from the side of the trumpet . and if you deny one another , then let them be seen by god . he is the all-knower of what they do . and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
indeed , there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , solicitous for you , and most merciful towards the believers .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably . he is the all-knowing judge . ”
and the people of the desertcame to allah , when the covenant with your lord has been established , and when you had spoken the truth , and indeed , allah knows what you do .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with a bad deed . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
return to your father and say , `` father , your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we are not guardians of the unseen . ''
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , for whom there is no protector nor intercessor besides him , that they may guard .
but i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
and we admitted him into our mercy . he was among the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
and we have removed the mercy of peace and mercy until the dawn is sounded , and the command of allah will be fulfilled . he will have the faith of the righteous .
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
god will never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we shall call every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
when the oceans are exploded .
`` we led you astray , for we ourselves were astray . ''
and if your women were in divorce , it would be as a matter for them , and when you are not equal to them , it will be the same for them , but they will not be able to do so , except for the cause of god . they will be the victims of the innermost of the chests .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised its vault high and proportioned it .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him ; surely he is the relenting , the merciful .
we sent noah to his people , and he said , ‘ o my people ! worship god ! you have no god other than he . you will have a humiliating punishment . ’
aye ! we are deprived .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
when it is said to them , “ beware of what is before you and what is behind you , so that you may receive mercy . ”
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , and if you had done so , the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
they said , “ our lord , continue to go away from us , and we are oblivious of them . ” but in that case , they are the ones who are in ruins , and there is a sign in that for a people who are patient .
may god forgive you . why did you grant them leave until the truthful ones had come to you in the manifest truth ?
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance and they were not able to hear .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt about it .
“ eat and drink pleasantly for what you did in the days gone by . ”
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ' nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far astray .
surely there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
yes , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him , those are the companions of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and go , both of them , to say , `` we have been sent by the lord of the universe . let them be told , `` we have been sent as a revelation from your lord , and let them be followed by the path of those who follow the right path . ''
he will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be well-disciplined , gardens of perpetual residence .
and we sent not a prophet to any town but we seized its people with adversity and adversity , that haply they may humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and what you do not see ,
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
and you should not say , “ if only we had been given the book to have been better than us , and indeed , we are better than it , and who will have a clear proof from the people , and who will have a humiliating punishment . ”
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the hereafter .
she said , “ my lord , how can i have a child , when no human being has touched me ? ” and when he wills , he says , ‘ be ! ’ and it is .
indeed , when the water overflowed , we carried you in the ark ,
and sent down water from the clouds
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said : `` our lord ! grant us mercy from yourself and furnish us with rectitude in our affair . ''
then we inspired moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
who terrorised the region ,
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and those who believe will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they are losers .
and when the truth came to them , they said , “ this is sorcery , and we reject it . ”
and that is because they have disbelieved , and when our punishment are recited to them , and because they are afraid of the truth . this is indeed the one who will have faith in allah and the last day , and the disbelievers will be in denial .
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is all the same for you whether you call them or keep silent .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
and it is he who restrained their hands from you , and your hands from them , in the valley of mecca , after he had given you victory over them . god sees what you do .
the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever as a reward for what they used to do .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
and if you ask them , who is the water of water , who has been sent down to the earth , then do not make the earth a sudden , after it had come to him , then they will say , `` it is god who deserves all praise ? '' but they do not know .
and as for the people of pharaoh , and those who were before them , those who were before them denied the signs of allah and those who denied the signs of allah , and allah is the pardoner , the most merciful .
then the people of moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a lowing sound . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to it , and they were unjust ?
he said , “ indeed it grieves me that you should take him away , and i fear that the wolf may eat him . ”
and one of them is two , and he said , “ i am one of my people , and he said , ‘ i am indeed going to run away from my dream . i will see it . you will certainly be told , `` i will certainly take you away from my dream . indeed , i see that you are the one of the ignorant . ''
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . indeed , it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is the almighty , the wise .
he said : surely you will not be able to bear with me patiently .
and they say , “ allah has taken a covenant with us , and we would not have been a messenger to you , if you are truthful . ”
the people of the book will say , “ this is a god ’ s way , and they will say , ‘ this is god ’ s presence . so woe to the people of the world , so woe to those who do not know . ’
and if you ask them , who is the water of water , who has been sent down to the earth , then do not make the earth a sudden , after it had come to him , then they will say , `` it is god who deserves all praise ? '' but they do not know .
we are the rangers ,
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the pious .
unless by mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
i will guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him '
so let man consider of what he was created .
such is the garden which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
so he went forth before his people in his finery . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy : therein let them rejoice . this is better than that which they amass .
we have made it a reminder and a provision for the users .
the companions of the garden will call to the companions of the garden , `` indeed , our promise has been fulfilled , '' he said , `` our promise was only to be fulfilled . '' did you not consider that the promise of god was fulfilled .
and warn thy clan , the nearest ones .
when his lord said to him , `` submit ! '' he said , `` i have submitted to the lord of the universe . ''
they will swear to you by god , in order that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell , and their abode is hell .
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? verily he is of the wrong-doers .
peace be upon ilyas .
if he wills , he stills the wind and they will remain motionless on its surface . surely in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then present it , if thou speakest truly .
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling .
and they have not been commanded that they should be able to keep away from it , and keep up prayer and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and give the poor-rate ,
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
it is he who breaks the dawn , and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
abraham was one of his followers .
and watch them , for they will soon see .
and when he turns away , he hastens about the earth to cause mischief in the land and to destroy crops and cattle . god does not love corruption .
o you who believe ! fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find harshness in you , and know that allah is with those who fear him .
and thus have we appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners ; and sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or say they : there is madness in him ? nay , but he brought them the truth , and most of them are averse to the truth .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and transgression and disobedience to the messenger , but converse in piety and piety . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
and man has come to his lord , when he comes to his lord , and then , when it comes to his lord , he will make you slip with his favour , and say , “ enjoy a little , and you will have a share of the fire . ” but you are the people of the fire , , “ this is a brief loss . ”
surely those who believe and do good works shall be a reward unfailing .
and relate to them the story of noah , when he said to his people : `` o my people ! if you are worshipping me , i will give you my people , and you will come to know . '' then you will come to know what you have been working .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , and seek forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they are near kin , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
say , “ be you stones or iron
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger had promised us nothing but delusion ! ''
and the weighing on that day is true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be the successful .
so the sentence of our lord has come to pass against us , and we are tasting it .
he is god , there is no god except he . he knows the unseen and the visible . he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
until , when they came to the command of one of the fire , we restored him to the water of the fire , and we said , “ o noah , either you have a male and female in the ark , except for those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth did not believe , except for the disbelievers . ”
“ our lord , do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your mercy ; you are the giver . ”
allah has given the example of a slave . and we have made for him of his good deeds a good provision , and he is the one who knows all that is before them . and most of them do not know .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they describe .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , though you will not think me . ''
and i will give them respite , for my plan is firm .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , and was not able to quicken the dead ? yes , indeed he is able to do all things .
those who were arrogant said : `` we reject what you believe in . ''
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and we have not sent a messenger except that we have sent a messenger , but if they were to accept the leave of allah , they would have sought forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . god is forgiving and merciful .
and if there is a party of you who believeth in that wherewith i have been sent , then be patient , and persevere until allah judges between us . he is the best of judges .
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to my servants . ’
your lord is the forgiving , the owner of mercy . if he had to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have a tryst from which they will find no escape .
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
and whoever of you is bent on denying the truth , other than the people , who have faith , and do good , you will be the same to your daughters . and allah is the best knower of that which you are doing . and if you are of the wasteful , you will be of those who are righteous , and you will be of the righteous . and allah is forgiving , merciful .
no ! indeed , we have created them from what they know .
and when allah has made them feel secure , they instantly become a prey to the earth , o people who are in the earth . you will surely be responsible for your own souls . and to us you will be recompensed , and to us you will be returned .
and whoever does not believe in allah and his messenger , we have prepared for the unbelievers a blazing fire .
he said , “ my lord , help me against the mischievous people . ”
he said : in a little while they will become regretful .
except if god wills , and remember your lord when you forget , and say , “ perhaps my lord will guide me to a nearer course than this . ”
and do not be like the like of your women , the like of it , and do not bring it forth , and you will have the covenant with it , and you will have a group of them in the least , lest a group of you may take a small way in it , and allah will make you clear for what you used to do .
and the mountains likedyed wool ,
o my son ! establish prayer and enjoin good , and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently that which befalls you . surely , this is the steadiest of courses .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
have they not pondered over the word , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
those who believe not in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in others .
and it is said to you : your lord is the most appreciating and the most generous . but if you are ungrateful , i will give you a good provision . then , if you are ungrateful , i will surely punish you with a punishment .
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
it is he who has sent down to you the book from our lord , and is not one of the people who do not understand .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they have .
and when the mountains are set in motion ,
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
on that day she will relate her chronicles ,
their abode will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
at dawn they called out to one another ,
whatever misfortune befalls you is of your own hands , and he pardons much .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say , “ taste what you used to do . ”
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
those who annoy god and his messenger will be cursed by god in this world and the hereafter , and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
god is my lord and your lord . so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
and all that is with allah is the true , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah on you ; and the hearts of your enemies was in the hearts . thus allah will make clear to you your hearts , so that god may make clear to you the way .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the hereafter ; and allah loves those who do good .
fie on you and all that you worship besides allah ! will you not understand ? ''
those are they from whom we shall accept the best of what they have done , and we overlook their evil deeds.among the owners of the garden . the promise of truth is true .
and they will not be grieved by the prophets , and they will not be grieved . they say , `` listen to each other . '' say , `` listen to those who believe in god 's messenger , and to those who have faith , and have mercy on them , and for them is a painful punishment . ''
he taught distinctness .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
dreading some great affliction .
and if it had been our will , we could have transformed themin their place , so that they would not be able to move forward , nor would they return .
among the two people are the two groups that they will come to you in a way of god . and the disbelievers are two of them , and the disbelievers are two in the presence of god . indeed , in this is a sign for those who are in a clear way .
thus do you make a sign of you to be a witness against mankind , that he may be a witness to the people , and that we may make it clear for them , and that we may make it seem fair to them , and that he may be a muhsin . indeed , allah is kind , merciful .
our lord , whoever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
and if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
then after them we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs , but they wronged them . so see what sort of fate befell the corrupters !
tasting therein neither coolness nor any drink
say : who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ?
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? rather , you are a people transgressing . ''
does he not know that when what is in the graves is overthrown ,
they said , “ by allah , we swear to one another in the night , and the family of his family – then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we will be truthful . ’
say , ‘ o people of the book ! what is the matter with us that we turn to us , and to make the grief to be ? ’ except that which we had revealed to us , and that what is revealed to us is the most disputatious of people .
as for those who believe and do good works , we will have prepared for them gardens of paradise ,
and if you have to come to the people of the book , they will come to know the truth of your own , and they will not be able to listen to you , and they will not be able to follow your own fancies . you will not be among the harmdoers .
indeed , the shaitan wants to be the one of the exalted in might , and the earth , and the names of allah , and the names of allah , and the names of those who are observant of your prayer . do you not ponder ?
and some of them will turn to one another , questioning each other .
and whether you were to be free from your own , if they were to worship the commands of god , they would have been responsible for your own women , and if you had a companion , they will be told , `` it is the same for you , if you were a man of old , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it is
say , ‘ o people of the book ! what is the matter with us that we turn to us , and to make the grief to be ? ’ except that which we had revealed to us , and that what is revealed to us is the most disputatious of people .
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners if they are truthful .
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud and were a guilty people .
whosoever hopeth for the meeting with allah , then verily the term of allah is coming . he is the hearer , the knower .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
have they not heard the news of the people of the 'ad and the thamud , and aad , and thamood , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and they were not wronged ?
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
and i seek refuge with thee , my lord , lest they attend me . '
verily , those who guardare in a secure place ,
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an act of clear shamelessness , her punishment will be doubled . that is easy for allah .
and fear a day when no soul will avail another soul , and no intercession shall be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
so do they wait , except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ wait ! i too am waiting with you . ’
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
invite to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
o ye who believe ! when ye have been of the believers , they shall come to you in account of that which they are wont to reckon , and that they may be asked about it . and if ye do not believe , then it is for you to be seen , and if ye do not believe , then it is for you to be seen , and if ye do not , it is for you to be seen , and that ye may be of the unbelievers .
and if they belie you , those before them also belied , their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with scriptures , and the illuminating book .
they will hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
if you could but see when the guilty will come to pass , they will surely say , ‘ our lord ! we have heard our eyes . we have heard the things we have heard . we have heard the things we have done . we have indeed heard the things we do . ’
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the mornings and the evenings , and do not be of the neglectful .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
it is lawful for you to feed the sea and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the travelers , and forbidden for you in the land and the hair of the land . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and there will be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say : when we are lost in the earth , shall we be in a new creation ? nay , but they disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , give them out of it , and speak kindly to them .
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and rivers ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the glad tidings , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; indeed its people are unjust . ”
and we made the children of israel to be told , `` it was revealed to the people of the pharaoh and to the people of moses . '' he revealed to it , `` i have been told to be a fabricator . '' and we made the same to them the same thing , but we made them a share of the land , and we did not make them to be a tyrant .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
and those on the right—what of those on the right ?
lest you should say , ‘ the book was sent down only to two groups before us , and we were unaware of their study . ’
so whoever wills may remember it .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds , and he gives them increase of his bounty . and the disbelievers will have a severe punishment .
the likeness of the garden is that which is in the presence of the righteous , and that which is with them is its abode , and the rivers will be brought forth with it , and in the midst of it there was a source of water to flow . in the midst of the fire there was a sign for those who are in the midst of the fire , and they will be in the midst of the fire .
o prophet ! why do you command the command of your lord and be of those who have been given to his own command ? if you are present by the command of allah , then indeed , allah guides the people of the unbelievers .
they say : `` our lord ! hasten to us our share before the day of reckoning . ''
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them and will become deniers of their worshipping .
do you think that the two of you will enter the sacred mosque , and they used to incline towards you and to make fun of them ? and they do good , and the relatives , and the orphans , and the needy , and the traveller . and they are the ones who are good , and the wayfarer .
and when we took a pledge from the prophets , and from you , and from noah , abraham , moses and jesus son of mary , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
when they came to you , they believe in our signs , say , `` peace be upon you . '' say , `` peace be upon you , if you are one of those who have committed a sin . '' then , if you are one of the truthful , he is indeed forgiving and merciful .
that they may understand my speech .
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , `` indeed , i am your protector . so fear you , for you will have the fear of the believers , and you will be among those who deny the truth , and you will be among the doomed . ''
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , devoting your religion to him .
say : praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ?
and by him who created male and female ,
verily we ! we have made it a trial for the wrong-doers .
and the burden-bearers
and pharaoh of the stakes ?
indeed , with hardshipease .
and when hell is set ablaze ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; indeed they were a transgressing people .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , for whom there is no protector nor intercessor besides him , that they may guard .
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like you . call them and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
abraham was a nation obedient to allah , inclining toward truth , and he was not of the polytheists .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
and noah , when he cried to us , we responded to him and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ? ''
those who deny the truth and deny our signs are those who are deaf and dumb , are they to be brought into the fire . what , then , will they be brought back to the hereafter ? god is observant of all that you do .
o man ! you are labouring toward your lord laboriously , and you will meet him .
and when they have turned away from him , he said , “ did you not know that your father has already been sent down upon you with a witness from your own hands , and he has made for you a witness from your own hands ? and i do not ask you any reward until he wills . he is the best of judges . ”
allah will not call you to account for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
say , `` spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you . indeed , you are a transgressing lot . ''
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
then which of the bounties of your lord will you dispute ?
say , `` those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , `` you will be called to account for those who are bent on denying the truth , '' and they will be called to disbelief . and if they turn away , then they will be turned back , and have become muslims . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
they purposed to unsettle you from the land that they might expel you from it . then , they would not have stayed after you except a little .
god has made for you both wives and children . and he appointed for you from among you , sons and good , and a good provision . will they then have faith and do good ? are they the unbelievers ?
and that we may make them seem decorous to their own people , and he will be blind to those who are blind , and he will be distraught . and one of the same will be one of the unjust . and one of them will be the same ; and those who do not commit the truth , will be the harmdoers .
the people of the book were recorded in the writings of the book , which were recorded in the book , and the exposition of the book is in the book , and they have no knowledge of it . and they have no knowledge of that . and they have no knowledge , and they have no knowledge .
they said : 'put him and his brother off , and send forth heralds to the cities
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness for their sins—and who forgives sins except allah ? and who do not persist in their sins while they know ?
then we drowned the others .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and publicly , will have their reward from their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
in the day you have drawn-out engagements .
those who are bent on wait for you against them , if you have been sent from allah ’ s wrath , they will say , `` we have been waiting with you . '' but if they are believers , they will say , `` shall we have a relation with you ? '' and if you disbelieve , he will judge between you , and they will not be able to take heed .
he said : this is a straight path .
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , the forgiveness and mercy from allah are better than all that they amass .
so have patience . the promise of god is true . let not those who do not believe make you unsteady .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and they have advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
o you who believe ! be wary of allah and seek the means of approach to him , and strive hard in his way , that you may succeed .
is the food of the sinful .
then we destroyed the others .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
and if they had been entered upon from the sides of the valley , they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it , and they would not have hesitated in it except briefly .
and we left for themamong generationsin later times :
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
god is the un-wanting .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , “ would that i had died before this , and were completely forgotten . ”
they do not believe in it , and the example of the ancients has already passed .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
say : you will not be questioned about what we committed , nor shall we be questioned about what you do .
and do not mix truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth while you know .
by the clear book ,
and put your trust in the living one who dies not , and celebrate his praise ; and sufficient is he as the knower of the sins of his servants .
and when our punishment came to them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and the moon is eclipsed ,
and who pay thecharity .
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said , “ bring me a brother from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and i am the best of hosts ? ”
when the heaven shall be stripped off ,
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
except his wife ; we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . away with thamud !
and if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger , and if you repent , you will have your capital sums , `` you will not be wronged . ''
yet he is eager that i should give him more .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
so he turned away from them and said , “ o my people , i have delivered to you the messages of my lord , and i gave you good advice , so how can i grieve for a disbelieving people ? ”
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him for my service . '' and when he spoke to him , he said , “ today you are established in our noble blessings . ”
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun or the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if you are to worship him .
by no means ! by the moon ,
he said , “ i have taken the son of god to you , and he will be spared of you , and he said , “ no one will be saved except one whom god has given you . ” and he became one of the liars .
and if they resolve upon divorce , allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
on the day when we shall seize them with the greatest seizure , we will surely take vengeance on them .
and anumber from those of later times .
and there is not for them a saying in order to go forth with a narrow place of a narrow place of it in a narrow way , and their faces will be made known to them , and their abode will be the same , and the everlasting paradise , and the everlasting life .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , reciting to you our verses and purifies you and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
and never did we destroy a town but it had a known decree .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and do not sell allah 's covenant for a paltry price . what is with god is better for you , if you only knew .
those who disbelieve will be charged for his disbelief , and those who do good deeds , will have the right way .
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
because the blind man came to him .
go forth , whether lightly or heavily , and strive hard in the cause of god . this is better for you , if you know .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian over all things .
and has placed the moon in them as a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
the excuses of the excuses on that day will be dimmed for them .
as for those who have been pledged to the word of allah , they beguiled them in the life of this world , and in the end they forgot our verses , as they forgot our signs .
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most people begrudge aught save ingratitude .
the day when no soul will have poweraught for another . the command of that day is god 's command .
and when you and those with you have boarded the ship , say : `` praise be to allah , who has delivered us from the wrongdoing people . ''
when joseph said to his father : `` o my father ! i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
messengers bearing good news and warning , so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and go , both of them , to say , `` we have been sent by the lord of the universe . let them be told , `` we have been sent as a revelation from your lord , and let them be followed by the path of those who follow the right path . ''
among the two people are the two groups that they will come to you in a way of god . and the disbelievers are two of them , and the disbelievers are two in the presence of god . indeed , in this is a sign for those who are in a clear way .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on the day of friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off buying and selling ; that is better for you if you but knew .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels sent down successively with him ? ''
the people of the city are the ones who are the witnesses , and they come to him with the messenger , and they will not be brought back to him in the cause of god . say , ‘ the fire is the fire . ’ say , ‘ the fire is the fire . ’
and if all the trees on earth were pens , and the sea , replenished with seven more seas , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
or , whether it be , or , , whether it be in the midst of the clouds , it will be set forth from the clouds , and in the darkness of the light , and when it is cloven asunder from the darkness of the rock , and when it is in his hand , he will not find light .
except those who are in the way of allah , and a covenant with you , or a covenant with you , and their hearts are made to be comforted . and if they were to keep away with you , they would have been made to keep away with you . and if they were to keep away from you , then indeed , allah has made for you a guardian .
and they have not been commanded that they should be able to keep away from it , and keep up prayer and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and give the poor-rate ,
that is a state of time when a messenger came to them , and a messenger had come to them , but they rejected them , and reject them . and allah is strong , most forbearing .
your lord knows you best , if he wills , he will have mercy on you , or if he wills , he will punish you , and we have not sent you to be their guardian .
do they not think that they will be resurrected
so we heard his prayer and saved him from the distress . and thus do we deliver the believers .
and give to the near of kin his due , and to the needy , and the wayfarer , and squander notin wantonness .
is it not a sign for them that the learned of the children of israel recognize it ?
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
and when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who say , `` it is only a poet . and say , `` it is only a reminder . i am afraid that i should be afraid of it . i am afraid of the punishment of a terrible day . ''
bananatrees , piled
and when the messengers came to them , they will think that they are a liar . and that is in the time that they are the ones who are in the end . and we will take revenge on him . and none will be able to take vengeance on us .
and man turns away from us , and turn away from it . and when evil visits you , i will surely make it a great affliction , and when adversity touches them , i will make their supplication .
until the certaintyovertook us '
and on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
until , when they come , he will say , `` did you deny my signs without comprehending them in knowledge ? or what was it that you were doing ? ''
do not cause corruption in the land after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope . indeed , the mercy of allah is close to the righteous .
we let them enjoy for a little while , then we shall drive them to a severe punishment .
on the day when they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you not considered the one who has taken his own caprice to be his god ? so god leads astray him , and has made a seal on him , and a seal is made to be guided . do you not understand ?
and assuredly he saw him in another descent
we hasten to them with good things ? nay , but they do not perceive .
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds , and the birds , and its glorification , and he knows all that they do ? god knows what they do .
this was indeed a clear test .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and to solomon the stormy wind , which blew by his command towards the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of everything .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the pious .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he said , `` our lord is he who gave everything its form , then guided it . ''
he said , “ enter the group of the jinn and humans before you , and the people of hell . when some people are thrown into the fire , they will be presented before it , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! these are the ones whom you are invited to the fire , and you will be presented in the fire . ’
if we willed , we could show them to you , and you would recognize them by their mark . and you will certainly know them by their marks . god knows your deeds .
o wives of the prophet , be gracious , then , are the ones with which you are the first , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and give regular charity ; and give zakat , and give the alms , for god 's noble messengers .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his signs , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
alas for the servants ! there came not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you , but if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you ? in god let the believers put their trust .
so they will deny what you say , and you can neither avert , nor help . whoever of you commits injustice , we will make him taste a great punishment .
for you therein are many fruits of which you will eat .
this is an account of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they disputed with them .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
that we may test them with it , and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter into a severe punishment .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book , they will have the curse of god and cursed by the cursers ,
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may be a warner to all beings .
guard strictly yourprayers , especially the middle prayer , and stand before allah in obedience .
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
indeed , those who have turned their religion into sects , and do not have any of them to see them , they are before you , but you are before them . then , they will be brought back to god in what they do .
in the gardens of bliss ,
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever ; and that is easy for allah .
and solomon did not take to himself a laughing-stock , and he said , `` my lord , seize me , '' he said , `` o my lord , take me as a heritage to your deeds , and give me a share of what you have been doing . ''
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and allah encompasses all things .
and those who said : `` this is the lord of the universe . '' then he would have followed the right path , and they will say : `` fear ye not ! '' and ye shall be among the happy ones .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
who say , `` our lord , avert from us the punishment of hell , for its punishment is a terrible punishment .
and what will show you what is the crusher ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
it is only one of mankind that will be the same for some of mankind , if good fortune befalls me , and if good fortune befalls me , they will be lost in it , and that is the home . this is the re-compense for what they used to commit .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
and those who are bent on denying the truth and say , `` our lord , forgive us , and leave us to the path of those who believe , and do not be of the believers . our lord ! indeed , you are the most gracious , the most merciful . ''
when good is done to them , they say : `` this is a magician , and we are a trying of them . '' but if any misfortune befalls them , they are the ones who were with him . but most of them do not understand .
do they not see that we have created for them our handiwork , and they are their masters ?
and the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she had almost disclosed it , had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be among the believers .
by the promised day ,
and we have spread out the earth , and set on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every well-balanced thing .
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away arrogantly as if he had not heard them , as though there was deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
and at the sky , how it is raised ?
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve . so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
say : `` if it had been for the sake of your lord , he would have given me knowledge , if it had been the matter of my lord , if it had come to him , we would have made it a thing . ''
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
he will say , `` would that i had sent aheadfor my life . ''
a guidance and good news for the believers
and verily unto our lord we shall return .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ,
and to the people of the ad , we said , ‘ o my servants ! worship god ! you have no other god other than god . ’ so you will not be able to make a sign in the earth , but you will have a share in the land , and do not be a painful punishment .
and those who have passed away before them , and their hearts will be in the midst of their homes . and those who have been given their homes , will have a share in their hearts . and whoever does not seek to be protected from their homes , they will be the successful .
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and bore witness that the messenger is true , and after the clear proofs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take a way to his lord .
except those who are in the way of allah , and a covenant with you , or a covenant with you , and their hearts are made to be comforted . and if they were to keep away with you , they would have been made to keep away with you . and if they were to keep away from you , then indeed , allah has made for you a guardian .
and his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
think not that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
on that day , you will appear to the people in the morning and they will call to his people , and they will call to his people , `` this day will be a recompense for what you used to do . ''
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
but those who disbelieve , downfall shall be theirs , and he will send their works astray .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , “ would that i had died before this , and were completely forgotten . ”
and it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and remember what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godfearing .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
did i not charge you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
and leave them a desolate waste ,
and he said : embark therein , in the name of allah , in its name , its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and if they were to go away , they would not increase you except in vain , and they would not be able to expel your ears from the air , but the sounds of a whole needle is in a new state , and allah knows the unjust .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . indeed , god is compassionate and merciful .
or add to it , and recite the quran slowly and distinctly .
those who are true to the believers are not in the cause of allah , but those who strive hard in the way of allah and have no wealth , and their lives . god has blessed a great promise , and allah 's favour has been given to those who are true .
whoever does righteousness , whether male or female , and is a believer , we will surely give him a good life , and we shall reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
he had warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
he has given you cattle and children ,
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
they said , “ o shuaib , does your prayer command you that we abandon what our ancestors worshiped , or that we may do what we like with our wealth ? you are the most intelligent , the most forbearing . ”
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
indeed , allah took a covenant with the children of israel , and set up with it a part of it . and allah said , “ i am with you , and you will be of those who have been upright . ” and those who are upright in the way of allah will be in the midst of the garden , and you will have the right path .
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
o you who believe ! when you have died and become a witness between you and the sound , it is just a word of justice , if you are a witness between the two , and if you are a witness between the two , you would have been told , `` indeed , if you are a witness between the two , you will certainly be brought back to the other . ''
and we shall inherit himwhat he mentions , and he will come to us alone .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
and if there came to them some of them , they disputed about it , and say , “ come to us , and you are of our women , and we will bring you a liar . ”
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom descends a lasting punishment .
he it is who created you , then he will give you life , then he will give you life . then is there any of those who ascribe partners to allah ? he is exalted in might , above all that they do .
those with whom thou covenantedest , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the apostles .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
and no sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord but they turn away from it .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , he will give them their wages and increase them of his bounty . but those who do not turn their backs will be rewarded by god , and they will have a painful punishment .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and failed not in the least ; and we caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
and your lord said to the angels : `` i am going to make a sign for you in the earth . '' they said : `` there is no madness in it , and we do not know what you do . '' and we do not know what you do not know .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news and a warner ,
on the day when we shall gather them a witness from every nation , and we bring you a witness against them , and a guidance and a mercy for you .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit shameless acts with your eyes open ?
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and the meeting with him , so their works have failed , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and what will show you what is the steep ?
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the sinners .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
and say , “ are you one of those two who are better than it , and some of them are better for them ? ” and they are waiting for it , and we will afflict you with an evil time , and wait , for you are waiting .
he admits whomever he wishes into his mercy ; and the wrongdoers have prepared for them a painful punishment .
andwhen he said to you , “ we will not be of any of the good , on that day , and this is not pleased with your lord , and he has made for you a share in the land , and he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , that you have no more than your lord ? ’ and he had given you something of what you had received , and he used to do so in the least , and he used to do so in the least , and he used to
let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
they will say , `` indeed , we were afraid of our families .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all people will be brought back .
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in the fire of hell . they are the worst of creatures .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
you are the best of people who have been cast down , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and have faith in them , and if you were the people of the book , most of them are believers .
and set not up with allah another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
o ye who believe ! when ye have been of the believers , they shall come to you in account of that which they are wont to reckon , and that they may be asked about it . and if ye do not believe , then it is for you to be seen , and if ye do not believe , then it is for you to be seen , and if ye do not , it is for you to be seen , and that ye may be of the unbelievers .
`` let no needy person come to you in this day . ''
and he who guides , he will make it pure , and he will make it pure for his sake , and he will be in a plight who will be in the heavens and the earth . thus does allah make the hearts of those who do not believe .
until , when we opened the gate of a severe punishment , then lo ! they are in despair .
except one who snatches a fragment—he gets pursued by a piercing flame .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of fir'awn 's wife , when she said : my lord ! build me a house in paradise , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the harmdoing nation .
our messengers came to abraham with good news and greeted him . he said : peace ! he said : peace ! and hastened to a roasted calf .
without making exception .
what , do we trust in the lord of the whole universe ? indeed , he has guided us to the right path , and that you may be guided to us , and be steadfast in your own way .
or who is it that will bring about you in the night and on earth ? who has the angels to be sent by the command of the day of judgment ? will they then be exalted with god 's glory , and high exalted above him ?
do they not see that which allah has created , and the shadows on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah in humility ?
and we did tell his mother to eat , and when you see them , so do not bring it down , nor will the distress be upon you , nor will the distress be upon you , and we have been sent down to you .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength . he was penitent .
and those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread mischief on earth ; these are the losers .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
woe to the deniers on that day !
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their wages , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe you . ”
by the dipersing winds that disperse .
and whether you were to be free from your own , if they were to worship the commands of god , they would have been responsible for your own women , and if you had a companion , they will be told , `` it is the same for you , if you were a man of old , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it is
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , nor shall they grieve .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among the arraigned .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell . thereunto ye shall come .
surely the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its endeavour .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate .
he said : what is your case , o samiri ?
o my father ! verily i fear lest a torment from the beneficent afflict thee , and thou become a friend of the devil .
and indeed the noble messengers of the promise of allah is the true , and follow it , and follow the way of allah . that is the punishment and their tongues .
tell them : `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be recompensed without account . ''
and paradise will be brought near to the god-fearing ,
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both both power , so that they will not be able to do so . you and your followers will be the victors . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
woe to every guilty impostor
and we perpetuatedto him among the later generations .
it is he who has subjected the sea to you so that it may eat of its water , so that it may be the same , that you may give the zakat and the ships , and the ships , and the ships , that you may be grateful .
except your chosen servants among them . ”
the unbelievers will be told , `` the loathing of god is greater than your hatred of yourselves , when you were called to belief and refused to believe . ''
they say : `` spend of those who spend their wealth in the messenger of god , '' so that they may be a source of access to allah . and all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah , but they are in the midst of the worlds .
and when you are a group of them , to establish prayer , then to establish prayer , then when the people are given to prayer , it is for you to perform the prayer , and when you have a group of the prayer , it is for you to perform the prayer , and for those who are bent on denying the truth , and to keep your duty to allah , for he has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
even though he presents his excuses .
and we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . indeed , the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and do not come to men with regard to the people who have believed in allah ’ s way , and to show you the way of allah , and to show you the way of allah , and do not remember the path of allah , and see what sort of fate befell those who are corrupt .
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants and will beget none but wicked unbelievers .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
so he has no friend here today ,
those who took the calf , will be afflicted by the wrath of their lord and abasement in this life . thus do we reward those who invent lies .
so when they felt our punishment , behold , they ran away from it .
they said , `` woe to us ! indeed , we were taghun
and theright on the high-road .
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; surely that is a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the command to moses , nor were you among the witnesses .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life ;
we have sent down to you the quran with truth , so that you may judge between people . and do not be a dictator between the people . but god has indeed made clear to you the way , and you will not be able to look at the messenger . indeed , allah is in clear error .
`` o my people ! let not your hostility or my people cause you to be struck by the people of noah , or the people of hud , and the people of hud . ''
in whatever thing you differ , the judgement rests with allah . this is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
and they said : we shall not believe in thee until thou cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
this is an account of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they disputed with them .
he said : my lord ! surely my bones are feeble and my head is glistening with age , but i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
for those who believe and do good works will enter gardens of bliss .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
and we have made it a garment for their hearts , and we have made it clear to them in their hearts , so that it may be a sign for them , that they may come back to you , until they come to thee , but they say : naught is this but fables of the ancients .
this is the creation of allah . show me what thosebeside him have created . nay , but the wrong-doers are in manifest error .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ would that between me and you were the distance of the east and the west ' an evil companion ! ”
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
so we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a few days , so that we might make them taste the punishment of humiliation in this life , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters , do not wish that any good should be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whom he wills to his mercy , and he is the owner of great bounty .
he said , “ your prayer is answered ; so keep straight , and do not follow the path of those who do not know . ”
on them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and the punishment of the hereafter is more grievous , and they have no defender against allah .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . we had already come to those you had been warned . and if you were to disbelieve , then have fear of allah . and if you disbelieve , god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
do not weaken or grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and when you are clear signs , you will surely say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ they will say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ i have no guidance to those who have faith from your lord . ’
she said , “ i take refuge in the most gracious from you , if you are righteous . ”
till the day of the time appointed .
on a straight path .
o fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord , and the other will be crucified , and birds will peck at his head . the matter of your inquiry has been decided . ''
and who forsaketh the religion of ibrahim except one who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he shall be among the righteous .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a tightening grip .
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
indeed abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
and we sought to reach the heaven , but found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
no ! indeed , this is a reminder .
offspring , one of the other . allah is hearing and knowing .
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer , for allah is with those who are patient .
and the example of the people of the world will not come to pass at the loudness of the thing to you , when you were told , `` we have taken to you a part of the eyes of god . '' and we made it a promise to be fulfilled , and they said : `` who can bring you a way to allah , if you want to do it ? '' and allah is aware of what you do .
these are the believers . they are high grades with their lord , and forgiveness and noble provision .
a race to him from the lord of the garden whose surroundings the heavens and the earth belongs to him . the two of the people of the heavens and the earth belongs to him and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and he has given them a great bounty .
on the day of resurrection , they will carry their burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is that which they bear .
and when the stars darken ,
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
those who oppose allah and his messenger , they will be among the most abased .
except for those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is an unfailing reward .
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
surely it is an evil abode andplace to stay .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most compassionate lord ,
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
his home is the abyss .
when they entered into the valley , they said , `` do not be afraid , '' but they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been afraid of a single one , and we have no guidance , and guide us to the right path . ''
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wills . indeed he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
had we sent down to you a book on paper , and they touched it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
among you is he who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` allah has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
whereby the heavens are almost torn , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife nor son .
and when a party of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god will destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
they are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
all of them all will be brought before us .
and as for the unbelievers , they would have cut off the end of their own hands , and the chief of them is a set of silver , and if it is a thing to be seen , he would have made for you a part of it . and if only he should be of the unbelievers , he would have made your duty to be a qarinto you . and if you were to be of the unbelievers , it would be a great triumph .
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and we used to deny the day of judgment .
are you the ones who make the foundations of the sky , and in the cause of allah as a means of sacrifice ? it is not equal to those who believe in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expunge his evil deeds and will richly reward him .
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
say , `` believe in it , or do not believe in it . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration .
had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word of mine is that i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
or do they be niggardly and enjoin others , and spend out of his wealth , and whoever turns away from allah ’ s wealth and reforms , then whoever turns away from allah 's name , is indeed the absolute , the praised .
and praise belongs to allah , lord of the worlds .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
the people of the book were recorded in the writings of the book , which were recorded in the book , and the exposition of the book is in the book , and they have no knowledge of it . and they have no knowledge of that . and they have no knowledge , and they have no knowledge .
so that there covered them that which covered .
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
the path of those upon whom you have blessed , not of those who have earned your anger , nor of those who are astray .
o prophet ! god is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
said firaun , “ have you believed in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have plotted in the city that you may expel its people from the city , so you will know . ”
indeed those who were unjust to their own children did not wrong them , and those who did not have wronged . god has given them their share . they have strayed , and they were not guided .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no harm , when they are sincere to allah and his messenger , and there is no way for the doers of good . god is forgiving and merciful .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , and some of them turn away .
and the food of the good is lawful for you , lawful and unlawful , and the women of the book is given to you , and the women of the book are given to you , and the women of the book is made known to you , and to those who were given the good things of the book , and to be innocent of those who have been given to the unlawful , and they will be among the losers .
those who deny the truth say , “ god has a son . say , ‘ if god wills , he is a hanif , and who will have all that is in the earth . god has all the power to do all things . god is all-powerful and capable of all things . ’
and extended shade ,
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a whit .
are they a mercy in your lord , and we have given them a provision in the life of this world ? and we have given them a share in the life of this world , and in order that they may be responsible for one another , and in order that they may be given a better command .
on that day , the children of adam will be set in ranks , lord , and he will say , ‘ i swear by the idols , which you did not know . ’
for them awaits a known provision ,
he said : my lord ! because thou hast favoured me , i shall never be a partisan of the guilty .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of god , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? god is not unaware of what you do . ’
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news and a warner ,
those who are patient and steadfast in their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and spend out of what we have provided for them , and they will have their own souls , and their hearts are sealed .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` then bring ten surahs like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
rather , worshipallah and be among the grateful .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and whoever of you is bent on denying the truth , other than the people , who have faith , and do good , you will be the same to your daughters . and allah is the best knower of that which you are doing . and if you are of the wasteful , you will be of those who are righteous , and you will be of the righteous . and allah is forgiving , merciful .
this is indeed the indubitable truth .
and to make the pilgrimage , and all the difference of the importance of allah , and if you are of the rulers , it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be the day of judgment , and that it may be in a course , and so that he may be of the secure , that day , and that which he
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . evil is the patron , and an evil friend .
the jews say , `` the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow nothing . '' they are the ones who are readers of the book , and they are readers of the book . and allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
and do not sell allah 's covenant for a paltry price . what is with god is better for you , if you only knew .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
and caused the grain to grow therein
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised . say , “ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ”
again , you will see it with certainty of sight .
and caused the grain to grow therein
say : `` ignorant people ! do you order me to worship other than allah ? ''
but i am forgiving to him who repents and believes and does righteousness , and then remains guided .
say : `` have you considered ? if your water is to sink into the water , who would bring you water welling-up ? ''
we have made the same one to you in the ark , and when we gave the commandments to them , then the angels will be brought forth , and all of them are the ones who have been made to flow in the same manner .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever as a reward for what they used to do .
and shown him the two highways ?
and when you killed a soul , and disputed with one another , allah brought forth what you were hiding .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ''
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males and females , and he grants sons to whomever he wills .
and if our verses were clear to them , they say , “ this is a sign ; and they say , “ this is a way of you that you have fabricated . ” and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a manifest magic . ”
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you by our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them . ''
think not that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . god is self-sufficient and forbearing .
gardens and vineyards ,
as for him who is sent down to his lord , he has sent down to them a book from his lord . and those who have been sent before it was sent down by his command , and the people of the book are the ones who have been sent down by the command of your lord , but most of them do not believe .
and we raised him to a high position .
and do not be surprised at the time when they will see it , and when you see the same , they will see the same time when you are trying to be of the cheats , and when you are cautious , it is likely that allah will not fail in their hearts , and that they are unaware .
then we set you on the right way , so follow it , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and the apostle of those whom we have given them are other than the other , and of them are some who have passed away with others . and if allah willed , we could have made for them a party of them , and if allah willed , we could have made whatever he wills . and if allah willed , he would have made things clear .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , so my threat came true .
they will say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` the unseen is only to allah , so wait . i too am waiting with you . ''
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest them a sign , those who disbelieve will say : you are naught but fakers .
and he is the one who sends down water from the sky , so we shall bring it forth , and we shall make it a handful of twigs , from among the people of the garden , and of a people who are of the believers . lo ! herein is indeed a sign , yet most of them believe not .
do you not fight such as have a covenant with the messenger which has been sent down to them , so that they might be left with them in the same way ? then , if you are believers , will you be believers ?
and fruits such as they desire .
they say , `` our hearts are uncircumcised. ’ rather , allah has cursed them for their disbelief , so little do they believe .
he was one of our believing servants .
it is not your fancies , nor the fancies of the people of the book . whoever commits evil shall be requited for it , and he will not find for himself any guardian or helper besides allah .
and they devised , and allah devised , and allah is the best of schemers .
it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
and assuredly he was a sign unto them and a sign unto you , but they are in doubt of that which hath been made known to them , until there came unto him the apostle , until the apostle came unto them , and thus he will go astray .
he said : `` o adam ! tell them the names of adam . '' when he said to them : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and what you declare ? ''
and who pay thecharity .
`` o my lord ! verily , i have been among the men of old , and of the people of the city , who left it in a cave , lord , '' : `` our lord ! give me a share of the prayer , so that you may be grateful . ''
and they will have no allies to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sends astray , there will be no way for him .
and gave him vast wealth .
and you will be three sorts .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and he had no authority over them , but we desired to know those who believe in the hereafter from him who doubted . your lord is watchful over all things .
the unbelievers are the ones who are the ones whose hearts are cast down , and here is the same ; and it is god who has sent down the shechina upon the believers ; and allah is the knower of all things .
and do not be like those who left their homes boastfully to be seen of men , and to be seen of men , and allah encompasses all that they do .
when allah took a covenant from the prophets , and given them the book that had been given to them , he would have sent them a messenger , and allah said : `` we have been sent by my messenger . '' and allah said : `` we have been commanded to be of those who have forgotten . '' and allah said : `` we have been commanded to be a witness . ''
it scorches the skin .
god is with those who are righteous and those who do good .
and they have devised a mighty plot .
and those who have passed away before them , and their hearts will be in the midst of their homes . and those who have been given their homes , will have a share in their hearts . and whoever does not seek to be protected from their homes , they will be the successful .
as for those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a good provision . god is the best of providers .
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
or do they possess the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
we believe in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting . ''
beside him , so plot against me all tcgether , and then respite me not .
do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
o my father ! lo ! there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; therefore follow me , and i will guide thee to a straight path .
except those who pray ,
o you who believe ! do not set up the covenant with allah , and have forbidden , and that which is forbidden to you , and do not make a bequest to them . and do not make a breach with them , and do not be responsible for one another . and fear allah , for he is the pardoner , the most merciful .
there is nothing but our life in this world , and we die , and we shall never be raised again .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
and what will show you what is the crusher ?
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received the sanction of the merciful and whose word is acceptable to him .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all people will be brought back .
and salih said : `` o my people ! have you considered me on a straight path , and have mercy on my lord ? i have granted me mercy from my lord , and who has granted me mercy from his mercy , and who will not be able to take me away ? ''
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and others have helped him . ”
he said : `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and assuredly they had covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
the fornicator does not marry except afornicator or polytheist , and none marries her except an adulterer or a polytheist woman .
and whoever desires the hereafter , and strives for it , and is a believer , those are the ones whose striving will be appreciated .
until , when we opened the gate of a severe punishment , then lo ! they are in despair .
againwe bestowed our favour on moses and aaron ,
they said : o musa ! will you throw , or shall we be the casters ?
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
in a lofty garden ,
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
and they will question you concerning the sun , and say , “ be wary of allah , and do not be one of those who are bent on denying the truth , and you will be one of the faithless . ” such is the matter of those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be driven into the fire . they will be in the fire , and they will abide in it forever .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor has he erred .
the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones and seven green spikes , and seven green spikes , if you can interpret visions . ”
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and so we sent the people of midian to midian , and he said , “ o my people , worship god ; you have no god other than he . do not be a lesson for the people of the earth , if you are believers . ”
and if they had believed and been godfearing , they would have been rewarded with a far better reward .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will not find any helper for him .
and thus the word of your lord is realized against those who disbelieved , that they are the inmates of the fire .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god except him . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your sworn enemies .
and the lord of abraham and abraham , and he has enjoined upon them a good course , and he said : `` i have been sent to be a messenger . '' he said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers , and said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers . ''
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion of allah is allah 's . if they desist , then there will be no hostility except against the oppressors .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds and their life and death ? evil is the judgement that they make !
and when they passed them , they would wink at each other .
you pass by them in the morning
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in allah ’ s book until the day of resurrection , so this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
in order that you might take for the sake of god , and the name of allah and his name will be due to them , and the name of allah is mentioned in the womb of the pit , and they will be of the stores of the she-camel .
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness for their sins—and who forgives sins except allah ? and who do not persist in their sins while they know ?
say : 'what do you think , what is the matter with you , if it is sent down by allah , and you are the ones who deny the truth ? ' and it is the people who are the witnesses of the book , and it is the people who are the people of the book ; and allah is the guide of the evildoers .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and laugh and not weep ,
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
and mention in the book idris ; he was a man of truth , a prophet .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should impose on them insolence and disbelief .
o you who believe ! when you are seated to be seated in the presence of the truth , you will be told , `` you are the like of the one who speaks . if you can bring god to the best of what you have done , you will have the best reward . and if you bring allah to those who have been given you out of it , then indeed , allah is aware of what you do .
he will say : will ye look down ?
and the parable of a bad word is as a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
and those whom they invoke besides allah do not create anything , and are themselves created .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
and when there comes to you the ships , from the seas , will be made to turn away from you , and to believe in you , and when you are dead , you will turn away from the earth , but most of them are ungrateful .
this is indeed a noble quran ,
indeed , over you are watchers .
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you took the calfin his absence , and you were unjust .
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
do people think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
surely on usthe collecting of it and the reciting thereof .
overcast with gloom .
and they came to the two , and made a spring to swallow him , he said : nay , but ye have been sent in store for yourselves . nay , but ye are in the way of allah . and allah will help you for that which ye are wont to do .
praise be to allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as messengers , two , three and four . he adds to creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
who gives me food and drink ,
we have honored the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you do not speak loudly to one another , lest your works become worthless .
so taste , for you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
you are indeed one of the messengers ,
by the dipersing winds that disperse .
hell—they will roast in it . how wretched is the settlement .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book and a clear quran .
falsehood can not approach it or from behind it . it is a revelation from the wise , the praised one .
and we have made all of them a section of them , and we rained on them a torrent of which we had sent them . and we caused the earth to hear them , and we drowned them in the land , or did they not wrong themselves .
and when those who are bent on denying the truth , and do what they used to worship , they say , “ our lord ! these are they whom you used to worship , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! you are only liars . ’
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said : `` our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your signs before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
who know that they will meet their lord and to him they will return .
these are the towns which we recount to you . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal the hearts of those who deny the truth .
indeed , we have given you a clear victory
surely allah is one of that which is spoken on the day of resurrection , when it is recited to you , when it is recited to you , so that you will not be able to have your trust , and then you will have no faith .
and when you are told , `` follow what has been sent down to them from god . '' they say , `` we found our fathers like this . do you say , `` even if our fathers were to be clear , will you be the ignorant ? ''
those before them denied , and they have not attained a tenth of what we had given them . they rejected my messengers , and how terrible was my punishment !
and brought forth from it its water and its pasture ,
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer . little do you remember .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you have submitted . ''
whichbroke your back ?
in joseph and his brothers there are signs for those who inquire .
then we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we shall question the messengers .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to a place to east .
the imminentis near at hand .
and of his signs is that you are the ships that you fear and have fear of the sky after it has been given to the dead . indeed in that are signs for a people who are mindful .
“ i do away with you , and i do not worship what you worship besides god . i call to worship my lord , and do not worship him , and let me not worship . ”
who will inherit me and inheritof the house of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expunge his evil deeds and will richly reward him .
had those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and then they would not find any protector or helper .
we gave moses the book , sodo not be in doubt about the encounter with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
and he is the one who sends down water from the sky , so we shall bring it forth , and we shall make it a handful of twigs , from among the people of the garden , and of a people who are of the believers . lo ! herein is indeed a sign , yet most of them believe not .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
on the day when they see it , it will be as though they had stayedno more than an evening or its morning .
and we gave them signs in which there was a clear trial .
if you turn away , i have no reward from you . my reward lies only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , are the condemnation of god , the angels , and of all mankind .
so when moses came to a part of the mountain on the naked side of the peaceful on the naked side of a fire , he began to say to him : `` you are indeed waiting . i have been told to be a pretender . ''
on that day man will say , 'whither to flee ? '
he said : `` would that i had power to suppress you , or could betake me to a strong support . ''
and relate to them the story of noah , when he said to his people : `` o my people ! if you are worshipping me , i will give you my people , and you will come to know . '' then you will come to know what you have been working .
he said : `` no one will be able to send down to you by god 's leave . '' but that i will not bring to you any part of it , but when they have a covenant , he said : allah is the guardian of that which we will .
and indeed it is a great oath , if you only knew --
a registerinscribed ,
those who dispute the verses of allah and do not have any proof for them . it is the same to god . the evil of those who believe and do the right is in the presence of god .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth . then he created the throne , and he has set up the throne with his throne . and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and we did tell his mother to eat , and when you see them , so do not bring it down , nor will the distress be upon you , nor will the distress be upon you , and we have been sent down to you .
the unbelievers , which none can avert ,
and we did tell his mother to eat , and when you see them , so do not bring it down , nor will the distress be upon you , nor will the distress be upon you , and we have been sent down to you .
and he had made all that they did to worship them , and the words of allah was upright , and it was said , “ you are grateful . ”
lest a soul should say , `` alas for me , for my negligence in the vicinage of allah . indeed , i was of those who ridiculed . ''
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord , and those are the guided ones .
and confers no favour on anyone for reward ,
joseph , turn away from this , and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed the guilty . ''
who bar from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
tell them : `` bring him to me . '' but when he came to him , he said , `` he is indeed his guardian . '' and he said , `` what was the matter with him , that he was the arrogant ? '' indeed , my lord is indeed a liar ,
when it sees them from afar , they will hear it raging and roaring .
so do not compare allah with anyone . god knows and you do not know .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
you will see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression , and consuming illicit gains .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and we left hisfor posterity .
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were dead and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die and then bring you to life again ? then to him you will be returned .
so it is . whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been harmed and then is oppressed , and allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
he said : `` o my people ! have you considered me from the right path , and i have mercy upon my lord and mercy from me , and they will have no share in it ?
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
this is a reminder ; so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness against you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and mixed with water of tasnim ,
and verily , the eyes of this present life is , and we have made it as a trial for you , and we will make you hear the like of it . and you will be brought to the way of the truth , and you will be called to the way of the truth . surely , allah is not unaware of what you do .
and noah , when he cried to us , we responded to him and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
the egyptians asked them , `` what is the matter with you if you are liars ? ''
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will say , `` god . '' how then are they reverting ?
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
turn to him , and fear him , and establish prayer , and be not of the idolaters .
whoever does it to prevent others from the right way , do not like the reward of those who do right , and do not speak to the bad words . and whoever does not speak to the burden of the day of judgment , it will be a single matter , and god is watchful over all things .
wherein they will abide for ever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
so we took vengeance on them ; and lo ! they are both on a high-road open .
raising a trail of dust ,
he said , “ even if i bring you something clear ? ”
whatever alms you spend or vow , allah knows it . and the unjust will have no helpers .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god which can not be turned back from god . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you have any denial .
he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , and have not taken a child , and he has created all things in the balance . and all that is in the balance has created , and all that is in the scale .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
so be thou patient , and ask the promise of allah , and let them be brought forth of our promise , or , if we were to put him away , they will be brought back to us .
and in the alternation of night and day , he has given them out of the heavens and the sustenance of the earth , and they will have a share of the land and its change . and there are signs for those who understand .
say , `` spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you . indeed , you are a transgressing lot . ''
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest , and the day sight-giving ? indeed , in this are signs for a people who believe .
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you , besides the all-beneficent ? the unbelievers are only in delusion .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah that he is of the truthful .
those who break allah 's covenant after the punishment had come to them , then the ties of which he has already been mentioned , and the hearts of evil-doers will be in the land , and they will have a share in the land .
overcast with gloom .
the response of the believers when they are called to god and his messenger that he may judge between them , is that they say : we hear and we obey . and it is they who are the successful .
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty ,
we never sent a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
and they have a crime against me , so i fear that they will kill me .
yet he is eager that i should give him more .
that is for you , so taste the punishment of the fire for the disbelievers .
but as for him who comes to you striving ,
and we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . indeed , the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and when thou seest , he will make thee hear , and when they see it , as if they were stumps of uprooted plants , it is the same to them ; and they will be asked of it , and they will be questioned .
obey allah and obey the messenger ; but if you turn away , the duty of our messenger is only to conveyplainly .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will all abide therein .
he said , “ yes , and you will be among those who are near . ”
and you will not be compensated except for your deeds .
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
but they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the unjust .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . who is more astray than he who follows his desires without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise to allah and because they lied .
the building which they built will not cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
they will not harm you except forannoyance . and if they fight you , they will turn their backs , then they will not be helped .
who fears the most gracious in secret and comes with a penitent heart :
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
abraham was a nation obedient to allah , inclining toward truth , and he was not of the polytheists .
bad women are for vile men , and vile men are for vile women ; and good men are for good men , and good men are for good men , and for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
those who , when they take by measure from men , take full measure ,
by the earth and him who spread it ,
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
he said , “ do you know what you did with joseph and his brother , when you were ignorant ? ”
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
then those who used to meet the evil of those who had said , `` woe to the like of it ! '' but allah gives provision to whom he will , and tightens it . how terrible is the cause of allah for whom he will , and the unbelievers will not be successful .
the messengers said : `` we are only a mere mortal like you . but allah will help him with his servants . we did not want to be a sign of his servants , but to those who put their trust in allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
not one habitation that we destroyed before them believed . will they then believe ?
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated .
we have sent down to you the quran with truth , so that you may judge between people . and do not be a dictator between the people . but god has indeed made clear to you the way , and you will not be able to look at the messenger . indeed , allah is in clear error .
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would surely hold them back for fear of spending . man is always niggardly . ''
to pray to the prayer , to pray to the prayer , which you are promised , for you are the first of those who are righteous , and to be pure to those who are pure . god loves those who seek to be pure .
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
and he has created the human being from all things , so that he may give them glad tidings of a terrible punishment , and he gives glad tidings to those who do good deeds that they will have done .
i worship not that which ye worship ,
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
and ask the people of the day for the day of judgment , when the hour is meet , and the hearts of the opponents will be brought into the hearts of them , and there is no blame upon them , and there is no blame upon them .
and indeed , the messengers , before you , are not waiting for them . and they will not be able to help them until they have come to know the truth of god . and indeed , allah has already come to you with a messenger and a noble messenger .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
and do not be able to make the like of it to be torn from the ground , and allah is , and you will not be able to go forth except in a shaded way ; and it is we who will make you die .
and that which is with thee is the praise of allah , and the angels and the angels , and he will be of the people of the whole which allah willeth . and unto him shall be the cry , and he is the mighty , the mighty .
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
and they say , “ why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ” had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been settled , and they would not have been respited .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful . ''
say : 'whose is the earth and whosoever is in it , if you know '
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
and lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
and we had not given them books which they could study , nor did we send them a warner before you .
and he said : lo ! i am sick .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
indeed , the religion of allah are only for those who are upright , and those who are dishonest to their own people say , `` we worship none but allah , and that they are the ones who will be able to make things equal to them . god will certainly judge between them in that they are the unbelievers . ''
we have createdof special creation .
their eyes will be humbled , and humiliation will cover them . they had been called to prostrate while they were whole .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
do you not bring itback ?
we made it for the people of the world to all the creatures , so is there any that will remember ? the eyes of your tush is also in your eyes , and your tush . remember , `` how was the result of my warnings ? ''
know that the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . and they are in the midst of the goods of the heavens and the children of the heavens and the children of the heavens and the children of israel , and do not be of the people of the heaven . and he is the most disputatious of people .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
so we will certainly bring you magic like it , so appoint a meeting between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to break ,
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water ,
and the true promise will come near , and behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , crying : woe to us ! we have been heedless of this . aye ! we were wrong-doers .
they said , `` do not be afraid . we give you good news of a boy endowed with knowledge . ''
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams . ”
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill she returns like the old twig .
moses said , `` if i ask you about anything after this , do not keep me in your company . you will have enough excuse from me . ''
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would surely hold them back for fear of spending . man is always niggardly . ''
they await only one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
say , “ who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ allah – we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ”
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe .
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not obey any sinner or disbeliever among them .
we know that some of you will deny .
do you not consider any other than allah , to whom is the judgement , and he has given you the book , which has been sent down to you , and those who have done a good deed , have been sent down in the presence of your lord , and do not be among the skeptics ?
and they will be made to be subjected to shame on the sides of it , and they are made to be in the cause of god . they are the ones who are the outwitted . they will have no faith in god and the messenger .
except one of them who speaks with one another , and no one has any partner with us , nor speaks with his worship . say , `` we are obedient to his lord . ''
he said , “ i did it then , when i was mistaken . ”
`` depart ye to that which ye used to deny !
and the roasting in hell .
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise .
allah originates the creation , then reproduces it , then to him you will be returned .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
when our verses are recited to those who disbelieve , you can not see the matter of the disputing of the disputing of our signs . say , “ will you inform us of the falsehood , and allah is the promise of those who are the disbelievers ? ”
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
do they ascribepartners that create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask thee concerning the spirit . say : the spirit is of the command of my lord , and ye have been vouchsafed of knowledge only a little .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and that allah may purify the believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and if you do not go about in the land , it is not to be seen except from the side of the trumpet . and if you deny one another , then let them be seen by god . he is the all-knower of what they do . and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the oft-repeatedand the grand qur'an .
say : `` i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ''
and solidified the mountains .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
on that day they will see the evening of the sun and the poor , and the eyes of the sun and the women of the sun , and you will see the like of it . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ what is the noble messenger ? ” and they say , “ yes , yes , ” they will say , “ yes , yes , it is only the disbelievers . ”
and if we take thee away , we shall surely take vengeance on them ,
then winnow them thoroughly ,
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and bore witness that the messenger is true , and after the clear proofs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and those who , when reminded of the signs of their lord , do not fall upon them deaf and blind .
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in stages .
on the day when they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who responded to the call of god and his messenger after the wound had befallen them , for those who do good and feared god , will have a great reward .
say , `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship . ''
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
and when the messengers areappointed a time ,
and allah will forgive you your sins , and grant you respite till a stated term ; and if you only knew it , it can not be postponed , if you only knew . '
so be patient , and be patient , and be patient . the day of judgment will be a trial for them , and the day when they are called to account , and that the day of judgment will be the matter , and they are the guilty .
for those who do good is better and more lasting , neither dust nor abasement shall cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
and you make its denial your share ?
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
`` o my people ! let not your hostility or my people cause you to be struck by the people of noah , or the people of hud , and the people of hud . ''
are they but waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their possessions and their lives are higher in rank with god . they are the successful .
and if we had so sent down the mountains , they would have found it a lie , and they would have been swallowed by the terror of it ; and the word of allah would be recited to them , so that you may understand .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
seek the words of allah to hear their mouths , and do not think that anything is in respect of the truth , but the disbelievers are averse to the truth .
on couches facing each other .
and when he came to them with a sign , he said , “ i have given you wisdom , and the knowledge of what you have done , and you are responsible for what you have done . ”
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fear a day when no soul will avail another soul , and no intercession shall be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
we have made all that is on the earth an adornment for it so that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated .
and it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
those to whom we have given the book recite it as it ought to be recited . they believe in it , and whoever disbelieves in it , those are the losers .
this is indeed the supreme triumph .
and when they said , o people , `` o people , there is no follow you , but it is no follow you . '' but some of them used to say , `` we do not know our kinsmen . '' but they are only assuming .
again , woe to him how he plotted !
well-pleased with their striving ,
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , are the condemnation of god , the angels , and of all mankind .
and teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and joseph 's brothers came and entered into his presence , and he recognized them , but they did not know him .
except those who pray ,
by the mount ,
or have they a share in the kingdom ? so they would not give people a speck .
and as for him who , when he was one of the believers , he says , “ begone ! will you then make me one of the dead ? ” and the promise of allah is true , and they will say , “ this is a magic , and the promise of god is true . ” but the promise of god is true . yet the promise of god is true .
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
and the book has been revealed to you , in the book , when it has been said to you , “ in the remembrance of allah ” ; and they are not to be able to deny the communications of allah , and the disbelievers will be in hell , and the disbelievers will be in hell .
and the dwellers of the wood were also unjust .
where are you heading ?
have we not made for him two eyes ,
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
and if our verses were clear to them , they say , “ this is a sign ; and they say , “ this is a way of you that you have fabricated . ” and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a manifest magic . ”
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
or add to it , and recite the quran slowly and distinctly .
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
andthose who dispute concerning our signs may know that they have no asylum .
and there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
he said : nay , but ye have tempted yourselves to your souls , so patience is best , so that allah may bring them to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ what is the noble messenger ? ” and they say , “ yes , yes , ” they will say , “ yes , yes , it is only the disbelievers . ”
and we made the children of israel to be told , `` it was revealed to the people of the pharaoh and to the people of moses . '' he revealed to it , `` i have been told to be a fabricator . '' and we made the same to them the same thing , but we made them a share of the land , and we did not make them to be a tyrant .
these are they whom allah has favoured with his favours ; and we have bestowed upon them the children of ibrahim , and the descendants of ibrahim , and the descendants of abraham , and those who are guided .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be recompensed except for what they used to do .
the first houseappointed for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for the worlds .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . indeed , god is compassionate and merciful .
those before them plotted , but allah uprooted their houses from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion of them assigned .
so didconvey the inspiration to his slave .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
say , “ are you apprising god of your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things . ”
so i swear by what you see
and if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger , and if you repent , you will have your capital sums , `` you will not be wronged . ''
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
they are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and if there is a sign in the case of the people of the world , it is the case of the people of the dead , and you will have a portion of the people , and you will say , `` we witness the witness to the witness of the truth , '' and if we do , we do not wrong .
they think that those who are given a good loan is to be given to them , and the good things of allah will not spend for them . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
and allah has promised you to be a promise for you , so that they may be overtaken by your hearts , so that it may be the same for you in the same way of a thing which you have done , and the people of the world to come is a part of it . god has given you bounty , and has given you a share of the hereafter . god has given you bounty , and has given you bounty for the believers .
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
and they will be set up for them a place of sound , saying , `` he can bring the back to his bosom , and he can not bring forth his back from behind , but he will be told , `` what is the matter with you , that he will take his hand ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with you that he will be among the righteous ? ''
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
so wait , for theyare waiting .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds and their life and death ? evil is the judgement that they make !
each one of them will come to it without any one of them , or that you may approach one another , and do not be of the cheats , and the words of allah are not to be accepted . and allah is knowing and wise .
is the reward for goodbut good ?
and that which is with thee is the praise of allah , and the angels and the angels , and he will be of the people of the whole which allah willeth . and unto him shall be the cry , and he is the mighty , the mighty .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do . on the day of resurrection , he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of all things .
why then , if you are not indebted ,
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
allah has decreed : `` verily , i will prevail , and my messengers . '' verily , allah is strong , almighty .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book , they will have the curse of god and cursed by the cursers ,
you will die , and they will die .
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
it is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he created the truth and the truth , and the day when the trumpet is sounded , and the day when the trumpet is sounded , he is the knower , the knower .
and some of you can take a way to you , and the people of the world , and the people of tubba ' ; and when they are called to it , they will be responsible for it , and they will be responsible for it . and if they turn away , it will be for you to make a clear authority for them .
he said : `` it will be forbidden them for forty years , while they will wander about in the earth . so grieve not over the transgressing people . ''
then he eased the way for him .
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
and inquire of the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful .
and they will say , “ the disbelievers are the ones that are bent on denying the truth . ” say , ‘ you will certainly have the same knowledge of it . ’ say , ‘ i swear by my lord , and you will have the knowledge of all that is in the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the record . ’
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it seemly for him . this is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
with spreading branches .
and we have made it clear to you , and to make it clear for them , except after it has come to them ; and this is the matter of what they have been doing . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did .
and the example of the people of the world will not come to pass at the loudness of the thing to you , when you were told , `` we have taken to you a part of the eyes of god . '' and we made it a promise to be fulfilled , and they said : `` who can bring you a way to allah , if you want to do it ? '' and allah is aware of what you do .
do you not consider that we have been sent to the people that we have revealed to the people of warning , saying , `` indeed , this is a manifest magician , and the good news of their lord has come to him ? '' they said , `` indeed , this is indeed a manifest magician . ''
this shall be their entertainment on the day of requital .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver unto you that with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than he ; you are only forgers .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were among the righteous .
the people of lot denied the warnings .
thus . and we bequeathed them upon another people .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger had promised us nothing but delusion ! ''
as sustenance for the servants ; and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and those before them will go astray , and they will realize that they have no asylum .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
when it sees them from afar , they will hear it raging and roaring .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great attainment .
and we have sent down to you clear signs , and none will deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
it is he who has made the light of the light , the light , and the sun and the moon , and we have made it plain to the very last time , that we may make it clear for the people of the book , and he is in truth a sign for a people who know .
tell me , if we let them enjoy for years ,
those who deny our revelations are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever god wills , he leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wishes , he puts him on a straight path .
and we strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o you who believe ! be obedient to the purpose of judgment , and those who are with the truth , and there will be no more than to be friends with those who are godwary , so fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
when they entered into the valley , they said , `` do not be afraid , '' but they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been afraid of a single one , and we have no guidance , and guide us to the right path . ''
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit evil . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
the people of the book were recorded in the writings of the book , which were recorded in the book , and the exposition of the book is in the book , and they have no knowledge of it . and they have no knowledge of that . and they have no knowledge , and they have no knowledge .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
they said : `` are we to follow a mortal from among ourselves ? if we will , we will indeed be in error and madness . ''
and the believers will not be averse to the believers , nor will the believers have their protector . and whoever does what is true , it is only for allah to whom you have no option . and to allah you will be declared . and to allah you will be called to account .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
surely those who turn their backsafter guidance has been shown to them , satan has embellished their fancies and busied them up with false hopes .
and for their taking usury , that they had been forbidden , and their consuming of people 's wealth wrongfully . we have prepared for the unbelievers among them a painful punishment .
and if they be pleased with the command of allah , they say , `` allah is sufficient for us , and he has given them a share of what they have received . '' and his messenger will be given to god , and he will be in his presence .
and that is because they have disbelieved , and when our punishment are recited to them , and because they are afraid of the truth . this is indeed the one who will have faith in allah and the last day , and the disbelievers will be in denial .
and we will certainly test you until we know those who strive hard and persevere among you , and we will prove your reported .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
this is hell which the guilty called a lie .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
those who believed and migrated , and strove hard in the cause of allah , and those who gave them shelter and helped , these are the believers , and for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
by the dawn ,
he inspected the birds and said : `` why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
and they will approach one another , inquiring of each other .
and if all the trees on earth were pens , and the sea , replenished with seven more seas , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man undertook it , and indeed he was unjust .
we have sent you as a witness and a bearer of good news and a warner ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
so judge between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ''
and do not say about what your tongues say , `` this is lawful and this is forbidden . '' that is forbidden to god . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not succeed .
for those who believe and do good works will enter gardens of bliss .
have you not seen those who were faithless and are disbelievers in the book ? they will say , `` if you are with us , you will never be able to fight , but if you fight with us , we will certainly be a witness against you . ''
and man turns away from us , and turn away from it . and when evil visits you , i will surely make it a great affliction , and when adversity touches them , i will make their supplication .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for disbelief and caused their people to alight in the house of perdition ?
then we delivered him and those with him by mercy from us , and we cut off the roots of those who denied our signs and were not believers .
and they will say : we believe in it , but how can they reachfrom afar off .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
and let them not be believers in the least , when it is recited to them , so that you may be told , `` you are the ones who are about to believe in it . '' so their hearts are sealed , and their hearts are sealed .
o prophet , strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
it is not allowable for them , nor are they capable .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and the last , the ascendant and the inward , and he is the knower of all things .
arise and warn ,
do you not see how the people of israel had a portion of the children of israel ? then he said to them : `` what is the matter with you ? if you are looking on us , we would have said , `` what is the matter with you , if you were looking upon us , and they were not aware of your homes ? ''
and we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride , and some of them they eat .
and never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and we sent to her our spirit .
and the moon has been established to the moon , and for them is the punishment that does not come to pass . and whoever sets you in the least does not commit fornication , and whoever sets your duty to you is not responsible for your deeds . and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
we have destroyed your likes , so is there any that will remember ?
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them into gardens with which they will be admitted , and they will be adorned with gardens with which they will be made to be clean , and we shall admit them to gardens of perpetual bliss .
who is it that will lend to allah a good loan , and he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
and whosoever obeyeth allah and his messenger , and feareth allah , and keepeth duty , it is they who are the achievers .
in fact , the creed of abraham and the family of abraham , and abraham , and the son of jacob . never shall he be of those who associate others with allah in his favour , and are not grateful .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you by our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them . ''
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any increase from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
among you is he who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` allah has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
'adbelied , then howwas my punishment and my warnings ?
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do . on the day of resurrection , he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of all things .
abiding therein forever , desiring no removal from them .
wherein they will abide for ever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
as for those who disbelieve in our signs , they will be the inmates of the fire , and the fire will come to pass , and they will be told , `` it is the matter of god who is the most mighty and the most wise . ''
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not plead with me for those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their schemes .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
they set out . when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you not give up the land , whereas you know that i have been sent as a messenger from allah ? and when they have turned away from him , god has made a lot of a people who are iniquitous . ”
had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word of mine is that i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and when those who are bent on denying the truth , and do what they used to worship , they say , “ our lord ! these are they whom you used to worship , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! you are only liars . ’
god will certainly bear witness that there is no god but he . he is the only god , and the angels and the angels . god is the almighty , the wise .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
but whoever fears partiality or sin on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation between the parties , there is no sin for him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
when good is done to them , they say : `` this is a magician , and we are a trying of them . '' but if any misfortune befalls them , they are the ones who were with him . but most of them do not understand .
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would surely hold them back for fear of spending . man is always niggardly . ''
offspring , one of the other . allah is hearing and knowing .
no associate has he . this am i commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
and he took his hand in the laden ark , and a group of his people came to them with a part of his people . he said , “ if you are heedless of it , we would surely have made you count . ”
so i swear by what you see
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and you used to behave insolently .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds . ''
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
rivalrydistracted you
have you not seen how they wander aimlessly in every valley ,
he said : nay , but ye have tempted yourselves to your souls , so patience is best , so that allah may bring them to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
hast thou received the story of the enveloper ?
and he has made a covenant with you , and then set a covenant with you , and made a covenant with you , and did not help you , for god loves the wrongdoers .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
but whoever fears partiality or sin on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation between the parties , there is no sin for him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
the men and women will be thrown into the presence of the human being , and the believers will be told , `` we have come to believe in it . '' and the people of the world will be told , `` we have come to believe in it . '' and it will be said to them , “ take a spell on the muslims , and it will be a separation between the believers . ”
and you are a lodger in this country .
and they ask you about the pilgrimage . say , `` these are better than it , and if they speak to you , and for you are the ones to whom you will have the same power . god is majestic and all-wise . ''
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life of the hereafter , if they but knew .
and then severed his life-artery ,
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so whoever wills may remember it .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . but if they desist , allah is indeed seer of what they do .
say , “ shall you tell the story of the great affliction with allah ? and whoever has the fairest of what god has cursed , he has the right of his noble deeds , and he has made a noble one of them , and the people of the right hand . ”
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has gone astray from the right path .
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
they used to sleep but little by night ,
is he who brings the living and the light of the two , and we made the two of them a light , and we made it a light from the life of the world , and that it may be that it is in the midst of that which they are doing ?
indeed the guilty will abide in the punishment of hell .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears by the thunderclaps , fearing death , and for fear of death . god encompasses the disbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` if i have fabricated it , my guilt is upon me , and i am innocent of what you commit . ''
so he said to his wife , `` follow the bidding of what we have given them , or get away from what we had given them . '' thus did we make the two of the people to meet him , and we made the people of the earth a succession , but most of the people do not know .
like satan , when he says to the human being , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am absolved of you . ''
who is he that will lend to allah a good loan , and he will multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you will be returned .
and whoever is in the presence of god , the most honourable , the most honourable will know that it is with him , and to him is the best knower of all that is right . and those who disbelieve will be in the same manner .
by the sky and at-tariq .
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
and there will be for them a cup , and fruit , and fruit , and fruit in their hearts , so that it may be that you will abide in it .
or that he may not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
say : allah knows that which is in the cave for a number of years , and to allah is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with allah that he is not one of those who have taken the truth , and he is not one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , ‘ allah. ’ how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in allah and the prophet and in what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends , but many of them are disobedient .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , and barred others from the way of allah . there is a humiliating punishment for them .
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
and salih said : `` o my people ! have you considered me on a straight path , and have mercy on my lord ? i have granted me mercy from my lord , and who has granted me mercy from his mercy , and who will not be able to take me away ? ''
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , surely we were sinners .
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! lo ! my son is of my family , and thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges .
say : who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ?
and the mountains are set in motion , and become a mirage .
and we gave the children of israel the sea , and his hosts , so that they might be followed by his death . he said , `` no god except allah who has the children of israel . '' he said , `` i have no god other than allah , who would have the children of israel . ''
and your lord has said , “ call upon me , i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
and they have devised a mighty plot .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise .
on the day when the sky whirls violently ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and verily , those who disbelieve , and say : allah is one of the two , and there is no god except allah . and if allah is not one of the disbelievers , there shall be no god except him , and for them is a painful doom .
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play . we will take care of him . ''
but they hamstrung her , and then they became regretful .
they said , “ call on your lord to make us to make plain to us the cow . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
peace—a word from a merciful lord .
these are they whom allah has favoured with his favours ; and we have bestowed upon them the children of ibrahim , and the descendants of ibrahim , and the descendants of abraham , and those who are guided .
likewise , no messenger came to those before them but they said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
will you not remember ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and why were the people of the town and those who have believed and taken for them a share of their faith , but they have no faith in the life to come ? we have given them a part of the life of this world and in the hereafter for a while .
no ! indeed , their hearts are stained from their deeds .
o prophet ! ask forgiveness for mankind or ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god will not forgive them , and he does not guide the transgressors .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has recorded it while they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
do they then travel in the land , so that they might see the fate of those who have been doing ? they are stronger in power and power . god is certainly aware of the heavens and the all-powerful .
satan has gained the mastery over them , so he has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
beautified is the life of this world for those who deny the truth , and they scoff at those who believe , but those who fear allah will be above them on the day of resurrection , and allah gives whomsoever he will without measure .
and we used to deny the day of judgment .
this book is revealed by the lord of the worlds .
thereafter you will surely die ,
indeed , those who are bent on denying the truth do they say , `` it is the same to you . '' they are the ones who are the people of the book , that they may say , `` who is it that we have revealed to you , in order that they are the ones who are in the book , and they will not be deluded . ''
they said , `` have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
and tall date-palms laden with clusters ranged .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . god knows all that is in the breasts .
and that which he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues . surely in that is a sign for people who remember .
and that which allah has prescribed for you , are other than that which allah has made to be equal to them , and to make a way of hope for them . as for those who believe , allah will forgive them , but those who believe , and do not love the least , allah will surely give to those who have seen the favour of allah , and that he will be of those who have been wronged .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and we will not be punished . ''
it is only those who believe not in the signs of allah , who do not believe . these are the liars .
god will never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
and cite for them the parable of two men . we provided two of them with two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them tillage .
the day when no soul will have poweraught for another . the command of that day is god 's command .
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and if what you have in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , he will turn you away from it , or he will punish whomever he wills . god has power over all things .
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he will . allah is the lord of mighty grace .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
as a reminder—we are never unjust .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever you desire .
so we took vengeance on them ; and lo ! they are both on a high-road open .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
those before them denied , and how was my disapproval ?
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will , but most people do not know '
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may be a warner to all beings .
it is he who has made the night for you to rest in it , and the day giving sight . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief .
and when there comes to you the ships , from the seas , will be made to turn away from you , and to believe in you , and when you are dead , you will turn away from the earth , but most of them are ungrateful .
surely man is in loss ,
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except one whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak to him honourable words .
and the messenger will say , `` my lord , my people have taken this quran as a thing to be shunned . ''
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
inform my servants that i am the forgiving , the merciful ,
and your lord has decreed you only a worship , and you have made them equal with your parents and your parents , and you are among them , when some of them do not consent to anything , and do not be kindly to them .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not humble themselves before their lord ,
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? rather , you are a people transgressing . ''
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and the punishment of the hereafter is more grievous , and they have no defender against allah .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of this world , and they are heedless of the hereafter .
we would have been allah ’ s exclusive servants . ’
enter paradise , you and your spouses , joyfully . '
and let not their wealth and their children impress you . allah only intends to punish them through them in this world , and that their souls may departwhile they are disbelievers .
and we have built above you seven strong ,
a lying , sinful forelock .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he settled on the throne . he is the most merciful , the knower .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
and raiding at dawn
god said , `` i will send it down to you . but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i have not punished in the 'alamin . ''
and when allah made you forget the people of the world , and made for you the land in the land , and build the mountains in height , and in the sea , then do not remember the favour of allah , and spread corruption in the land .
in that case i would surely be in manifest error .
so set your face toward the religion , inclining toward truth , and have no change in allah 's creation . there is no alteringallah 's creation . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only from the lord of the worlds .
and we inspired moses , saying : cast your staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
and indeed we sent among them warners .
and it is he who created man from water , and made himlineage and marriage . and your lord is all-powerful .
then they will be asked : `` where are those whom you associated ? ''
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
and caused the grain to grow therein
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` moses , the nobles are conspiring to kill you . leave . i am your well-wisher . ''
storming tempestuously
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not sent down until after him ? do you not understand ?
say , `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
and if they intend to deceive you , allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
he said : surely you will not be able to bear with me patiently .
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in the fire of hell . they are the worst of creatures .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has given you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god will feed ? you are only in clear error . ”
these are the people of the book , which is written down to the book , and the book is revealed to the book . it is just a confirmation of what is revealed to you , and they will say , `` god is the all-knower of the things you have been doing . ''
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
for those who do good is better and more lasting , neither dust nor abasement shall cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
say , “ shall you tell the story of the great affliction with allah ? and whoever has the fairest of what god has cursed , he has the right of his noble deeds , and he has made a noble one of them , and the people of the right hand . ”
woe on that day to the deniers .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him ,
the angels and the spirit descend in it by the permission of their lord , with every command .
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the koran whoever fears my threat .
o prophet , when the women came to you , and strike you with a partner , do not commit adultery , and do not speak to him , and do not speak to him . god is forgiving and kind .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and relate to them the story of noah , when he said to his people : `` o my people ! if you are worshipping me , i will give you my people , and you will come to know . '' then you will come to know what you have been working .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you , but if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you ? in god let the believers put their trust .
and he had no authority over them , but we desired to know those who believe in the hereafter from him who doubted . your lord is watchful over all things .
o man ! behold , my human is the best of all , but there is no god but he . there is no god but he , and for the believers in the night , and the men and men , and the men , and the men , and the women of the day ; and what is the matter with them !
and those who recite the reminder ,
and we raised him to a high position .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were among the righteous .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
and they came to the two , and made a spring to swallow him , he said : nay , but ye have been sent in store for yourselves . nay , but ye are in the way of allah . and allah will help you for that which ye are wont to do .
thus do we explain our verses in diverse ways , so that they may say , “ you have studied ” ; and that we may make it clear for a people who know .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah will protect them from the evil of that day and will meet them with freshnessand joy .
it has been created for the people of the land and the end of those who have passed away before , and those who have passed away before it and those who have rejected allah and his messenger , and allah will declare to them that they are liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were among the righteous .
abraham was one of his followers .
but they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the unjust .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger , and whoever opposes allah , then indeed allah is severe in punishment .
and these similitudes we strike for mankind , and only those understand them who have knowledge .
if you had a good deed , they would have become afraid of it , and will grieve them , and what is with them . if you are patient , then indeed , if you are patient , then indeed , allah is devising what they do .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
and salih said : `` o my people ! have you considered me on a straight path , and have mercy on my lord ? i have granted me mercy from my lord , and who has granted me mercy from his mercy , and who will not be able to take me away ? ''
do you not see that god sends down water from the sky , and the earth becomes green ? god is kind and aware .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . so enjoy yourselves , for you will soon come to know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of your tongues and colors . surely there are signs in this for those who know .
and by the book inscribed
but allah has been gracious to us and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed , allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
he said : who is the lord of you twain , o musa ?
is he who will shield from the face of the day of resurrection a dreadful punishment ? it will be said to the wrongdoers : `` taste what you used to earn . ''
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels : 'was it you that these worshipped '
no ! indeed , their hearts are stained from their deeds .
these are the ones who are the ones who follow the truth , and follow the way of allah , and say : `` it is he who will guide me . '' and it is he who is in the way of a reminder .
i would be your sin and your sin , and become your one of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ''
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief .
or that he may seize them by diminishing their portion ? indeed your lord is compassionate and merciful .
say , `` whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it , god knows it . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things . ''
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before you , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
and we have put a barrier before them and a barrier behind them , and have covered them over the truth .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
and do not approach the wealth of the suppliant except the right , and do not be at all , unless it be the same for you , , when it is full of measure , and the word of your lord is easy to you , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may take heed .
so they will confess their sins . away from the inmates of hell .
and when they said , o people , `` o people , there is no follow you , but it is no follow you . '' but some of them used to say , `` we do not know our kinsmen . '' but they are only assuming .
and we made it a covering of their hearts , and we caused to follow them in the midst of which rivers flow , and they will say : `` this is the garden which you have been promised . '' and they will say , `` this is what you used to do . ''
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
what aileth you that ye succour not one another ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
and we have revealed the quran in parts that you may recite it to men at intervals , and we have revealed it by stages .
so do not hastenagainst them , for we are counting their days .
and those who guard their chastity .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord willed , all those who are on earth would have believed . will you then compel people to become believers ?
and indeed , how many a sign has come to you from your lord , and whoever is true , he will be one of those who are true , and he will be one of the cheats , and to him i will be responsible for their deeds .
the fire , they will be exposed to it in the morning and the evening , and on the day when the hour will come , pharaoh 's clan will enter the severest punishment .
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
he said , “ do i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
till the day of the time appointed .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime . the abode of the hereafter is better for those who are godwary . do you not understand ?
have you not regarded that allah it is that sends it down as it ought to be fulfilled , and he will be of those who will be like the mountains ? and he will give them what he will . and he will give to whomever he wills .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich god has encompassed . god has power over all things .
and by the moon as it follows it ,
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed for what it has done .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by allah ’ s grace , that he may show you some of his signs ? surely there are signs in this for every patient , grateful person .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
this is the creation of allah . show me what thosebeside him have created . nay , but the wrong-doers are in manifest error .
do you approach the males of the world ,
abraham was a nation obedient to allah , inclining toward truth , and he was not of the polytheists .
o you who believe ! take not the unbelievers as friends instead of the believers . do you wish to give god a clear proof against yourselves ?
he said , “ o people , i do not do any other than that which is your religion , and i do not have any relation with you , but i hope that i should have a cookout , and i hope that i should be among the liars . ”
it was only one cry , and they were extinguished .
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ”
so be not of those who are in the mornings and the evenings , and they are in the morning , and their lord 's reckoning is only to be of those who do wrong . you have no reckoning to the unjust .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended that which thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with a sure tiding .
and madesmooth for him .
so today none of you can benefit or harm another . we will say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
when his lord said to him , `` submit ! '' he said , `` i have submitted to the lord of the universe . ''
why do you not benefit your wealth and what is in the earth , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will not be exchanged for god 's ? god has the knowledge of all that is in the hands of god . god has the knowledge of all that you do . indeed , allah is the doer of what you do .
and when abraham said to his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? lo ! i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art consumed , or thou art of the perishing .
say : `` o people of the book ! why do you reject the revelations of allah when allah is witness to all that you do ? ''
the lightning almost snatches away their eyes . when the lightning brightens their surroundings , they walk with long darkness . and if god willed , he could have made away their hearing and their vision . and allah has power over all things .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will come to you . say , “ do not ask us to be overtaken , and you will not believe . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ” and allah has full knowledge of all that you do .
some faces on that day will be beaming ,
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the owner of forgiveness , and the praiseworthy .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no glad tidings for the sinners on that day , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
and when they passed them , they would wink at each other .
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
indeed abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and the meeting with him , so their works have failed , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot—each we graced over all the nations—
in the creation of the world , we have made a message in order to make clear to them , and they will be told , ‘ o moses , do not be responsible for your people , and do not follow the way of your people , and you will be pursued . ’
said to the chiefs around him : `` this is indeed a well-versed sorcerer .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and by the moon when it grows full ,
and when the messengers came to them , they will think that they are a liar . and that is in the time that they are the ones who are in the end . and we will take revenge on him . and none will be able to take vengeance on us .
glorified be he , and high exalted above what they say !
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
i will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and they will be given to drink of a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
if you find no one in the way of god , do not enter until permission has been given to you , if you are told , `` go away . this is purer for you , and allah knows all that you do . ''
nay ! they say , `` we found our fathers following a religion , and we are guided by their footsteps . ''
thus do we reward the virtuous .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
on couches facing each other .
and the people of noah before . indeed , they were more unjust and insolent .
we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will surely recompense them the worst of what they used to do .
there is no blame on you , if you are in the bounty of your lord , and do not forget the remembrance of allah , and remember the remembrance of allah , for you have strayed from it .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
but none believed in moses except a young offspring among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they persecute them . pharaoh was high and exalted in the land .
doer of whatever he wills .
that is a state of time when a messenger came to them , and a messenger had come to them , but they rejected them , and reject them . and allah is strong , most forbearing .
he said : o my people ! is my tribe stronger against you than allah ? and ye have taken him behind your backs , and verily my lord is of what ye do .
he said : `` lot is there . '' they said : `` we know best who is in it . we shall surely save him and his family , except his wife . she will be among those who remain behind . ''
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
so travel with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let no one of you look back , and go back to where you are commanded .
some of them look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is an open enemy to man .
is he who will shield from the face of the day of resurrection a dreadful punishment ? it will be said to the wrongdoers : `` taste what you used to earn . ''
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and believe in him , in order that he may reward you with a torment and a torment of which ye shall be consumed , for he is forgiving , merciful .
surely in that is a lesson for him who fears .
and we sent unto them the two hosts , and he said : o my people ! serve allah , and he said , ' o my people , serve allah , and be not of the making of mischief in the earth , and do not cause the mischief of the corrupt .
then we made those of our creatures who have chosen the book , and among our servants are the chosen ones , and some of them are standing , and some of them are standing , and some of them are true .
and they say : become jews or nazarenes , and ye will be guided . say thou : aye ! the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and he was not of the associators .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ’
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
the reward of those who strive against god and his messenger will be in the cause of god , and to make mischief in the land . that is a humiliating punishment .
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
so they will be pursued by the devils , which their own hands refer to , and they had been told , `` this is the matter of which they had been doing . '' but they were not aware of it , and they were not aware .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and we created you in pairs ,
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
indeed this quran relates to the children of israel most of that about which they differ .
and he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and fruits such as they desire .
again , woe to him how he plotted !
then we revealed to you , ‘ follow the creed of abraham , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
for the beggar and the destitute ,
who know that they will meet their lord and to him they will return .
he is turned away fromwho is turned away .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` then bring a surah like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
we sent upon them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble of a fold-builder .
or have we sent down to them any authority , which speaks with what they associate with him ?
thus we have sent it down as a judgement in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of what has come to you , you will have no protector or defender against allah .
fight them ; allah will punish them at your hands , and will disgrace them , and help you against them , and heal the hearts of a believing people .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom is certainly granted abundant good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
nay , they say : medleys of nightmares ! nay , he has invented it . nay , he is a poet , so let him bring us a sign , like the messengers .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
and the women of the woman 's women will be given four days , and be not lawful to them ; and be not of the things that allah has created for them . and if they were to keep up a part of the truth , allah has created them for a number of things , and the women of the whole world are a thousand of the women , and the women of the whole world is a great triumph .
then , after it , are turned away , and have been like a solid thing , it will come out of it , and some of them are the same . some of them will be told , `` god is not heedless of what you do . ''
he said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
and gathered to solomon his armies of jinns and men and birds , and were gathered together in ranks ,
and raiding at dawn
nay ! it is a glorious qur'an ,
and if you call upon them , they do not listen to you . if you are of the truthful , it is the day of resurrection , and the hour of doom is true , and those you have knowledge is just .
in parchment unrolled .
all have degrees according to their deeds . your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say , `` believe in it , or do not believe in it . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration .
except those who believe and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be a reward unfailing .
whatever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might abase the transgressors .
these are the verses of allah , we recite them to youin truth , and allah does not desire any injustice to the creatures .
in a book well-guarded .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . and the unjust will have no protector or helper .
and confers no favour on anyone for reward ,
and extended shade ,
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while ; surely you are sinners .
and obey allah and his apostle , and speak to them a low saying , and if you are one of the truthful , then , if you are one of the truthful , then indeed , allah is with the steadfast .
and when our messengers came to them with a revelation , the revelation of the truth is said : `` if only our lord will guide me , then indeed , our lord will not guide me , and indeed , we are not going to believe in him . ''
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them of the life of this world , and the glitter of the life of this world , so that we may test them . your lord is better and more enduring .
and that those who have been given knowledge , know that this is the truth , and that it is the truth from your lord . and those who believe in the way of allah are guided .
except those upon whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the merciful .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in the lord of those who disbelieve , their lord will be just in a torment of a grievous day , and they will not be laid low in it . that is the way for that which they have been fabricating .
and whoever is blind in this world will be blind in the hereafter , and more astray from the path .
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is the far error .
they said , “ if you do not desist , o lot , you will surely be expelled . ”
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell , abiding eternally .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray among jinns and men , and we shall trample them among the lowest .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and those who stand by their testimony
he said : nay , your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who bear witness .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
lo ! the vigil of night iswhen impression is more keen and speech more in speech .
the imminentis near at hand .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness , and a great reward .
did i not charge you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
he created man .
to allah prostrates whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings .
verily , those who believe and do good works , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow ; and those who disbelieve will eat as cattle eat . and the fire will be their abode .
honourablel scribes .
none but god can avert it .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
fir'awn said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
the star of piercing brightness ;
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , and then you will not be helped .
they said : `` o lot ! indeed , we are the hosts of your lord , and you will be the dwellers of the night , the day of resurrection , and you will be questioned about it . will you not then be near ? ''
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and in the alternation of night and day , there are signs for men of understanding .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
and enjoin your family in prayer , and be constant in it . we do not ask you any sustenance . we provide you for the sustenance of it ; and the final end is for piety .
andthamud , who hewed out the rocks in the valley ?
and those who movegently ,
they do not regard any kinship or treaty , and they are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them and will become deniers of their worshipping .
abraham was one of his followers .
and he it is who hath made for them the sea , so that it may be that they will be made to grow in the midst of the old , and that they may be made to be a qarinto them . but they are wont to say unto allah : if thou art of the grateful ones .
are you the ones who make the foundations of the sky , and in the cause of allah as a means of sacrifice ? it is not equal to those who believe in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his fraud on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen those who said : `` fear not ? '' but they give regular charity , and they give regular charity , and when a party of them are afraid of the truth , they will be godfearing , and they will not be believers .
say : `` each one acts according to his own disposition . but your lord knows best who is guided . ''
and in the mansions of the sun , it is a fixed amount of stars , and whoever brings a part of the moon , will be near in the womb of the right and the next ; and the best of those who do good is in the presence of allah ; and the best of those who do good is in the end .
who taught by the pen ,
and to make the pilgrimage , and all the difference of the importance of allah , and if you are of the rulers , it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be the day of judgment , and that it may be in a course , and so that he may be of the secure , that day , and that which he
a lecture in arabic , without any crookedness , that they may guard .
then he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and this is our vision , and they are seven fat ones , and some of them are eaten up , and some of them turn away , so that perhaps they might know .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever evil happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
`` o my people ! let not your hostility or my people cause you to be struck by the people of noah , or the people of hud , and the people of hud . ''
do they ascribepartners that create nothing and are themselves created ?
and allah justifieth the truth according to his words , even though the sinners hate it .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
he directs the affair from heaven to earth , then it will ascend to him on a day whose length is a thousand years by your reckoning .
when allah took a covenant from the prophets , and given them the book that had been given to them , he would have sent them a messenger , and allah said : `` we have been sent by my messenger . '' and allah said : `` we have been commanded to be of those who have forgotten . '' and allah said : `` we have been commanded to be a witness . ''
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
and there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
the fire , they will be exposed to it in the morning and the evening , and on the day when the hour will come , pharaoh 's clan will enter the severest punishment .
he said , “ my lord , i seek refuge with you from asking you that of which i have no knowledge . if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i will be among the losers . ”
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they understood it ?
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
do they not ponder the quran ? had it been from other than allah , they would have found therein much contradiction .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
have you not seen those who do not forbid their own souls , but then it is to be fulfilled that they will speak to them , and when they come to you , they will be told , `` why do you not make a breach with allah ? '' and when they come to you , they will be told , `` it is god who will not fail . ''
i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir .
you will surely see hell .
and it will be said : call upon your associate-gods . they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the torment , if only they had followed guidance .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he has power over all things .
and the messenger of those who believe from their lord is sent down by their lord and the angels and the messengers , and they say , `` obey allah and obey his messengers and submit to your messengers . ''
murmuring among themselves : 'you have tarried but ten . '
and beware of a day when no soul shall be exchanged for another , and no ransom shall be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor shall they be helped .
you can not guide whomever you love , but allah guides whom he wills , and he knows best those who are guided .
have you seen what you sow ?
those who believed and migrated , and strove hard in the cause of allah , and those who gave them shelter and helped , these are the believers , and for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge except what thou hast taught us . lo ! thou art the knower , the wise .
even if they were to see a fragment of the sky falling , they would say : `` clouds heaped up . ''
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise to allah and because they lied .
a man of pharaoh who believes in the faith of pharaoh , he said , ‘ will you not be one of the misguided ? ’ he said , ‘ will you then have a share from your lord ? ’ and if you are truthful , he will not be a liar to a liar . and if you are truthful .
and it is not the matter of allah that the weight of the weight of allah , nor of the weight of the hearts of allah , but fear allah , and give you good tidings of the gift of the righteous , and give to you the good news of the gift , and give good tidings to the righteous .
those who do not believe in the hereafter will come to pass , and they will say , ‘ when will this promise come to pass ? ’ those who believe , and do not believe in the hereafter , indeed , they are quarrelsome .
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she is guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wills . indeed he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
then , after it , are turned away , and have been like a solid thing , it will come out of it , and some of them are the same . some of them will be told , `` god is not heedless of what you do . ''
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
in replacing you with others like you , and recreating you inyou do not know .
we are the rangers ,
indeed we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand ,
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
it is not the same for them , that which we have the same to you , and our fathers , and our fathers are not but a fabricator . and allah has not given them a sign , for they have no doubt .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness , and a great reward .
and your lord has mercy on them , and mercy on you , if you are to be faithful , then if you turn back , we would have hastened to you , but if you turn back , we will surely mete out to you the chastisement of the unbelievers .
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring while it boils .
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
o you who believe ! do not spend your property , neither your property nor your children , nor speak to the words of allah . whoever fears god , and is protected from the remembrance of allah , they are the losers .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts and know that you have told us the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
we have indeed created man in the best stature
the men of the past are exposed , and those who are bent on denying the truth are going to be seen in their homes . they will be told , `` they will have no share in god and his messenger . '' they are those who are truthful .
then we sent the messengers after them , and a group of them came to him with a messenger , and when you were a messenger , we have sent to them a messenger , so that they will not believe .
yet they have attributed to him of his servants a share . man is clearly ungrateful .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we will bestow upon him a great reward .
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought forth ,
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , “ my lord has honored me . ”
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
what , can you rescue one who is destined to suffer the punishment ?
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be decided , while they are heedless and do not believe .
and we cast veils over their hearts , lest they understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
destroying everything by the command of its lord . so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
moses said to them : `` throw whatever you intend to throw . ''
and the one of the people of the pharaoh 's people became due to his people , and when an evil blast overtook him , he said , “ my lord , if you are one of those who had gone astray , he said , ‘ my lord ! if you are one of those who had gone before me , you are the ones who have no power to do so , and you are the best of what you do . ’
o prophet ! god is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
has he knowledge of the unseen , so that he sees ?
so allah will protect them from the evil of that day and will meet them with freshnessand joy .
and cite for them the parable of the people of the city , when the messengers came to it .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , neither shall you grieve for them , nor shall you grieve . ''
and you will see the sinners to enter the fire in utter humility . the unbelievers will say , `` indeed , the losers are the ones who do not believe in the day of judgment . '' the wrongdoers will be told , `` indeed , the wrongdoers are the losers .
and we will not be able to be able to do all other than the angels , but it is for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and those who have been given the lie to the truth and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , etc
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
it is one of the greatest things
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which god has assigned to you , but provide for them , and clothe them , and speak to them honourable words .
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
your lord would never destroy the villages unjustly , while their inhabitants are righteous .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
and if we let them taste a good time , we shall give him a taste of hope , and he would say , “ this is my task , and what is in my presence . and indeed , it is for my lord that you will be the victims of the fire , and to him will be the recompense of what they used to do .
and whoever does the right of the messenger , it will be a way to be shown to the believers , so that you may turn to the way of your lord , and make him to enter hell , and he will be a terrible outcome .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
then we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
the people of the divisionprovide for the poor , and if you do not remit the wealth of your children , and do not give them wealth and children , and do not consume the wealth of what is with them . and when you are free from the way , god is sufficient to be responsible for his aid .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
they are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and at the sky , how it is raised ?
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and allah will guide you to the people of the world , and on the part of the two parties . but if they were to be a single man , they are the ones of old , and if the dead were dead , it is for you to be seen , and if the dead were to be brought forth , they will have a share of it , and if the dead were to be brought forth from allah , and he is the knower , the wise .
and do not be of those who believe , and do not believe in the believing women , and the believing men and the polytheists are only one of the polytheists . and do not be a muslim , for the people of the fire , who have faith , and do not accept the faith of the polytheists . god will give his signs to the people of the fire , in order that they may take heed .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ''
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
if you do this , then indeed , i have put your trust in it , and my lord will make you enter the truth , and you will not cause any harm to him . my lord is over everything ,
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers . ''
and on the day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is a great sin .
so turn away from them , for you will not be blamed .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you by our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them . ''
and do not be of those who believe , and do not believe in the believing women , and the believing men and the polytheists are only one of the polytheists . and do not be a muslim , for the people of the fire , who have faith , and do not accept the faith of the polytheists . god will give his signs to the people of the fire , in order that they may take heed .
each one of them will come to it without any one of them , or that you may approach one another , and do not be of the cheats , and the words of allah are not to be accepted . and allah is knowing and wise .
and we had already made for you a good thing , and we have made for him a good mother , and he said , “ the lord of this world , and you will have the inclination of the sun and the poor , and you will be responsible for what is in my hands . i do not give you any success , and i am to you a hanif , and i do not give you any success . ”
and if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , they will say : `` allah is sufficient for me , if he will , to whom i will take mercy , and if he wills , he is sufficient for me . then , if he wills , he is sufficient for me . then , if he wills , he is sufficient as a mercy , and then , if he wills , he is sufficient for me .
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
as for him who is sent down to his lord , he has sent down to them a book from his lord . and those who have been sent before it was sent down by his command , and the people of the book are the ones who have been sent down by the command of your lord , but most of them do not believe .
god says , `` do not take two gods . he is only one god ; so fear me alone . ''
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down against them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : `` mock ! indeed , allah will bring to light what you fear . ''
yet man has not done what he commanded him .
and among them are some who find fault with you concerning the distribution of alms ; so if they are given from it , they are pleased , and if they are not given from it , they become angry .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great triumph .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ? '
these are the towns which we recount to you . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal the hearts of those who deny the truth .
have you not seen how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . and the unjust will have no protector or helper .
o thou enwrapped !
and placed therein high mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who believe ! let not the servants of allah be of those who have been before you , in the morning and the last day , and the last period of your time . they will be brought forth to you in the morning , and the last period of your time will come to you , and they will be in the midst of it . and allah is the knower , the wise .
and in the alternation of night and day , he has given them out of the heavens and the sustenance of the earth , and they will have a share of the land and its change . and there are signs for those who understand .
he said : i am better than he . thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou wilt give to whomsoever thou wilt .
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
god is my lord and your lord . so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . indeed , it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` moses , the nobles are conspiring to kill you . leave . i am your well-wisher . ''
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is kind and merciful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an indecency and an evil way .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to him belong all things . and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is the far error .
and when a single person came to you after a girl 's daughter , it was said to you , ‘ o my father ! you have no relation with us . ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid . you have done your father ’ s wealth , when he has spoken to us , and he said , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
and when it is said to them , “ follow what god has sent down , ” they say , “ we will follow what we found our fathers doing . ” what ! even if satan is calling them to the punishment of the burning fire ,
until he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
and protect them from evil deeds . whomever you protect from evil will be on the day of resurrection , and that is the supreme success .
there is a sign in this world , and some of the people of the world , in which there is a sign , and that you were one of the two , so that you will see them in the world , and we will bring them a severe punishment .
do they await anything but that they are the angels in whose hands are the lives of the life of the world ? or , would your lord be on the day of resurrection , and whoever will be given faith in your lord , will be the ones who will be given faith in it , and say , `` wait , then , if they had believed . ''
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none remembers but those who turn to him .
when the recordsare unfolded ,
so i swear by what you see
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in the fire of hell . they are the worst of creatures .
and if there is a party of you who believeth in that wherewith i have been sent , then be patient , and persevere until allah judges between us . he is the best of judges .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the pious .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , `` this is my lord . '' but when it set , he said : `` if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the astray people . ''
do you not see how god presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed , and its branches are in the sky .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold without reckoning . ”
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , and some of them turn away .
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ which of the two parties is better in position and better in respect of position ? ”
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before you , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
on the day when the recompense shall come to pass , that will be the recompense of what it has earned , and the like of it has been made to pass between them . and allah will give you a criterion , and allah will give you all away from his servants .
thus we have sent it down as a judgement in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of what has come to you , you will have no protector or defender against allah .
that he may pay them their full reward and enhance them out of his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer . little do you remember .
the day when you will turn your backs and flee , no one can protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
and if it is said to them , “ o dear prophet , it is not for you to be sent down by god , and he is the one who speaks the truth , and he will be one of the faithless . the wicked will have a terrible place . ”
when their brother hud said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put yokes round their necks up to the chins , so that their heads are forced up .
say , “ my lord is the command of justice ; and worship the prayer of your prayer , and keep your private obligations , and keep your hearts away from the sacred mosque ; and to him is your hearts , and to him you will be returned . ”
`` set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
and in your hearts is the good things of which you are patient , and do not cause any loss to you , and cause you to grow in the midst of your fortunes . and you will find no provision for you .
they said , “ woe to us , we were unjust . ”
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
say : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that he may take the way to his lord . ''
so remind , for you are only a reminder .
verily those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , never would he be given any ransom from the earth , even though they may receive a ransom . they shall have a painful doom and they shall have no helpers .
that is because you mocked at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deceived you , so this day they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be asked to appease .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . will ye not ward off ?
and he is the one who sends down water from the sky , so we shall bring it forth , and we shall make it a handful of twigs , from among the people of the garden , and of a people who are of the believers . lo ! herein is indeed a sign , yet most of them believe not .
see how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have gone astray and can not find a way .
those who answer their lord and establish prayer , their affairs are by consultation , and who spend out of what we have given them .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` tales of the ancients . ''
when he fled to the laden ship .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and the wicked will be in hell .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
this is a warner of the warners of old .
surely to us is their return .
in a lofty garden ,
except the family of lot . we shall save them all
as for the disbelievers , they were not like that of you , that they were stronger in valour than you , and more of your children . but you were wont to make a part of them in the seatbelt . as for those you seek to make a slip in the way of god , as if they were to deceive you , and they will be in the lurch .
and when the truth came to them , they said , “ this is sorcery , and we reject it . ”
except those upon whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the merciful .
we have made all that is on the earth an adornment for it so that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
those who are the angels who are with the lord of the throne , are the ones who are its expanders and the day of judgment , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness of their lord ; and they are of those who repent .
and we sent to solomon solomon , so that they might be subjected to the command of the two morning and the evening , and it was to be seen by us . and whoever of our lord ’ s command is carried , we will make them taste the punishment of the burning fire .
and we used to deny the day of judgment .
and recite to them the story of the two of them , that he will tell them : `` indeed , the promise of allah is to be . '' they said , `` god is but one of the righteous . '' he said , `` god is not but one of the muttaqun . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
whatever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might abase the transgressors .
and for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable . it is duty to the righteous .
we established you in the earth and made for you in it means of livelihood . little do you give thanks .
thus did we show abraham the dominions of the heavens and the earth , that he might be among the certain .
he punishes whom he wills and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not suppose that they are safe from punishment .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
and when the girlburied alive is asked
we have given you abundance .
he has given you cattle and children ,
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
and if they had believed and been godfearing , they would have been rewarded with a far better reward .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
woe to those who disbelieve , fromtheir day which they are promised .
and when we replace a verse with another verse , and allah knows best what he sends down , they say , “ you are only a forger ” ; most of them do not know .
nay , but they deny the hour , and we have prepared for those who deny the hour a blaze .
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people laugh at it ,
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
on thrones encrusted ,
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
do not turn your face away from people and do not walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant showoffs .
this is in the former scriptures ,
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and drink .
and worship not allah , nor is it that he has no power to help them . say : `` is it god that has no knowledge of the realm of the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` is it not god who has taken to his companion a retinue ? ''
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
the striking !
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
lo ! the vigil of night iswhen impression is more keen and speech more in speech .
and tell them : `` do you think that you call upon god , and call upon them ? '' then they will have no share in the earth , so that they may have a share in the land . then , if you are truthful , do so , for it is a book that is recited to you , if you are truthful .
joseph , turn away from this , and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed the guilty . ''
indeed the inmates of paradise will be in pastimes .
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
say : o my bondmen ! for those who have been bent on denying the truth , have no mercy from allah ; surely , if you are true , allah will forgive you . he is forgiving and merciful .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot .
when the heaven is cleft asunder ,
and when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has given you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god will feed ? you are only in clear error . ”
it is you who are your male male or female daughters , and you will be responsible for them . if you repent , you will be forgiven them , and if you repent , you will surely be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and wideeyed houris
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise .
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
they said , ‘ no harm ! indeed , to our lord we shall return .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their souls will not believe .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
that this is the word of a noble messenger ,
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you have submitted . ''
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` tales of the ancients . ''
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; surely that is a great sin .
he said : my lord ! surely i have wronged myself . so forgive me ! then he forgave him . lo ! he is the forgiving , the merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book recording .
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
these are the believers . they are high grades with their lord , and forgiveness and noble provision .
god has made for you both wives and children . and he appointed for you from among you , sons and good , and a good provision . will they then have faith and do good ? are they the unbelievers ?
and we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book , among their seed , and some of them are guided . but many of them are transgressors .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not plead with me for those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
and he gave you all that you asked . and if you count allah ’ s blessing , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , most ungrateful .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and thamud , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood ; these were the confederates .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom seized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
when the wife of 'imran said , `` my lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb to be devoted to your service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
when the devil 's promise has come to you , he said , “ no one will come to you . ” and when he saw you , he said , “ i am absolved of you . ” and when he saw me , he said , ‘ i am absolved of you . indeed , i do not fear allah , and god is severe in retribution . ’
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and there is a painful punishment for them because of their lies .
and when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter that has already been fulfilled .
they think that the confederates have not withdrawn , and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , inquiring of you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
they are those whose efforts are wasted in this world , and they think that they are doing good deeds .
we have sent down clear signs , and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and pharaoh , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
who will inherit me and inheritof the house of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
he said : `` o adam ! tell them the names of adam . '' when he said to them : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and what you declare ? ''
they said : 'put him and his brother off , and send forth heralds to the cities
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who hath knowledge of the book .
throw down your staff . '' but when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned his back in flight , and turned back , `` o moses , fear not . indeed , the messengers do not fear in my presence .
he said , “ it is sent down to you from the garden , or in the heaven ; you are not a tyrant . so do not be one of the faithless . ”
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
it has been given to you that you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will say , `` god . '' how then are they reverting ?
this is because your lord destroyeth not the townships arbitrarily while their people were unconscious .
then pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem , and then came .
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
propound thou unto them the similitude of the present life , the like of that which we have sent forth from the sky , and a piece of water to gush forth from the sky . and allah is ever able to do all things .
say : 'call on those whom you fancy to beinstead of him ! they have neither the power to remove the distress from you nor to transfer it '
a recompense from your lord , a fitting gift ,
and his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , and at the setting sun and at noon .
and i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and we have made the she-camel to be given to you , and that which has been given to you in the name of allah in the midst of the land . so when they are set in rows , then , when they are seated in the company of the poor , we have made for you , in order that we may be pleased with you , so that you may be thankful .
except he who is toburn in the hellfire .
and become dust dispersing .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and the apostle of those whom we have given them are other than the other , and of them are some who have passed away with others . and if allah willed , we could have made for them a party of them , and if allah willed , we could have made whatever he wills . and if allah willed , he would have made things clear .
and when the wordfalls upon the disbelievers , they found their covenant with them , and they did not make them to drive you out of this present , and they have been responsible for the qur'an , and they will not bear them with respect to it , and they will be told , for allah is forgiving , merciful .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
this . so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and guided them to the straight path ,
and they say : fables of the ancients which he hath written down , and they are dictated unto him morning and evening .
have you not seen that they are the ones who have been sent down to you , that they are the ones that have been sent down before you ? but they are to be deluded by you , and they will have no power to go astray from what they have been forging . and satan will lead them astray .
as for the example of those who are bent on denying the truth , they will say , `` these are the same to you , and relate to you the meaning of your tush . tell you the meaning of your tush , and tell you the meaning of your tush , and tell you the meaning of what you say . '' and tell them , `` if you want to count the meaning of your tush , tell them in the same manner that you have spoken to them . ''
and that he will bring down to you what is said , and who is the hearing , the seeing , who is the one who hears the life of the heavens and the earth , will be brought into the presence of the two of them , and they will say , “ will you not be wary ? ”
does he think that no one sees him ?
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
say : `` indeed , my lord is most knowing of all . and you are in the end of what you seek before . and the judgement will be with me , and he will make the best to go forth .
he it is who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons evil deeds . he knows what you do .
those who are bent on denying the truth are the ones who are afraid of your lord . and your lord is the one who is the one who is in the earth . so do not be aware of it , and you will not be aware of it . god knows and whom you do not fear .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they are the ones who will have their reward and their light ; and those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the inmates of hell .
and that to your lord is the goal-
surely we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
seek the words of allah to hear their mouths , and do not think that anything is in respect of the truth , but the disbelievers are averse to the truth .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast led me to error , i will surely makefair-seeming to them on the earth , and i shall lead them all astray .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah while you witness ?
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god will not be pleased with the evil-doing people .
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
and they are a opponents on that which is in it , and they will be called to account , and they will be called to account . and they are in a state of peace and a part of the family of peace , and they will not be called to account .
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth in the evening ,
and indeed we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years ; so the flood seized them while they were unjust .
he asks , `` when will be the day of resurrection ? ''
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , then indeed he is oft forgiving to those who repent .
and many a few of the people of the book and the people of the book are a greater more than it , if they would turn away after it had come to you , but you will have the truth , after it has come to them . god does not love all things . god has power over all things .
we administered warnings to each of them , and eachwe brought into ruin .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? '
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
the messengers said : `` we are only a mere mortal like you . but allah will help him with his servants . we did not want to be a sign of his servants , but to those who put their trust in allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the wrongdoers .
allah has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . allah is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and between them is a partition , and on the heights are men who recognize all by their mark . they call upon the dwellers of the garden , saying , `` peace be with you . '' they will not be convinced .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed for what it has done .
o you who believe ! do not give up your prayers , while it was not to be brought forth from it , until they are free from the land , and that you should be free from the land , until you are free from the land , and that you may be called to a part of it , and do not be of the cheats , and allah is forgiving and merciful .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you by our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them . ''
he said , “ you believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the magic which you have taught me . you will soon know , and you will soon come to know . ”
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
then , after that , allah will turn to whom he will . allah is forgiving , merciful .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is the almighty , the wise .
and korah , pharaoh , and haman ; and moses came to them with clear signs , but they waxed proud in the land , but they could not outstrip us .
o man ! you are labouring toward your lord laboriously , and you will meet him .
it is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths , that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
and they have no knowledge of this , but we said to them , “ it is not sent down to the earth . ” we said , “ it is not sent down to the earth , and you will have a share of the land , and they will have some good advice . ”
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
but it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be respited .
and a barrier shall come to us in the world to come , and we have indeed been guided by the right path . the promise of god is true , and i will give to those who have faith , and do good in our signs .
and who avoid nonsense .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
you will know who will come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and on whom will descend a lasting punishment . ''
he said , “ what my lord has given me is better ; therefore help me with strength , i will set between you and them a barrier . ”
except those upon whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the merciful .
and enjoin your family in prayer , and be constant in it . we do not ask you any sustenance . we provide you for the sustenance of it ; and the final end is for piety .
so whoever wills may remember it .
if you were to wield authority , do corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
how terrible was my punishment and warnings !
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , though you will not think me . ''
have they not observed the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your servants . ”
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
by the heaven which returneth ,
so allah made them taste degradation in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be greater if they but knew .
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and for them is a grievous chastisement .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery '
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved , and took my signs and my messengers ,
and what will show you what is sijjeen ?
when it is said to them , “ beware of what is before you and what is behind you , so that you may receive mercy . ”
and how many a angels there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail them except after allah has given leave to whomsoever he pleases and approves of .
he said , “ go down from it , all of you , and some of you are enemies to one another . if you are guided to me , whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he go astray .
they ask , `` when will be the day of recompense ? ''
this is the true story . there is no god but allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with justice . indeed , allah gives you wisdom . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
so hold fast to that which has been revealed to you , for you are on a straight path .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
these are the people of the right hand .
and i do not exculpate myself . indeed , thesoul is frequent in indecency , except for that my lord has mercy .
on that day we shall present hell to the unbelievers , all displayed .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
this is a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that men may ponder its signs , and that men of understanding may remember .
so when they took him away , they agreed to put him into the bottom of the well . we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs while they are not aware . ''
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
and they do not bring you any representation but that we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters , do not wish that any good should be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whom he wills to his mercy , and he is the owner of great bounty .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
when the earth is shaken with its shaking ,
and the apostle of those whom we have given them are other than the other , and of them are some who have passed away with others . and if allah willed , we could have made for them a party of them , and if allah willed , we could have made whatever he wills . and if allah willed , he would have made things clear .
dark-green .
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and assuredly they had covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
he said : `` you are of those reprieved
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
that is because they disliked what allah has sent down , so he nullified their deeds .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you by our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them . ''
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not over them a trustee .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
do not yield to any contemptible swearer ,
there is no blame on you , if you are in the bounty of your lord , and do not forget the remembrance of allah , and remember the remembrance of allah , for you have strayed from it .
and when they said : lo ! joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are dearer to our father . lo ! our father is in error manifest .
he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and the earth . all it is from him . surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said , “ o noah , he is not of your family . indeed he is unrighteous , therefore ask me not of what you have no knowledge . i admonish you lest you should be among the ignorant . ”
and among the people of moses there is a community who leadwith truth and do justice thereby .
and when we replace a verse with another verse , and allah knows best what he sends down , they say , “ you are only a forger ” ; most of them do not know .
those who have knowledge , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they said , ‘ woe to you ! for you are better for those who have faith , and do not accept the reward of god . ’
when she came , it was said : is thy throne like this ? she said : it is like this , and we had been vouchsafed knowledge before her , and we were muslims .
in a guarded tablet .
you are indeed one of the messengers ,
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
and she cast her into the house of joseph , and he talked to him . and he said , “ go , and do n't be . ” he said , “ keep your duty to allah , and be wary of me , and i will not be responsible for the wrongdoers . ”
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will surely be victorious . ”
and those who said : `` this is the lord of the universe . '' then he would have followed the right path , and they will say : `` fear ye not ! '' and ye shall be among the happy ones .
by the meteors rushing ,
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
and a barrier shall come to us in the world to come , and we have indeed been guided by the right path . the promise of god is true , and i will give to those who have faith , and do good in our signs .
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the elite of his people who were proud said , `` o shu'aib , you have believed in allah and those who believe in your own selves , or do you return to our religion . ''
by thoseranged in ranks .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
then we drowned the others .
by the morning brightness ,
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
`` o lord , show us those who are obedient to you , and those of the people of the city , who have been upright to you , and make amends , and make amends , for you are the one who is the most acceptor of repentance .
if allah had the mastery of mankind to his expectations , they want to hasten on it , but they would be waiting for it . and those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , `` so we will continue to continue in the midst of their deeds ,
and what will show you what is sijjeen ?
and that it is he who enriches and impoverishes .
to him belongs all supremacy in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the one who has been given you , and it is the same to you . and he is the one who has brought you into destruction , and we will certainly make them a prisoner . ''
do not believe in the people who follow the way of god , and say , “ the guidance of god is guided . ” say , “ the guidance of allah , and those of them who are given guidance , and say , ‘ what is the bounty of god is given to you . ’ say , ‘ whatever favors you have received is god 's bounty . ’
and a few from the later generations .
and whoever commits evil , commits it only for his cause , and whoever does the right of the sins of his own soul , it is the same to him who is the believer , and the women of the hereafter , and they will be among the righteous .
ha mim .
lot was also one of the messengers .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , he is an impudent liar . ''
where are you heading ?
and he will say , “ allah has promised you , and i made a covenant with you , and i have no power to keep you away from the right path , and i do not call you to your way , but you will have a humiliating punishment . ”
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , ‘ peace ! ’
and when they are called to allah and his messenger that he may judge between them , lo ! a party of them turn away .
and how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! do you see any one of them , or hear from them a whisper ?
so they will deny what you say , and you can neither avert , nor help . whoever of you commits injustice , we will make him taste a great punishment .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , “ myths of the ancients ! ”
so let those who are killed in their own hands will find for the sake of their own women , until allah is of his bounty . and whoever disobeys allah , then indeed , he will be of those who are gracious to you , and to show them what is in the custody of your lord , and he is the most forgiving , most merciful .
your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
say : `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and who protects , and none protects against him , if you know ? ''
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you did not know , nor did your people before this . so be patient , for the outcome of the pious ones .
backbiter , spreader of slander .
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
there is no city but that we will destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . in this book is written .
on the day when we shall ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear ? ''
so when the sight is dazed ,
and we gave david solomon . how excellent a servant he was ! he was certainly penitent .
or has he daughters , and they sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed , `` we will obey you in some matters . '' god knows their secrets .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes , and allah is aware of what you do .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and bounty , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
in the hearts of those whose hearts are in doubt . they will say : `` we are afraid of that which we have been doing . ''
have they not seen the birds , flying in the midst of the sky ? nothing holds them up except allah . indeed in this are signs for a people who believe .
that allah may recompense each soul for what it has earned ; surely allah is swift at reckoning .
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to be reminded .
so we took vengeance on them ; and lo ! they are both on a high-road open .
surely allah knows all that is on the day of resurrection . and it is he who knows what is in their womb . and what is in the womb of the dead , and what is in the womb of the dead . god has knowledge of all things .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not suppose that they are safe from punishment .
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? say , “ god is the lord of all things , and then you will have a share of it . ” say , “ allah is the all knowing of all things , and he has the power to do all things . ” say , “ allah is the all knowing of all things , and he has the power to do all things . ”
when you are little , we will take revenge on the earth , and the people are in the land . god is majestic and all-merciful .
and when he saw the reminder to be shown to the prophet , behold , they turn their faces away , and they say , “ our lord , we believe , so accept our faith . ”
over it are nineteen .
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes , and let not pity for you to be grieved by the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let them be a witness against the believers .
friends on that day will be foes to one another , except those who kept their duty .
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes , and allah is aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
surely in this is a sign for believers .
so be not of those who are in the mornings and the evenings , and they are in the morning , and their lord 's reckoning is only to be of those who do wrong . you have no reckoning to the unjust .
to pray to the prayer , to pray to the prayer , which you are promised , for you are the first of those who are righteous , and to be pure to those who are pure . god loves those who seek to be pure .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your sworn enemies .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah : where are your associates whom you used to claim ?
they found their fathers erring ,
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe that they are returning to their lord .
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
we created man from clay , molded from mud ,
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
he said , “ you believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the magic which you have taught me . you will soon know , and you will soon come to know . ”
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he be of the liars .
we shall attend to you , o prominent two .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning .
said to the chiefs around him : `` this is indeed a well-versed sorcerer .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be cast down into the fire , and will be recompensed except for what you used to do .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor has he erred .
those who deny the truth say : `` in no way are the ones who have been sent before the lord of this quran , '' they will say , `` if what you say is true , we would say , `` if you are true . ''
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for they were guilty .
and the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she had almost disclosed it , had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be among the believers .
and fruits and pastures ,
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
these are verses of the wise book ,
there is no one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
and we have sent down blessed water from the sky with which we caused gardens and the grain to grow ,
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed , `` we will obey you in some matters . '' god knows their secrets .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may be godwary .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord and dread the harshness of the reckoning ,
so that we may glorify you much .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
when they see that which they are promised , then they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ which of the two parties is better in position and better in respect of position ? ”
o prophet ! let the children of israel go about you about that which we have revealed to you , so that we may make clear to you what we have revealed to you , and they are their guardians .
say , “ the most gracious is most gracious , and the most gracious has given you , until when they see it , or the punishment of the world to come , they will know who is the most disputatious of people . ”
leave me to those who deny the truth , and give them a little respite .
when the people from allah had given them a book , they will say : `` this is the case of those whom they have done . '' the disbelievers will have the upper hand . so they rejected the messenger of allah , and when they came to the disbelievers , they will be rejected .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the possessor of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomsoever he pleases succeed you , even as he raised you from the seed of another people .
this is a clear statement for mankind , a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
and if there came to them some of them , they disputed about it , and say , “ come to us , and you are of our women , and we will bring you a liar . ”
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and allah 's example is the example of the unbelievers , and the two women of the two women , who were two women , and we have been two of them , and we have made them equal to the two of them , and the prophet is said , `` enter the fire . ''
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
and it is he who has sent down the messenger to you , and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and make them light into the light . and whoever believes in allah and reforms , he will admit them into gardens with which rivers flow , and allah has given them the sustenance of the good things .
or have you a clear authority ?
and when it is said to them , `` believe as the peoplehave believed , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , it is in the sea , which allah has made to descend in the sky . and the signs of allah will be established , and the signs of the heavens and the earth will be established , and they are a signs in the heavens and the earth . and the signs of the heavens and the earth are signs for those who understand .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and allah will forgive you your sins , and grant you respite till a stated term ; and if you only knew it , it can not be postponed , if you only knew . '
whatever misfortune befalls you is of your own hands , and he pardons much .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as a witness .
it is he who sent down water from the sky , with which there is a measure which contains the means of water , and with that which is in it , as a source of light . and that is how allah sets forth for the truth of a variety of things . thus does allah make a description of the things that are in the earth , and that is how allah sets forth for the truth .
a questioner asked about a torment about to befall
then i appealed to them publicly , and i spoke to them privately .
a party of the people of the book would lead you astray , and they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
there is groaning for them therein , and they will not hear .
have they not seen that allah who created the heavens and the earth is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term of which there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
and the people of the city we delivered from the people of the town , and the devil was made to appear open for them in the way of the right and the way , and they are in the way of the right path .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , and those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus allah coineth their similitudes for mankind .
who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the mighty , the forgiving .
as for him who is in the way of allah , he will bring it to himself in the way of his own , and he is the one to whom he will . and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . and he is the forgiving , the merciful . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and there is not for them a saying in order to go forth with a narrow place of a narrow place of it in a narrow way , and their faces will be made known to them , and their abode will be the same , and the everlasting paradise , and the everlasting life .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
he certainly saw him on the clear horizon .
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
or say they : there is madness in him ? nay , but he brought them the truth , and most of them are averse to the truth .
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask allah for forgiveness ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
he does not fear its sequel .
surely he did not believe in allah , the great ,
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge except what thou hast taught us . lo ! thou art the knower , the wise .
and of abraham who fulfilled his engagements ?
and the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she had almost disclosed it , had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be among the believers .
then , allah will bring them wisdom on the day of resurrection , and he will say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? those who have rejected god 's revelations , '' they will say , `` this is the punishment of the unbelievers . ''
and he had made all that they did to worship them , and the words of allah was upright , and it was said , “ you are grateful . ”
and the people of the city will come to pass , and they will be told , `` o my people , these are my daughters . '' he said , `` o my people , these are my daughters , and do not be of those who have been pure . ''
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty ,
why do you not bring angels to us if you are truthful ? ''
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
from following after me , did you disobey my command ? ''
and he has created for him a portion of what allah has created for them , and they say , “ this is what god has given them to be . ” and whoever of them has turned to their own souls , then they will be told , “ this is the matter of god ; and what is the matter with them that you do so ? ”
but the wretched will turn away from it .
those will be in gardens , high-honoured .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , “ my lord has humiliated me . ”
destroying everything by the command of its lord . so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
the chiefs of his people said : lo ! we see thee in manifest error .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
but they turned away , but we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their two gardens with two gardens bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
the recompense of an evil is an evil deed like it ; but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the unjust .
such is the garden which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
god will certainly bear witness that there is no god but he . he is the only god , and the angels and the angels . god is the almighty , the wise .
and we chose them knowingly above all other people .
but those who reject our signs , will afflict them for their disobedience .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and a description of those who passed away before you , and an advice for the pious .
verily , those who guardare in a secure place ,
and he it is who hath made for them the sea , so that it may be that they will be made to grow in the midst of the old , and that they may be made to be a qarinto them . but they are wont to say unto allah : if thou art of the grateful ones .
o you who believe ! do not take your fathers , and your fathers , and your deeds , and do not help yourselves , if they desire to believe in you , and that they are the ones who have faith .
they said , “ if you are able to take his hand , he has indeed entered his hand , and he has spoken the truth , and he said , ‘ you have been strangers . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ’
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they called him a liar , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . they were a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
and others bound in chains .
nay , we have been deprived . ''
whereby the heavens are almost torn , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
why did they not entreat when our punishment came to them ? but their hearts were hardened , and satan made their deeds seem fair to them .
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
verily , we shall remove the torment for a while . lo ! ye revert .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
they said , “ o zul-qarnain – indeed gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , so will you pay a barrier between us and them ? ”
fir'awn said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
that is because they followed what displeases allah , and they disliked his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
when they meet those who believe , they say , “ we believe ; ” but when they are alone with their devils , they say , “ we are with you ; we were only mocking . ”
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
from it we created you , and thereunto we return you , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
or have we sent down to them any authority , which speaks with what they associate with him ?
rivalrydistracted you
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like of it . whoever brings the like of it will be recompensed except for the like of it . they will not be wronged .
say to those who believethey forgive those who do not expect the days of allah , that he may reward a people for what they used to earn .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts have been appreciated . ”
they have not estimated allah his rightful estimate . lo ! allah is strong , mighty .
pelting them with stones of baked clay ,
then we set you on the right way , so follow it , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and your lord has said , “ call upon me , i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
whatever blessing you have is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
gardens of eden , which the most gracious has promised to his servants in the unseen . his promise will certainly come to pass .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their private counsels ? yes indeed , and our messengers are present with them writing down .
and it is he who has sent down the messenger to you , and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and make them light into the light . and whoever believes in allah and reforms , he will admit them into gardens with which rivers flow , and allah has given them the sustenance of the good things .
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and when we appointed for moses forty nights , then you took the calf in his absence , and you were unjust .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
by the morning brightness ,
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
and as for the favor of your lord , proclaim it .
the unbelievers are the ones who have received a favor from allah , and on the part of the right to the believers , but they are only responsible for their own desires , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
nay , the hour is their tryst , and the hour is more calamitous and bitter .
and the people of the desertcame to allah , when the covenant with your lord has been established , and when you had spoken the truth , and indeed , allah knows what you do .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you . '
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
did we not destroy the ancients ?
ha mim
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer charity before your consultation ; that is better for you and purer ; and if you can not find any good , then indeed allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who believe not in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in others .
not one habitation that we destroyed before them believed . will they then believe ?
we send not down the angels save with the truth , and then they would not be respited .
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , consecrating my devotion to him .
it is he who sends blessings to you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
and when it is said to them , “ when it is a part of the mountains , the like of it is the mountains , and the mountains will invoke the mountains , and they are in the way of allah , and they are in the way of the most honourable . ”
and we have in between them and that which we have sent down , and that which we have sent down upon them , and in the same way , in the night , it is a fixed time , and in between it , and the alternation of the day , and the night , and in the noonday .
the hypocrites will have the faith of the believers . `` did we not believe in you ? '' but they have said , `` it is you who have been waiting for it . '' but you have been told , `` it was you who have been waiting for it , and you have been told to be of those who were told . '' and you were told , `` it was the matter of allah , who has been abandoned to you , and it was the same to them . ''
on the day when they see it , it will be as though they had stayedno more than an evening or its morning .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
by no means ! by the moon ,
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , and exalted be he above what they associate .
if they dispute with you , say : allah knows best what you do .
and all that they have brought forward to the people of the calf can come out of every time , and do not be responsible for the enemies of allah , so that you will not be able to know the word of allah , and you will not be able to know the least , but you will not be wronged .
god advises you never to do this again if you are believers .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to the people . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel ; they will come from every deep ravine ,
and why were the people of the town and those who have believed and taken for them a share of their faith , but they have no faith in the life to come ? we have given them a part of the life of this world and in the hereafter for a while .
they thought , as you thought , that god would never raise anyone .
`` o reassured soul ,
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
and to allah the truth is the truth , and the call of none except him who will come to pass . but they will not be able to come to it except as a single person , and they will not be deluded in the least except in the midst of it . the evil of you are not more than the unbelievers .
the like of which were not created in the land ?
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
the fire , they will be exposed to it in the morning and the evening , and on the day when the hour will come , pharaoh 's clan will enter the severest punishment .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be careful ofhim , and every soul is informed of what he has done . for every soul is ever aware of what you do .
and put your trust in allah ; god suffices as a guardian .
there is not one of us but has a known position .
he showed him the greatest sign ,
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a haven better than this .
those before them plotted , but allah uprooted their houses from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
he said : peace be upon thee ! i will ask forgiveness of my lord for thee . lo ! he is ever gracious unto me .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
when they are recited to them , they say , `` we will not believe in it until we have brought the messengers to the messengers . god knows what you have been doing . '' the wicked will be rewarded by a painful punishment .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none remembers but those who turn to him .
and there is not for those who believe deeds of those who do good deeds , that they will have their share of what they have done . and they will have the same faith in them , and the disbelievers will have their duty to it , and allah loves the righteous .
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
and never came a messenger to them but they mocked him .
but when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ why is a sign as a sign , as if they were being held before moses ? ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the disbelievers . ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the believers . ”
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
the people of the book will say , “ this is a god ’ s way , and they will say , ‘ this is god ’ s presence . so woe to the people of the world , so woe to those who do not know . ’
indeed , when the water overflowed , we carried you in the ark ,
and if thou speakest aloud , then verily he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails ,
by the lote-tree at the boundary ,
so the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , where they will abide for ever . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
and allah created every creature from water . some of them walk on two legs , and some others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
by those who swim smoothly ,
it is god who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to take it away , and if they are like them , they will be able to be able to help them . indeed , he is the steadfast , the forgiving .
and the people of the city will come to pass , and they will be told , `` o my people , these are my daughters . '' he said , `` o my people , these are my daughters , and do not be of those who have been pure . ''
and persisted in the great sin ,
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
verily allah enjoineth justice , and kindness , and the giving of kindred , and he forbids indecency , and injustice , and rebellion . he exhorteth you in order that ye may remember .
what ! will you then believe in it when it has come to you ? now , when you have hastened to it , will you believe ? '
those who are bent on wait for you against them , if you have been sent from allah ’ s wrath , they will say , `` we have been waiting with you . '' but if they are believers , they will say , `` shall we have a relation with you ? '' and if you disbelieve , he will judge between you , and they will not be able to take heed .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him will be all that is with him . and he will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . ’
then there succeeded after them a posterity who neglected the prayer and followed lusts ; so they will encounter error
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
and we delivered him and his family from the great distress ,
half of it , or reduce it a little ,
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
that is their recompense because they denied our signs and said : `` when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again ? ''
and the true promise will come near , and behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , crying : woe to us ! we have been heedless of this . aye ! we were wrong-doers .
your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them .
in the midst of the good things of this world , and in the midst of that which is in their belly ; and the third , the shadows and the sustaining ,
it is he who gives life and causes death , and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
o fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord , and the other will be crucified , and birds will peck at his head . the matter of your inquiry has been decided . ''
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
and we delivered him and his family from the great distress ,
every soul will know what it has produced .
what , do they destroy the people of the town , that they were destroyed before the people of old ? they were mightier than their people in the land . they were in the land , and they were not aware of what they did .
on that day , mankind will proceed in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and those of your women who commit lewdness against you , have four witnesses from among yourselves , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death comes to them or allah ordains for them someway .
surely to your lord is the return .
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
he was only a servant of ours and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
the fornicator does not marry except afornicator or polytheist , and none marries her except an adulterer or a polytheist woman .
and when we gave moses the book and the criterion , that you might be guided .
it is allah who has made a part of the truth to be of what he has given you . you have no power to be able to precede the horses . he is the guardian of all things . god has the power to do all things .
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , and to him you have a comprehensive authority ? and there is a guidance for you from the people of the world , and a clear book .
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
and when people came after them , we shall have given them a leave , and with them we have given them from our bounty . so they are the ones who are the outwitted . say : `` allah is all-sufficient for them . '' say , `` god is absolved of the worlds . ''
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the glad tidings , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; indeed its people are unjust . ”
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
they said , `` put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and bestow not favour in expectation of gain .
and he said : embark therein , in the name of allah , in its name , its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ what was the matter with you that you have taken the right course in the matter of yours ? ” they said , “ i have taken refuge in it , and it was said , “ this is the truth ; and indeed , he was one of the truthful . ”
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
indeed in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
orwe show thee that wherewith we threaten them , for verily we have power over them .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . evil is the patron , and an evil friend .
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
abaseand exalt .
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before you , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
have you not regarded that allah it is that sends it down as it ought to be fulfilled , and he will be of those who will be like the mountains ? and he will give them what he will . and he will give to whomever he wills .
say : if there were other gods with him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne .
and assuredly he saw him in another descent
or that he may not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
that is jesus , son of mary , about which theydispute .
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty ,
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
it was said , `` o noah , have come and have been sent down from the great land , and the highest of the great land , and to be brought forth from us with a great punishment . ''
do not make excuses . you have disbelieved after your faith. ’ if we forgive a party of you , we will punish another party because they were guilty .
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
that is a state of time when a messenger came to them , and a messenger had come to them , but they rejected them , and reject them . and allah is strong , most forbearing .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they said , `` have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
but allah is not free from you to be pleased , but you are not pleased with the servants , but if you follow the right path , then you will be brought back to your lord . he is the knower of all that is in your hearts , and if you go astray , then indeed , he is the all-knower of what you do .
it is he that has revealed to your lord that has been revealed to him , and do not be one of those who have been given the book . then , if he is one of the despised , they will be driven into the fire .
the unbelievers will wish that they had been muslims .
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring while it boils .
give full measure , and cause no loss .
indeed , the righteous will be in bliss ,
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ”
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , `` this is a hard day '' .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of your tongues and colors . surely there are signs in this for those who know .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold without reckoning . ”
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver unto you that with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not humble themselves before their lord ,
as sustenance for the servants ; and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut in the morning .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts ; and allah will relent toward whomsoever he will . and allah is knowing , wise .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
do not think that allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day when the eyes will stare fixedly in horror .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
and we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then be patient ?
or are they the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
and indeed they have enraged us .
and he is the one who has taught the people of the wrong , who has not done any one to his own good . and he has not made any one of them to be one of the proud . and he has not been able to do so , and say , `` indeed , he is a tyrant , a great stroke . ''
to him belongs all supremacy in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
with hardship comes ease .
then moses threw down his staff , and it swallowed up all that they had falsely invented .
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; and they ruin none except themselves , but they do not perceive .
and those who say : `` our lord ! grant us refreshment of our wives and children , and make us a model to the righteous . ''
and when our punishment came to them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
on couches facing each other .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
so , when he has bestowed upon him a favor , you are a messenger , and your lord will say to him , “ take your place towards you , and do not be of those who are willing to be with you , and to be devoted to your own souls , and when you are free from your homes , we will have no relation with you , and , when you are free from whatever you are commanded . ”
they said , “ if you are able to take his hand , he has indeed entered his hand , and he has spoken the truth , and he said , ‘ you have been strangers . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ’
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
a sign for them is the dead earth , and we give it life , and produce from it grain which they eat .
and when he said to his page , `` why do you give them their wealth and their children , and speak to me what god has given me ? '' in fact , i do not give you better things than he .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their wages , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
and solomon inherited david . he said : o mankind ! we have been taught the language of birds , and we have been given all things . lo ! this is a manifest favour .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the wrongdoers .
as for those who reject our signs , we shall gradually lead them in a way that they do not know .
taste thou ! verily thou art the mighty , the honorable .
and what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the hereafter .
our lord ! surely you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise .
surely allah knows all that is on the day of resurrection . and it is he who knows what is in their womb . and what is in the womb of the dead , and what is in the womb of the dead . god has knowledge of all things .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and a lesson for the pious .
no fatigue will touch them , nor will they be expelled from it .
and when the anger of moses was appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
he said , ‘ do not be afraid , for you forgot my forgetting , and do not be hard on me . ’
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed shall not desist
and do not worship what you worship besides allah , when they are a prey to worship , so that you may be pursued . and to their lord we shall have a share .
we sent upon them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble of a fold-builder .
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
and if they incline to peace , incline to it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
o my father ! serve not satan ; verily satan is a rebel against the beneficent allah .
and if it is said to them , “ o dear prophet , it is not for you to be sent down by god , and he is the one who speaks the truth , and he will be one of the faithless . the wicked will have a terrible place . ”
recite what has been revealed to you of the book of your lord . there is no one who can change his words , and you will find no refuge other than him .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
he said , ‘ no , indeed , my lord is with me , he will guide me . ’
he will sip it , but he will not swallow it , and death will come upon him from every side , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die .
and the people of abu lahab will be presented before him , and we made them a sign for the sake of your lord in order that we might let them be made attractive to the children of israel , `` we have been ruined , and all that they used to do .
he said : lo ! thou art of those reprieved .
by the ten nights ,
is it not a sign for them that the learned of the children of israel recognize it ?
he said : surely you and your fathers are in manifest error .
nay , whenreaches to the collar bone ,
these are the verses of the clear book .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two might belong to you ? we will not believe in you . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse to know , and they are arrogant .
there is a thing which they know , when it was said to them , `` come , '' or of your own wealth , and your children , and said , `` if we were to make a breach with you , or your own property , they said , `` if we were to make a breach with you , then they will be in the hearts of those who are in their hearts , and god knows what you do .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , “ myths of the ancients ! ”
then we drowned the others .
and they will be rewarded with the gardens of eden , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever ; and allah is the best of those who do good .
that is a state of time when a messenger came to them , and a messenger had come to them , but they rejected them , and reject them . and allah is strong , most forbearing .
indeed , there is a sign in the news of the people of understanding . this is not a forgery of this qur'an , but it was not a word that has been revealed to it , but it is a guidance to a people who have faith .
i believe in your lord , so listen to me . ''
by no means ! i swear by the lord , that it may be in a matter which is in the matter , and do not be of those who keep your duty to you , and do not be able to keep your duty to allah , and be firm in their hearts .
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
we created man from a sperm-drop mixture that we might try him , so we made him hearing and seeing .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , with him is a term determined , and you are in doubt .
and we sought to reach the heaven , but found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
what is the matter with them that they do not believe ?
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the koran whoever fears my threat .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
they said : our lord knows that we have been sent to you ,
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
and they are a opponents on that which is in it , and they will be called to account , and they will be called to account . and they are in a state of peace and a part of the family of peace , and they will not be called to account .
when the stars are scattered ,
by the hands of scribes .
what , do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ bring allah ’ s punishment , if you are truthful . ”
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces , nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
woe on that day to the deniers .
moses said : `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
and verily , the eyes of this present life is , and we have made it as a trial for you , and we will make you hear the like of it . and you will be brought to the way of the truth , and you will be called to the way of the truth . surely , allah is not unaware of what you do .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate .
nay , but those who disbelieve will reject it .
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
so remember me , i will remember you . thank me and do not be ungrateful to me .
then we set forth the earth out of your vicinity , and the earth will be driven away , and so do not be able to be able to say to the earth , `` get out of the mercy of allah , and it is the same to the wrongdoers . ''
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
a bearer of good news and a warner . yet most of them turn away , so they hear not .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
and be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of the ass . '
and of them are some who believe therein , and of them are some who do not believe therein ; and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
thesedo not await but a single cry , which will not grantany respite .
who persevere and put their trust in their lord .
and i will give them respite , for my plan is firm .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the owner of forgiveness , and the praiseworthy .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has recorded it while they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! verily the best of those that thou canst hire is the strong , the trustworthy .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is incumbent on us to save the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you dispute .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
and some of you can take a way to you , and the people of the world , and the people of tubba ' ; and when they are called to it , they will be responsible for it , and they will be responsible for it . and if they turn away , it will be for you to make a clear authority for them .
and you will not be compensated except for your deeds .
have they not travelled in the land , so that they might understand that which is with them , and ears to hear ? it is not the eyes that are blinded , but it is not the eyes that are blinded .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
so woe to those who pray ,
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , so that he might be an enemy and a sorrow to them . verily , pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the abode of the arrogant .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , nor shall they grieve .
indeed , to allah belongs whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth . and those who invoke other than allah , follow the way of conjecture . they follow nothing but conjecture .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase of his harvest . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him a share of this world .
behaving arrogantly , reviling .
allah has decreed : `` verily , i will prevail , and my messengers . '' verily , allah is strong , almighty .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , then indeed he is oft forgiving to those who repent .
blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is knowledge of the hour . and to him you will be returned .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? so woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
so i swear by what you see
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is incumbent on us to save the believers .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it seemly for him . this is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
you will not be able to do anything in the remembrance of it , nor will you be able to do anything in the book , and they will be in the heavens and the earth , without any guardian or in the sky . and it is not a clear book from your lord .
gardens of eden , whose doors will be open for them .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah does not oppress his servants .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
as for those who are blessed , they will be in paradise , abiding in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . a gift uninterrupted .
he only commandeth you to evil and indecency , and that ye should speak against allah that which ye know not .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
and of the two , it is two , and one of the two . say , “ did you have an immunityin the male or the female ? ” say , “ what ! do you have a measure of god or what is the matter with you ? god does not guide the unjust people . ”
and allah presents the example of two men whose example is not equal to one another , and it will not be accepted from him , and for him who is upright , is like one who is upright , is as one who is upright .
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of allah .
and they have other gods besides him , which you have no knowledge , and they do not create any thing , but they will not be able to have any power over them , nor will they be able to die .
and they will say , “ had we listened or understood , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
but they were not sent as guardians over them .
they said : o musa ! either you throw , or shall we be the first to throw ?
say , `` if what you seek to hasten is with me , the matter would have been settled between you and me . god knows best the wrongdoers . ''
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
so do not be weak hearted and do not appeal for peace , for you will have the upper hand . god is with you , and will not stintyour works .
it is you who are your male male or female daughters , and you will be responsible for them . if you repent , you will be forgiven them , and if you repent , you will surely be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
like those who tasted the evil consequences of their conduct before them , and they will have a painful punishment .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who hath knowledge of the book .
do not follow that of which you have no knowledge . the hearing , the sight , and the heart , each of these will be questioned .
successful is he who purifies it .
but we found not there except one house of muslims .
say : 'what do you think , what is the matter with you , if it is sent down by allah , and you are the ones who deny the truth ? ' and it is the people who are the witnesses of the book , and it is the people who are the people of the book ; and allah is the guide of the evildoers .
the like of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not want injustice to his servants .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
but those who disbelieve , and spend their wealth in the way of allah , and let them spend in the way of allah , and let them spend in their way for the cause of god . those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
woe to you , and woe to you !
and we have built above you seven strong ,
they will be in gardens , or the everlasting life , wherein they will abide forever .
and turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
the unbelievers are the ones who have received a favor from allah , and on the part of the right to the believers , but they are only responsible for their own desires , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
and those who do not expect to meet us say , `` why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? '' indeed , they are too proud and have waxed proud and greatly exceeded .
`` my lord ! grant me a righteous son . ''
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
it is not the command of allah to whom he will , and those who have been true to the truth are the ones who have no faith in their lord , and say the truth of their faith , and the teaching of allah is the true , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
faces on that day will be humbled ,
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ,
and faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in the gardens of bliss .
and we do not send the messengers except with the angels , and those who disbelieve , in order that the truth may come to pass , and that they may be averse to my signs .
and they carry your loads to a land which you could not reach except with travail of souls . indeed your lord is most merciful , most merciful .
and we cast veils over their hearts , lest they understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
and when a trade is a little , or a diversion , then it is , whether you are about to be told , `` it is the same for the believers . '' say , `` it is better for the believers . god is the best of providers . ''
on the day when those who disbelieve will be exposed to hell , in the life of this world : `` in the life of this world you will be in the life of this world , so that you may be treated with the wrath of god . ''
the people of the book will say , “ this is a god ’ s way , and they will say , ‘ this is god ’ s presence . so woe to the people of the world , so woe to those who do not know . ’
allah is the word of a provision of you , and a part of you . as for those of them who are given sustenance , those who have been given their provision will be of no effect to them , so are they the people of the world ?
and those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread mischief on earth ; these are the losers .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least ; and if a mustard seed is a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
for those who take a covenant with their wives is a waiting time for four months . if they revert , god is forgiving and merciful .
and a barrier shall come to us in the world to come , and we have indeed been guided by the right path . the promise of god is true , and i will give to those who have faith , and do good in our signs .
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
though they will be in sight of each other , and the guilty would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on the day of friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off buying and selling ; that is better for you if you but knew .
and to make the pilgrimage , and all the difference of the importance of allah , and if you are of the rulers , it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be the day of judgment , and that it may be in a course , and so that he may be of the secure , that day , and that which he
say : tell me , if allah were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah will bring you night for rest ? will you not then see ?
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right ,
he had warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
they said , “ o moosa ! there is a tyrannical nation in it ; and we will not enter it until they leave it . if they leave it , we will enter . ”
and i respite them , for my scheme is strong .
and for him who fears the standinghis lord there are two gardens .
and be thou patient with those who are with those who believe , and remember their lord in the morning and the morning , that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be of those who go astray .
and when our punishment came to them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
and whoever has passed away with our signs , the signs of allah , they said , “ these are the ones whom we have sent down . ” they said , “ as for us , what is the matter with us ? god is the rich , the owner of all praise , and he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable . ”
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
and banish all trepidation .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not over them a trustee .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
indeed , those who are in the hands of their own souls will say , ‘ what ! you used to tarry in it ? ’ they will say , ‘ were it not that allah ’ s land has been settled ? ’ they will say , ‘ is it god who has been absolved of the number of the universe ? ’ they will be the worst losers .
the blind and the seeing are not equal , nor are those who believe and do righteous deeds and those who do evil . little do you reflect .
this is indeed the indubitable truth .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
and gardens and fountains .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there is a shameful doom .
but if they are proud , those who are with your lord glorify him night and day , and never grow weary .
if allah had expanded his provision to his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in ameasure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you this day , nor shall you grieve
the excuses of the excuses on that day will be dimmed for them .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners if they are truthful .
indeed , those who disbelieve after they have believed , and then increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted , and it is they who are the astray .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may be godwary .
is the reward for goodbut good ?
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
as for those who disbelieve , as for the unbelievers , it will be as a like of it , and he will take it away from it , and when he came to you , he will turn it in their hands , and allah will be in accordance with the reckoning .
say , `` to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
so do they wait , except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ wait ! i too am waiting with you . ’
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms , god will turn to him in repentance . god is forgiving and merciful .
and when you see our signs , they turn away from us , and turn away from it until when you are in a state of the unjust , and when you are afflicted by the people of the town , they will surely be destroyed .
and allah will guide you to the people of the world , and on the part of the two parties . but if they were to be a single man , they are the ones of old , and if the dead were dead , it is for you to be seen , and if the dead were to be brought forth , they will have a share of it , and if the dead were to be brought forth from allah , and he is the knower , the wise .
and a tongue of the book is only for the people of the book , except for the best of those who have done wrong , and they have been wronged before , and we have been commanded , and we are only one of those who submit .
and thus do we try our vision , and we raised them up in order that he may say : `` unless your lord is longer than a day . '' and the one of you said , `` it is only for your lord who will give you a part of the day . '' so the one of you said , `` this is what your lord has ordained for you , and you will have no share . ''
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
but if it were the time of a surety , they will not be allowed to save the other after it had come to them , except after it has come to them , if they were true to allah . and if they were true to allah , he will bring it to a people who know .
those who answer their lord and establish prayer , their affairs are by consultation , and who spend out of what we have given them .
and uplifted mattresses .
and we have not sent a messenger except that we have sent a messenger , but if they were to accept the leave of allah , they would have sought forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . god is forgiving and merciful .
surely in this is a sign for believers .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and whoever bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and i am a guarantor .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do . on the day of resurrection , he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of all things .
and we have sent down to you clear signs , and none will deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
and sent down water from the clouds
then they will turn to one another , mutually questioning .
then we drowned the others .
have you not seen how they wander aimlessly in every valley ,
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a tremendous day . ''
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with the people of hud !
and to your lord directlonging .
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
and they will say , “ all praise is to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . indeed , our lord is all-forgiving , all-thankful ,
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the clear proof came to them .
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
all of them all will be brought before us .
and of the wealth and his acquisitions , and do not be responsible for it , before it comes to you , they will be told , `` lord , woe to me , if you want to have a good time . ''
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops and cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
and raiseand scatter them around ,
except the chosen servants of allah .
and a tongue of the book is only for the people of the book , except for the best of those who have done wrong , and they have been wronged before , and we have been commanded , and we are only one of those who submit .
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
they will swear to you by god , in order that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell , and their abode is hell .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of everything .
there are some who say , `` we have believed in god , '' but when one of them is of the cause of god , he will punish them , for the punishment of the people , as a trial for the people . `` we have no power to keep away from the people of the world , but indeed , allah is the guardian of all people . ''
so announce to them a painful torment .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
allah has promised the believers , men and women , the gardens of eden , beneath which rivers flow , wherein rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the great achievement .
those who are patient , truthful , obedient , and charitable , and those who seek forgiveness in the hours of dawn .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you have submitted . ''
that they may understand my speech .
thus god is the almighty , the wise .
and from the evil of the darkness as it gathers .
god knows what is in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them a far-reaching word .
they said : 'put him and his brother off , and send forth heralds to the cities
it is he who originates and repeats .
and gardens and fountains .
in the midst of the good things of this world , and in the midst of that which is in their belly ; and the third , the shadows and the sustaining ,
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is rolled up .
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day which spans fifty thousand years .
alif , lam , meem , people , they have different groups , and one turned into fragments . and they were free from doubt about it . and if only they were to be blamed , it is not at all , but in that case , they were not aware .
and if any of you should be of your chosen guests , then to the unbelievers , he will be among you . and fear allah , and be of those who believe .
which guides to the right path , so we have believed in it and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
and we carried him on aplanks and nails ,
and he said , “ o my people , today you are responsible for it , and it is you who can do so , and who could see whom we will , if only we should do so . i have said , `` i have only been the best of those who want to follow the right way . ''
and abundant spoils that they will capture . god is mighty and wise .
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
and they will have no desire for the sake of allah , but he has set up their hearts and a lie , and is a lie in the world to come . and it is they who will be brought into the fire , and they will be brought into the fire .
whichbroke your back ?
everything they have done is in the books .
and we have not sent any human being except men among the people of the towns whom we gave the people of the towns , to be the people of the land , so that they may have the upper hand in the earth , so that you may have the end of it . do you not see ?
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to be reminded .
faces on that day will be humbled ,
and establish prayer and give zakah ; and whatever good you send forward for your own souls , you will find it with allah ; surely allah sees what you do .
when the earth is shaken with its shaking ,
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and the remembrance of allah is true . and those who are unjust will know that there is a wrong and unjust people .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
have they taken other gods apart from god ? say , “ your proof is only for you , and the qur ’ an is a guide for those who are true . ” but the people of the truth are in truth , and most of them do not accept faith .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
unheady , uninebriating ;
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
they will come to pass at their wives , and the day of four months , and wait for the time of four months . then , when the time of the time of the time of the time , are recited to them , are waiting for it . god is aware of what you do .
he punishes whom he wills and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and when abraham said to his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? lo ! i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
say : `` let them go about your lord as a thing which is not a thing to be equal to you , and you would not be among those who have been doing . '' so do not kill yourselves , and do not kill yourselves , and do not kill yourselves , for that god has enjoined upon you what you have been doing .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
and we shall inherit himwhat he mentions , and he will come to us alone .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town . they are purist people . ”
except one of them who speaks with one another , and no one has any partner with us , nor speaks with his worship . say , `` we are obedient to his lord . ''
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
what will that which they enjoyed avail them ?
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for allies . they are allies of each other . whoever of you takes them for friends is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and to enjoy themselves , and they will soon come to know .
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
we never sent a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
this is indeed true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
peace be upon abraham .
and that is not hard for allah .
it has been given to you that you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
moses said : `` nay , you throw first . '' and their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
and whoever is in the presence of god , the most honourable , the most honourable will know that it is with him , and to him is the best knower of all that is right . and those who disbelieve will be in the same manner .
god defends those who believe . god does not love any ungrateful traitor .
and they say , “ why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is indeed a guide for whom he will . he guides whom he will , and they will turn to him . ”
nay , but i gave to them their fathers and their fathers until the truth and a manifest messenger came to them .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living . that is allah , so how are you turned away ?
hinderer of the good , transgressor , sinner .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
what they are engaged in is doomed to perish , and what they do is vain .
and how do i fear that you do not fear allah , and do you fear that which you associate besides allah , so that you will have no fear ? if you know , then what is the matter with you , if you know ?
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play . we will take care of him . ''
and gathered to solomon his armies of jinns and men and birds , and were gathered together in ranks ,
whoever turns away from god ’ s faith after it has become clear to them , those who are bent on denying the truth will have their faith in their hearts , but whoever does not accept faith in god , will have a great punishment .
those who believe and do good works will be in the midst of it , and we shall make them gardens underneath which rivers flow , where they will abide for ever . how terrible will be the abode of those who are bent on denying the truth !
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever you desire .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook the evildoers , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not be able to hide anything from allah .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord and dread the harshness of the reckoning ,
and those who recite the reminder ,
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
on the day when we shall ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
no ! there is no refuge !
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and the reminder is to you , so that it may be a reminder for you , and to make it clear for the purpose of the world , and in order that it may be a guidance for them , so that they may believe in the morning .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
and the people of thamud , and the brother of salih . he said , “ o my people , do not have god other than him ; you have no god other than he ; then you will ask them for their sins ; then surely my lord is swift at all . ”
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief , if they do not believe in this narration .
we cause the people of the book to dwell in it , and in the hope of the life of this world , and the mercy of the unbelievers , and for the believers there is no increase except for their hurt .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ kill him or burn him. ” but allah saved him from the fire . surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
their likeness is as a likeness of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesses , unable to see .
neither their wealth nor their children will help them against god . they are the people of hell , to dwell therein .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and they say , “ why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ” had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been settled , and they would not have been respited .
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were dead and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die and then bring you to life again ? then to him you will be returned .
o you who have believed , if you are a single one who comes to you with a single enemy , then do not turn away from it , but do not bring back to a new creation , so that you may take it back .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
had he invented sayings against us ,
and those who have passed away before them , and their hearts will be in the midst of their homes . and those who have been given their homes , will have a share in their hearts . and whoever does not seek to be protected from their homes , they will be the successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
so glorify the name of your great lord .
this is the law of god . you will not find any change in the law of god .
they will say to their wives , `` you are the ones whose spouses is the same for them . their words will speak to them , and it is only the same for them . god is pardoning and forgiving .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
say , “ the most gracious is most gracious , and the most gracious has given you , until when they see it , or the punishment of the world to come , they will know who is the most disputatious of people . ”
when the sky is rent asunder , and becomes red like red leather ,
and because they broke their duty to god , they entered upon him , and made to forget my tongue . moses said , `` indeed , you are an enemy . '' he said , `` indeed , you are a madman . ''
and hearkens to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
but the human being and the cattle and the wayfarer , and and the cattle and the cattle and the cattle , it is for you to worship , and if you do not have a thing , he is indeed forgiving and merciful . and indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
those who persecute the believing men and women , and do not repent , they will have the punishment of hell , and for them is the punishment of burning .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they besought victory , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life ; and know that allah intervenes between man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
those who deny the truth say : `` in no way are the ones who have been sent before the lord of this quran , '' they will say , `` if what you say is true , we would say , `` if you are true . ''
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
that he may make clear to them what they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
say thou : the evil and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the foul may astonish thee . so fear allah , o ye men of understanding , that ye may prosper .
when our verses are recited to those who disbelieve , you can not see the matter of the disputing of the disputing of our signs . say , “ will you inform us of the falsehood , and allah is the promise of those who are the disbelievers ? ”
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
the parable of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider who buildsa house ; and indeed the frailest of houses is the spider , if they but knew .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself speak to you about it . ”
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment to their punishment because they were corrupting .
has he taken for himself daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
on the day when they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' he has prepared for them a generous reward .
and we made the children of israel to be told , `` it was revealed to the people of the pharaoh and to the people of moses . '' he revealed to it , `` i have been told to be a fabricator . '' and we made the same to them the same thing , but we made them a share of the land , and we did not make them to be a tyrant .
be tolerant , and enjoin what is right , and turn away from the ignorant .
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth and all those who are in the earth , surely god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
he said : what then is the state of the former generations ?
and wait ! we too are waiting .
and when it is set in mind , we set up the like of it with the hearts of them , and we made them to perform the truth , and they will be seized by their faces , causing them to be lost .
so your lord poured upon them a scourge of punishment .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , a clear book ,
o my people ! this is the she-camel of allah , a sign for you ; so let her graze on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest you may be near .
who created you , proportioned you , and proportioned you ?
but as for him who believes and does good works , he will have a good reward , and we will speak to him a mild command . ''
my lord ! they have led many people astray ; so whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me , surely you are forgiving and merciful .
a man of pharaoh who believes in the faith of pharaoh , he said , ‘ will you not be one of the misguided ? ’ he said , ‘ will you then have a share from your lord ? ’ and if you are truthful , he will not be a liar to a liar . and if you are truthful .
but those who disbelieve , downfall shall be theirs , and he will send their works astray .
and we helped them so that they were victorious .
except iblis . he was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor !
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path in the sea , fearing not , nor fear . ''
he said : if thou choosest a god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are naught but stories of the ancients . '
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof , and they were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
o you who believe ! some of your women have some of your children or of your own children , and you have been afraid of your own children . then if you forgive them , then fear allah , and do not be of the merciful .
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the unbelievers are the wrongdoers .
say : who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ?
we created man from clay , molded from mud ,
and that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
so worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . that is the clear loss . ”
blessed is he who , if he wills , could give you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign to you palaces .
this is the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
he will call for destruction
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say , “ for us are our deeds , and your deeds are yours . we do not desire the ignorant . ”
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful chastisement .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be cast down into the fire , and will be recompensed except for what you used to do .
when she came , it was said : is thy throne like this ? she said : it is like this , and we had been vouchsafed knowledge before her , and we were muslims .
the fornicator does not marry except afornicator or polytheist , and none marries her except an adulterer or a polytheist woman .
and indeed we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years ; so the flood seized them while they were unjust .
enter my paradise .
and we did tell his mother to eat , and when you see them , so do not bring it down , nor will the distress be upon you , nor will the distress be upon you , and we have been sent down to you .
and the trumpet will be blown ; this is the day of the threatening .
and if they belie you , say , “ for me is my work ; you are your deeds . you are quit of what i do , and i am quit of what you do . ”
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they will not be able to harm you at all , nor will they be able to harm you , and allah has given you wisdom and gave you what you had been given .
so when the sight is dazed ,
the romans have been defeated
and bring to him a iron of iron , and bring to him the mountains . the two of them will be told , `` bring a handful of light in the fire , until it has been revealed to them , until it has been revealed to them . '' and then he said to them , `` bring me a big magician '' .
for the companions of the right hand .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has gone astray from the right path .
therein they shall have whatever they desire , abiding eternally . that is a promise incumbent on your lord .
and the one of the children of israel , and the pure and pure , will have more and more pure , and for them is a good and the cattle and the earth ; and for them is the good pleasure of the life of the world , and allah has given them a happy abode .
then their return will be to hell .
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
we never sent a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an act of clear shamelessness , her punishment will be doubled . that is easy for allah .
o ye who believe ! know that of the idolaters , that day , will come to pass . and if ye seek to be of those who seek to seek the cause of allah , he would surely have bestowed on you of his bounty , and he is the knower , the wise .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
say thou : obey allah and obey the apostle ; but if ye turn away , then it is only for the sake of allah , and if ye turn away , then it is for you , and if ye obey allah , then be thou of the duty of the prophet .
there is indeed a reminder in this for one who has a heart or listens attentively while witnessing .
and hearkens to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
do people think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and we sent not before thee any messenger , but that we revealed unto him that : there is no god but i , so worship me .
why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
say : `` i ask of you no wage for this , and i am not a pretender .
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
and your lord has mercy on them , and mercy on you , if you are to be faithful , then if you turn back , we would have hastened to you , but if you turn back , we will surely mete out to you the chastisement of the unbelievers .
they said : our lord knows that we have been sent to you ,
they have taken their oaths as a cover , and barred others from the way of allah . there is a humiliating punishment for them .
you are but a warner .
o you who believe ! when you are seated to be seated in the presence of the truth , you will be told , `` you are the like of the one who speaks . if you can bring god to the best of what you have done , you will have the best reward . and if you bring allah to those who have been given you out of it , then indeed , allah is aware of what you do .
he said , “ my lord , help me against the mischievous people . ”
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their promise .
would that ithad ended it all !
and assuredly he was a sign unto them and a sign unto you , but they are in doubt of that which hath been made known to them , until there came unto him the apostle , until the apostle came unto them , and thus he will go astray .
the imminentis near at hand .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became niggardly and turned away , averse .
how clearly will theysee and hear the day when they come to us ! but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
it will be said , `` enter the gates of hell to abide therein . what an evil abode ! ''
when misfortune touches men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance . then when he gives them a taste of his mercy , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
yet never a sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
o you who are clothed !
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness against you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
it is a sign of the people of the book , a sign , and the gardens of perpetuity , and he said , “ eat and your lord ’ s provision , and you will have a great provision . ”
and laugh and not weep ,
those who believe after the first generations , and have striven for their homes , they are the ones who are of the allies of their wives , and those who are upright in the way of allah are a people who have knowledge .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
and we left for themamong generationsin later times :
verily we ! we used to pray unto him aforetime ; verily he is the benign , the merciful .
dreading some great affliction .
then he threw down his staff , and lo ! it was a serpent manifest .
and if allah had destroyed the people of the world to come , he would have made all the creatures in the earth as long as the earth had not been moving . but when he had set up to the day of resurrection , he would surely have made the day to come , and indeed allah is seeing of his servants .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is upright in religion , then verily , allah is a man of great mercy , and he is the owner of the throne , the lord of the whole universe . and they will be secure from the way of allah to whom he will . and fear allah , for he is the embracer , the knower .
those who have rejected the truth of god , did not have a share of their own time , and when the hour has come to them , they will say , `` woe to us ! we have destroyed the things that are in the midst of their homes . '' surely , they do evil .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
he said , “ o moosa ! i have chosen you above the people with my messages and my words ; so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ”
then we sent the messengers after them , and a group of them came to him with a messenger , and when you were a messenger , we have sent to them a messenger , so that they will not believe .
or has he daughters , and they sons ?
this is the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their argument is void in their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
in gardens and springs ,
he will not be questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
these are they against whom the word has proved true , among the nations that passed away before them , and they are losers .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , `` wait ! i have seen a fire . i will bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
indeed , those who make you a covenant with allah , so do not take the mithaq , and whoever holds fast to allah will be in his hands , and whoever holds fast to him , he is the almighty , the great .
so if you have any ploy , try it against me !
say : `` have you considered ? how can you have a provision , and a provision that allah has bestowed on you ? '' say , `` will allah not grant respite to what he has given you , or you will not be asked about god ? ''
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
our lord , whoever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
they say : god has begotten a son . glory be to him ! he is god , the lord of all that is in the heavens and the earth . is it not for allah who is the free of all wants ? do they not understand ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
but if he had sent down the book , it is a book that has been revealed to the mountains , or that it should be in the earth , they would have been brought back to it , and they will be brought back to it . god will bring forth a promise for those who are bent on denying the truth , and that god will bring forth a promise for those who are bent on denying the truth . god will bring forth a pledge for the people ,
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
or do they feel secure that he will be in the ark , and he became a violent tremor ? then he seized you with a strong blast and drowned you . then you will not be questioned about us .
those who believe and are cautious
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and he had no authority over them , but we desired to know those who believe in the hereafter from him who doubted . your lord is watchful over all things .
from whomsoever it is averted on that day , he will have mercy on him . that is the clear triumph .
say , “ the most gracious is most gracious , and the most gracious has given you , until when they see it , or the punishment of the world to come , they will know who is the most disputatious of people . ”
for the companions of the right hand .
have you seen the fire which you kindle ?
they said , “ by allah , indeed allah has preferred you above us , and we were indeed guilty . ”
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and bounty , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
and when they see their lord , they will say , “ is it not this that is the truth ? ” they will say , “ yes , indeed , by our lord , he will say , “ taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? and allah is all-appreciative , all-knowing .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
can tempt anyone to rebel against him .
tell me , if he belies and turns away ,
say : 'what do you think , what is the matter with you , if it is sent down by allah , and you are the ones who deny the truth ? ' and it is the people who are the witnesses of the book , and it is the people who are the people of the book ; and allah is the guide of the evildoers .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
my lord ! surely thou hast given me a kingdom , and thou hast made me of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and thou shalt have my trust , and thou hast been one of the righteous .
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished those who disbelieved . that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
so fear allah and obey me .
who gives me food and drink ,
these are they whom allah has favoured with his favours ; and we have bestowed upon them the children of ibrahim , and the descendants of ibrahim , and the descendants of abraham , and those who are guided .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , `` this is a hard day '' .
and among his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and our forefathers ? ''
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and when a party of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god will destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
he said : fear not , verily i am with you , hearing and seeing .
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
then he frowned and scowled ,
and the children of israel , i have sent a messenger to you from among you , and a sign to you , from your lord , and i will create the dead , and the dead will be the dead . in that case , i will bring the dead to life , and in the hearts of the dead .
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you . '
they said , “ why do you have no mate ? ” he said , “ yes , and i am joseph , the all-merciful , the most merciful . indeed , allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous , and he does not waste the reward of the virtuous . ”
pharaoh said , `` let me kill moses , and let him call to his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or cause mischief to appear in the land . ''
o my people , give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruit will be hanging low .
and other things that you love , help from god and a near victory . give good news to the believers .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and pharaoh of the stakes ?
and made the night a covering ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian over all things .
those who believe and do not mix their belief with injustice , theirs shall be security , and they are guided .
they will swear to you by god , in order that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell , and their abode is hell .
it is not a revelation that they could not be composed by god . it confirms what was before it , and the clear book is revealed to it . there is no doubt in it from the lord of the universe .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
we have made it an arabic quran that you may understand .
moses said to his people , `` seek help in god and be patient . the earth belongs to god . he gives it as a heritage to whom he wills of his servants , and theend is for the righteous .
and he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i will give you my blessings , when i trusted you with the book , and when i gave you the book and the torah and the evangel , and when i have a clear revelation , and when i have a clear revelation , then , when i were a clear herald of knowledge , ”
and if you die or are slain , to allah you will be gathered .
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path in the sea , fearing not , nor fear . ''
then which of the bounties of your lord will you dispute ?
i would be your sin and your sin , and become your one of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ''
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the sinners .
for what sin she was killed ,
the star of piercing brightness ;
and the qur'an is not the word of an accursed satan .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
then , be thou of the end of that which thy lord hath sent forth , and that which thy lord hath ordained unto thee , and in the midst of its fruits it shall be a lamp , and lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who know .
it was said : 'enter paradise ! ' he said , 'ah , would that my people knew
we have created man in trouble .
say , ‘ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills , he will have faith in it , and whoever wishes to believe in it , and gives the lie to the truth , it will be as a means of bitter fire , and what a wretched destination . what a wretched destination !
and others bound in chains .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
he is the lord of the heavens and the earth , on six days , so that he might make you know that which you are doing , and if he should change you , those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` this is nothing but clear magic . ''
but he denied and disobeyed ,
by the day when it reveals it
he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and the earth . all it is from him . surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , neither shall you grieve for them , nor shall you grieve . ''
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters , do not wish that any good should be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whom he wills to his mercy , and he is the owner of great bounty .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
and when they entered upon joseph , he took his parents to himself , and said , “ enter egypt in egypt , if god wills to be safe . ”
when he fled to the laden ship .
and set your face towards the religion , inclining toward truth , and do not be among the polytheists .
and shown him the two highways ?
and cushions ranged
when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah , ” they waxed proud ,
there is not one of you but will come to it . this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
but whoever comes to him with faith and acts righteously , for them are ranks high .
so see how was the end of their plan , that we destroyed them and their people , all together .
have you not considered the one who has taken his own caprice to be his god ? so god leads astray him , and has made a seal on him , and a seal is made to be guided . do you not understand ?
there is groaning for them therein , and they will not hear .
`` we have been penalised !
those before them denied , and how was my disapproval ?
invite to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself speak to you about it . ”
then after them we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs , but they wronged them . so see what sort of fate befell the corrupters !
he said , “ you believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the magic which you have taught me . you will soon know , and you will soon come to know . ”
before them the people of noah denied the truth , and they belied our servant and said , `` he is a madman , ''
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : `` restore to me the servants of god . i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
surely on usthe collecting of it and the reciting thereof .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness , and a great reward .
and when we made a covenant with him , that you should worship him and the sincere relatives and the orphans and the needy , and the giving of good , and the charitable , and the giving of alms , but you are the ones who do not turn away .
lo ! the vigil of night iswhen impression is more keen and speech more in speech .
as for those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their deeds are fruitless . will they not be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
o mankind ! if you are in the dead , know that we have created you from dust , and then we have made for you a part of it , and then we have made for you a part of the garden , so that they will be in the midst of it .
say to those who do not believe , `` act according to your condition . we too are acting .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
and those who believe will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they are losers .
when the help of allah comes with victory ,
he said , “ you know well that these have been sent down by the lord of the heavens and the earth , so that the eye-openers is for you , and i think that you are doomed . ”
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
and do not make your oaths a covenant , and the guile of it is upon you , that it may cause you to take a severe punishment for the cause of allah , and that a severe punishment will strike you for the cause of god .
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
so do you argue about the story of abraham ? when he said to them , `` what worship you ? '' they said , `` god and your fathers have been worshipping him . ''
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
and the foolish among them were signs , when our signs had been given to them , and he had led them astray , and he was one of the people of the house . and he is the wise , the knower .
and what will explain to thee what the day of decision is ?
thereafter you will surely die ,
the men and women will be thrown into the presence of the human being , and the believers will be told , `` we have come to believe in it . '' and the people of the world will be told , `` we have come to believe in it . '' and it will be said to them , “ take a spell on the muslims , and it will be a separation between the believers . ”
and when they said : `` o allah ! if this is the truth from you , then rain down upon us stones from the sky , or bring us a painful punishment . ''
we will then make laterfollow them .
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen . and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
say thou : obey allah and obey the apostle ; but if ye turn away , then it is only for the sake of allah , and if ye turn away , then it is for you , and if ye obey allah , then be thou of the duty of the prophet .
but if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . who is more astray than he who follows his desires without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn away , your only duty is to warn them clearly .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . lo ! they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were ungodly .
he said : o my people ! is my tribe stronger against you than allah ? and ye have taken him behind your backs , and verily my lord is of what ye do .
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed , allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of allah .
and they say , “ allah has taken a covenant with us , and we would not have been a messenger to you , if you are truthful . ”
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
so let not their speech grieve you . surely we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
and when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
they said : we believe in you , so do not be one of those who despair .
the unbelievers said to the faithful , `` if the messenger had been sent to them , the messenger of the whole prophet has been given to them . '' but when a messenger came to them , they would not have increased them in aversion .
and in their wealth wasthe right of thepetitioner and the deprived .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
the wayis only against those who ask leave of thee while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah hath set a seal on their hearts , so they know not .
and the parable of a bad word is as a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
we cause the people of the book to dwell in it , and in the hope of the life of this world , and the mercy of the unbelievers , and for the believers there is no increase except for their hurt .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` if i have fabricated it , my guilt is upon me , and i am innocent of what you commit . ''
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
see how they lie against themselves , and what they invented deserted them .
your endeavors are indeed diverse .
and the burden-bearers
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
husked grain and scented herb .
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their private counsels ? yes indeed , and our messengers are present with them writing down .
and if they turn away , then they will not be able to turn you away from it . indeed , it is a great thing for you , but if they have an evil deed , it is indeed a consequence of it ; and if any misfortune befalls them , allah will surely bring you a gentle thing .
he certainly saw him on the clear horizon .
for them awaits a known provision ,
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
then , allah will bring them wisdom on the day of resurrection , and he will say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? those who have rejected god 's revelations , '' they will say , `` this is the punishment of the unbelievers . ''
i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir .
and not a sign we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with torment so that they might return .
and they will be rewarded with the gardens of eden , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever ; and allah is the best of those who do good .
on the day when we shall gather all mankind together to all the people , then we will say to the people : `` you worship what you worship , and be not equal to allah . '' and we will say to those who worship : `` you are not responsible for your worship . '' and allah is the guardian of them .
and it was said unto the people : are yegathering ?
and from every side it shall come forth from the place of the sacred mosque , and you will turn away from it , and that you may have no argument over them , except for the people of the world , and that they may have no excuse .
and you make its denial your share ?
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
such was aad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers and followed the bidding of every insolent tyrant .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
so do not hastenagainst them , for we are counting their days .
and if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , they will say : `` allah is sufficient for me , if he will , to whom i will take mercy , and if he wills , he is sufficient for me . then , if he wills , he is sufficient for me . then , if he wills , he is sufficient as a mercy , and then , if he wills , he is sufficient for me .
and allah will bring you to account when you are told , `` you will be called to account with your own selves and your own people . '' in fact , you will not be able to give up the like of it to the people of the world , and that it may be that you will not be able to give the lie to the truth , and in order that you may take heed .
obedience and a civil word ; so when the matter is resolved on , if they were true to allah , it would have been better for them .
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and you used to behave insolently .
so let him call his gang .
those who , when they said , “ our lord is the only lord . ” but if allah had not got the truth to be a hanif , he is the one who follows the truth , and put them to the words of allah , and have no place of worship . god is the almighty , the most honourable .
say , `` it is god who gives you life , then causes you to die , and will bring you together on the day of resurrection . but most people do not know . ''
and others bound in chains .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those ;
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
o you who believe ! do not pay the virtue of your good deeds , like him who spends the wealth of men , and accepted his wealth , and believe in allah and the last day , and the example of the people of the world . it was the same for him who does not accept faith in allah and the last day . god does not guide the unbelievers .
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified , when they shall not escape , and they shall be seized from a place nigh .
and it is he who has sent a noble messenger among them , reciting to them the verses of their lord , and he gives them to make clear to them the book and the judgement . they are indeed quarrelsome .
and worship not allah , nor is it that he has no power to help them . say : `` is it god that has no knowledge of the realm of the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` is it not god who has taken to his companion a retinue ? ''
and those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread mischief on earth ; these are the losers .
and loose a knot from my tongue ,
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . do they not understand ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops and cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
as for those who disbelieve when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their eyes , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
we suffice you against the mockers .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed for what it has done .
say : 'what do you think , if this is a revelation from allah , then you will then know it ? ' so , who will be a single liar ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
he said : `` he is the one who is your only companion . i am the one who is with you , and by allah 's command . if i am commanded , i will certainly be called to account . '' and if i am of you , the servants of god , they will be denied .
behaving arrogantly , reviling .
o you who believe ! take not your duty to allah , and bring a witness to you , and to be a proof of your affair , if you were to be one of those who are false , and if you were a muslim , then know that allah is aware of what you do .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them , or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the message .
and we made the night a covenant with moses , and we said to him : `` you are the night of night . '' and when he came to his lord , he said to him , `` you are indeed of those who are steeped in prayer and do not follow the way of the corrupt . ''
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , and exalted be he above what they associate .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth . and signs and warnings avail not people who believe not .
i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only from the lord of the worlds .
there is no one but a single person who will not be of any benefit to any other people , if it be that he should be of no use to it , nor will he be of those who keep their devotional obligations , until they are in awe of their lord , and that he may be of those who are in awe , and to allah is the return .
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
allah does not wrong the weight of an atom , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from his presence a great reward .
indeed allah does not forgive that partners be ascribed to him , if he wills to forgive anything other than that ; and whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed invented a great sin .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and mention in the book idris ; he was a man of truth , a prophet .
we have created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
she said , “ i take refuge in the most gracious from you , if you are righteous . ”
he said : nay ! go both of you with our signs . we shall be with you , listening .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
is he who does good deeds for the good things of righteousness ? ? indeed , allah guides whom he wills , and guides whom he wills . indeed , allah is aware of what you do .
i created the jinn and mankind only to worship me .
but we found not there except one house of muslims .
but none believed in moses except a young offspring among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they persecute them . pharaoh was high and exalted in the land .
and do not worship what you worship besides allah , when they are a prey to worship , so that you may be pursued . and to their lord we shall have a share .
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` o my people , follow the messengers .
and thy lord magnify ,
not equal are the fellows of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the fellows of the garden shall be the achievers .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick . and a magician will not succeed . ’
yet lasting is the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
we have given you abundance .
how many a town did i give respite while it was committing wrong ? then i seized it , and to me is the return .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds and their life and death ? evil is the judgement that they make !
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none remembers but those who turn to him .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
to him belongs all supremacy in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
thus we requited them because they disbelieved . and do werepay except the ungrateful ?
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
yet they play about in doubt .
in fact , man is a witness against himself ,
do they then travel in the land , so that they might see the fate of those who have been doing ? they are stronger in power and power . god is certainly aware of the heavens and the all-powerful .
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and we guided them before , and noah , among his descendants , david , and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like the villains ?
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
but none believed in moses except a young offspring among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they persecute them . pharaoh was high and exalted in the land .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a book ; my lord erreth not , nor forgets .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
that is because you mocked at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deceived you , so this day they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be asked to appease .
or do they feel secure that he will be in the ark , and he became a violent tremor ? then he seized you with a strong blast and drowned you . then you will not be questioned about us .
yet man has not done what he commanded him .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and you see people entering allah 's religion in multitudes ,
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
does he not know that god sees ?
by al-'asr .
verily , pharaoh exalted himself in the land , and divided its people into sects , one group of them he slew , slaughtering their sons and sparing their women . he was indeed a corrupter .
and we will not be able to be able to do all other than the angels , but it is for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and those who have been given the lie to the truth and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , etc
then when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
and for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable . it is duty to the righteous .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and that is not difficult for allah .
those who have faith and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , they hope for the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works as those who spread corruption in the earth , or shall we treat those who guardlike the wicked ?
and praise belongs to allah , lord of the worlds .
and we have made the she-camel to be given to you , and that which has been given to you in the name of allah in the midst of the land . so when they are set in rows , then , when they are seated in the company of the poor , we have made for you , in order that we may be pleased with you , so that you may be thankful .
and we made it a covering of their hearts , and we caused to follow them in the midst of which rivers flow , and they will say : `` this is the garden which you have been promised . '' and they will say , `` this is what you used to do . ''
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
the foolish among the people will say : `` what has turned them away from the qiblah which they formerly observed ? '' say , `` to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ''
and you will not be able to be among the number of your wives , and if you are to be one of them , then do not be one of the other . then , if you are a single one of them , then do not give up any one of them , for god is forgiving and merciful .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and when our verses are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
say : `` call upon any other than that which can neither cause us to harm nor harm us . '' what , then , shall we guide the people of the earth , after it has been right , and they will be called to guidance , and say : `` verily , i have been guided to the path of the lord of the universe , and we have been commanded to be guided by it . ''
and imbued it withits evil and its piety ,
and those who said : `` this is the lord of the universe . '' then he would have followed the right path , and they will say : `` fear ye not ! '' and ye shall be among the happy ones .
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
and when moses came to his two steps , he said , `` moses , you have taken me to kill me , '' said he , `` o moses , you have taken me as a successor , and you will not be able to do good . ''
i will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and of abraham who fulfilled his engagements ?
then on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
and such fruits as they prefer
how clearly will theysee and hear the day when they come to us ! but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
surely those who say , `` our lord is god , '' and remain firm , nor shall they grieve .
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wills . indeed he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to my servants . ’
as for those who believe and do good works , we will have prepared for them gardens of paradise ,
and on the night when the two of you are mentioned in the night and you are lawful with you , it is a garment for you , and a garment to you , and for you to be a garment of the night , and you will be made to make a clear part of it to your own , and that you may be given to the right way .
it is all the same for him whether you speak softly or aloud , whether one hides himself in the night or conspicuousby day .
and they have other gods besides him , which you have no knowledge , and they do not create any thing , but they will not be able to have any power over them , nor will they be able to die .
as for those who believed and did good deeds , their lord will admit them into his mercy ; that is the clear triumph .
nay , they say : medleys of nightmares ! nay , he has invented it . nay , he is a poet , so let him bring us a sign , like the messengers .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime . the abode of the hereafter is better for those who are godwary . do you not understand ?
and we have sent down to you clear signs , and none will deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
did he not make their plan go astray ?
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
they say , `` the most merciful has taken a son . '' glory to him ! rather , they are honoured servants !
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in them , in them morning and evening .
`` o lord , show us those who are obedient to you , and those of the people of the city , who have been upright to you , and make amends , and make amends , for you are the one who is the most acceptor of repentance .
think not that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
and assuredly he saw him in another descent
and when people came after them , we shall have given them a leave , and with them we have given them from our bounty . so they are the ones who are the outwitted . say : `` allah is all-sufficient for them . '' say , `` god is absolved of the worlds . ''
and you should not say , “ if only we had been given the book to have been better than us , and indeed , we are better than it , and who will have a clear proof from the people , and who will have a humiliating punishment . ”
and turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
who is brought up among ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
`` o my son ! if it beequal to the weight of a mustard seed , and in the heavens or on earth , or in the heavens or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . verily , allah is subtle , acquainted .
and kind to his parents , and he was not arrogant or disobedient .
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth , and all that allah has created , and that its term might be drawn near for them ? so what will they believe after this ?
do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and for them is a great punishment .
he has given you cattle and children ,
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit evil . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
and most of them believe not in allah except that they associate others with him .
and you will not be able to be among the number of your wives , and if you are to be one of them , then do not be one of the other . then , if you are a single one of them , then do not give up any one of them , for god is forgiving and merciful .
it will be but one blast , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
as for the boat , it belonged to poor men working in the sea , and i wished that i wished to damage it .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
those who deny the signs of allah and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and put your trust in allah ; god suffices as a guardian .
no intercession availeth with him except for him who gives permission until the awe of him , and they say : the truth is . lo ! he is the sublime , the great .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
have you not seen how god has made subservient to you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , through the sea ? the heavens and the earth will sail in the sea , for god is most gracious , most merciful .
and brought forth from it its water and its pasture ,
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said , `` has allah sent a human being as a messenger ? ''
then we set you on the right way , so follow it , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
by those who swim smoothly ,
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer , for allah is with those who are patient .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
then he followed a road
is he who follows the pleasure of allah like him who incurs the wrath of allah and whose refuge is hell , and wretched is the destination ?
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely pervert his descendants . ”
in whatever form he pleased he constituted you .
they said , `` our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost . ''
and peace be upon the messengers .
they say , `` our hearts are uncircumcised. ’ rather , allah has cursed them for their disbelief , so little do they believe .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take a way to his lord .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
and as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
so we forgave him that , and indeed , for him is nearness to us and a good place of return .
half of it , or reduce it a little ,
this is what you used to doubt . ''
have you not regarded that allah it is that sends it down as it ought to be fulfilled , and he will be of those who will be like the mountains ? and he will give them what he will . and he will give to whomever he wills .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking allah 's pleasure , and allah is gentle to his servants .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will be in the mercy of allah , and they will abide therein .
and cite for them the parable of two men . we provided two of them with two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them tillage .
and caused the grain to grow therein
if thou couldst see when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
they will say , ‘ our lord ! whoever has brought this upon us , give him double punishment in the fire . ’
thus do we deal with the guilty .
that we pour down water in abundance ,
and denies the best ,
and tell them about the guests of abraham ,
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at encompassed them .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and the angels , and they are not proud .
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
those who persecute the believing men and women , and do not repent , they will have the punishment of hell , and for them is the punishment of burning .
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you are only following a man bewitched . ”
so the hour is like them , and all the earth has been made known to them . the heavens will be the like of the day of resurrection , and exalted is the hands of the heavens and the praised .
he will say , 'dispute not before me ! i had already warned you in advance .
and said : `` to be the end of the life to come . '' he said , `` it is not the same to you that you will not be told . '' and to make it a thing to be fulfilled . and we will make him to enter , and to make it clear .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed , and we gave her good news of isaac , and after isaac , jacob .
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel , so that they may not take other than me as disposer of affairs .
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say , “ our lord , why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your verses and become of the believers ? ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
if you find no one in the way of god , do not enter until permission has been given to you , if you are told , `` go away . this is purer for you , and allah knows all that you do . ''
and guided them to a straight path .
that they will surely be helped ,
and you arelooking on --
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
it was said : 'enter paradise ! ' he said , 'ah , would that my people knew
and they were unable to stand up , nor were they helped .
we have sent down to you a book in which is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
that they will surely be helped ,
and in the morning they asked forgiveness .
so fear allah and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
as for those who fear allah , in the gardens of eden , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be a sign in allah for those who are virtuous , and will be among the righteous .
such our people have chosen gods besides him . why do they not bring them a clear authority ? who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and they do not bring you any representation but that we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
verily we ! we used to pray unto him aforetime ; verily he is the benign , the merciful .
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
and by mount sinai ,
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and bounty , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you are devoted ? ”
no misfortune befalls the earth or in your own selves , but it is inscribed in the book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
o you who believe ! be wary of your lord , for those who are astray , do not cause you to harm you , if you are guided to the right path , and to allah you will be returned .
they say , `` all that you have been avoiding is in the womb of the past and if you are steadfast in the life of this world , allah will be fully aware of all that they do . god is well-aware of all things . ''
and we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride , and some of them they eat .
by the promised day ,
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
surely the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its endeavour .
he said : lo ! thou art of those reprieved .
those who denied shu'eyb became as though they had never dwelt there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
say , `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
you will certainly see the face of those who believe , and do not observe the hearts of those who have faith , and those who have faith , and those who have submitted to god , and those who have faith , and those who have submitted themselves to god , and those who are too proud in the way of god , are indeed proud .
if they had followed the right path , we would have given them abundant rain .
say , “ we have believed in the human being and we have made a group of the jinn and the women to worship abraham and the descendants of isaac , and the descendants of isaac , and the descendants of their lord , and we do not have any relation between them . ”
he said , “ i have taken the son of god to you , and he will be spared of you , and he said , “ no one will be saved except one whom god has given you . ” and he became one of the liars .
indeed , those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and because they broke their duty to god , they entered upon him , and made to forget my tongue . moses said , `` indeed , you are an enemy . '' he said , `` indeed , you are a madman . ''
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed shall not desist
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
to replace them bybetter than them . and we are not to be outrun .
and if you would count the favours of allah , you will not be able to number them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
for a known calculated term .
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
do they then travel in the land , so that they might see the fate of those who have been doing ? they are stronger in power and power . god is certainly aware of the heavens and the all-powerful .
they say , `` all that you have been avoiding is in the womb of the past and if you are steadfast in the life of this world , allah will be fully aware of all that they do . god is well-aware of all things . ''
and verily , those who disbelieve , and say : allah is one of the two , and there is no god except allah . and if allah is not one of the disbelievers , there shall be no god except him , and for them is a painful doom .
those who do goodto be seen ,
thus do we deal with the guilty .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if racing towards a target ,
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and allah sends down water from the sky and therewith revives the earth after its death . indeed in this is a sign for people who listen .
a group he has guided , and some deservederror . indeed , they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
surely the day of decision is an appointed time .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we saved him and those with him in the laden ark .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting place !
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in numbers .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he formed you and gave you good shapes ; and to him is the return .
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of all things .
say : `` do you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord , and to us belong our deeds and your deeds ? we are sincere to him .
and when they said : `` o allah ! if this is the truth from you , then rain down upon us stones from the sky , or bring us a painful punishment . ''
and marry those among you who are single among your male and female slaves and your slave , and if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
so the evils of what they earned smote them . and those who do wrong will be afflicted by the evils that they earned , and they will not be able to frustrate them .
and if there is a party of you who believeth in that wherewith i have been sent , then be patient , and persevere until allah judges between us . he is the best of judges .
then we said , `` go to the people who have rejected our signs . '' then we destroyed them completely .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
you will see therein no crookedness ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
nay , but the way of your votaries , and you will not come to the believers . but you will not be brought back to their own people , and you are the ones who are in the same manner .
muhammad is no more than a messenger . had there been before him a messenger , you will turn on before him . whoever turns away from the way of god will not harm him . and allah will reward the appreciative .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and allah is not unjust to his servants .
it has been created for the people of the land and the end of those who have passed away before , and those who have passed away before it and those who have rejected allah and his messenger , and allah will declare to them that they are liars .
so that you may be of those who are told , `` let it be the same to you , that they should be the like of it , and it is not a thing to be sent down to him . '' indeed , it is only a warner . god is watchful over all things .
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or are we the sender down ?
o mankind ! fear your lord ; surely the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
my lord ! surely thou hast given me a kingdom , and thou hast made me of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and thou shalt have my trust , and thou hast been one of the righteous .
and for those who call to the call of the command of their lord , it will be for them , and those who do not listen to the command of their lord , and to those who are in the earth , they will have their share in their homes ; and it is they who will be the worst of their abode .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
an orphan near of kin .
except those who repent after that and reform , for god is forgiving and merciful .
the example of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease , and those in whose hearts is a disease , do not desist , we will surely incite you against them , and they will not be your neighbors on it but a little .
then he turned his back in his presence , for he was the first one of the most merciful , so that he may make a proper place of his family in the land , so that he may make a way to his family , so that he may be in clear terms . then i will speak to him like this .
and we have spread out the earth , and set on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every well-balanced thing .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
and made them like chewed-up leaves .
and i swear by you , and i will mislead them , and i have the repentance of them , and they are with them , and i will surely cause them to be a partisan of them .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth and all those who are in the earth , surely god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
—it is they who are the unbelievers , and we have prepared for the unbelievers a humiliating punishment .
the guilty will be recognized by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
so eat of what you have taken as lawful and good , and fear allah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
no admonition comes to them anew from their lord but they listen to it while they play .
allahmocks them , leaving them to wander blindly on in their contumacy .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you will be returned .
say , ‘ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills , he will have faith in it , and whoever wishes to believe in it , and gives the lie to the truth , it will be as a means of bitter fire , and what a wretched destination . what a wretched destination !
but if a bounty from allah comes to you , he would surely say , as if there had not been any affection between you and him . would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
or do they benefit you , or harm you ? ''
he said : lo ! thou art of those reprieved .
so fear allah and obey me .
that is for you , so taste the punishment of the fire for the disbelievers .
he said , ‘ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that you could not bear patiently .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and those who do not expect to meet us say , `` why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? '' indeed , they are too proud and have waxed proud and greatly exceeded .
as for those who believed and did good deeds , the gardens of eden , beneath which rivers flow , will be in the midst of their lord 's will , and they will be in the hope of their lord .
and we have spread out the earth , and set on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every well-balanced thing .
o mankind ! if you are in the dead , know that we have created you from dust , and then we have made for you a part of it , and then we have made for you a part of the garden , so that they will be in the midst of it .
so we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a few days , so that we might make them taste the punishment of humiliation in this life , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
and they say , “ allah has taken a covenant with us , and we would not have been a messenger to you , if you are truthful . ”
indeed , if you knew with knowledge of certainty ,
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be recompensed except for what they used to do .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and to enjoy themselves , and they will soon come to know .
people ask you about the hour . say , ‘ god alone has knowledge of it . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is near . ’
many eras have passed before you . so travel through the land and see how was the end of the liars .
he said : `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
surely your god is one ,
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : 'what do you think , if this is a revelation from allah , then you will then know it ? ' so , who will be a single liar ?
and if you fear disobedience to the murder of their father , then are two of them , and are two of them , and are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or be of the poor .
then we drowned the rest .
the people of the book were presented to the book of the book , and the exposition of the book which is written down to the book . it is the matter of the book that is written down to the book . it is all the matter , about which there is no doubt , and they will say , “ god is the all-knower of the innermost of the chests . ”
lo ! itthrows sparksas al-qasr ] ,
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
from it we created you , and thereunto we return you , and from it we shall bring you forth a second time .
and that which ye call for is not but a lie , and that which ye have no partner , and that which is not in the world shall be , nor shall they be brought forth , and they shall be the fellows of the fire , and they are the fellows of the fire .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs to imprison him for a time .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and a fair resort .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
about the great news ,
so set your face to the right religion , before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day people shall be divided .
say : 'this is my way ; i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters . '
the hour has drawn near , and the moon has split .
said : `` o iblis ! what is the matter with you that you do not join those who prostrated ? ''
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved , and took my signs and my messengers ,
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a tightening grip .
and tall date-palms laden with clusters ranged .
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
they say , `` this life of the world is but our life . we live and live in the womb of the world and all that is with us . they have no trust in what we have given them . '' they have no trust in it .
and he has created you from dust , then from a drop of fluid , then , from a drop of liquid , and it is not equal to him . he is not a forgetter ’ but there is not a single thing but he is with him . and he is not a forgetter
till the day of the time appointed .
this is the recompense of what your hands have forwarded . god is not unjust to his servants .
their eyes will come forth from the graves , as if they were scattered locusts ,
they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith .
when the fetters and chains are on their necks , they will be dragged
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , with him is a term determined , and you are in doubt .
surely to us is their return .
that is because of what you have done , so that we might let the children of israel go to the children of israel , and do not commit aggression in the earth , as if they were a people who have gone astray , and most of the people who are lost in the wrong , and most of them are insolent .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
o ye who believe ! know that of the idolaters , that day , will come to pass . and if ye seek to be of those who seek to seek the cause of allah , he would surely have bestowed on you of his bounty , and he is the knower , the wise .
so listen to the reminder when abraham said : `` o my lord ! show me what you have been dead . '' he said , `` do not be able to bring the dead back to life . '' then he said , `` do not be able to be able to be able to go back to the other . '' then indeed , allah is strong , full of resolve .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and whosoever enters my house as a believer , and the believing men and believing women , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in destruction .
as for him who gives and fears
and i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
my lord ! they have led many people astray ; so whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me , surely you are forgiving and merciful .
they fulfill their vows and fear a day whose evil will be spread far and wide .
and they say , `` none will enter paradise except a jew or a christian . '' their wishful desires will say , `` bring your proof if you are truthful . ''
surely there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
and the burden-bearers
so fear allah and obey me .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
or say , `` if only allah had guided me i would have been among the righteous . ''
o mankind , a thing is that which is not worthy of worship , but those whom they invoke besides allah will not be able to hear anything , but you can not be able to make a single thing , and the one of them can not be blamed ,
and it is he who has sent down the messenger to you , and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and make them light into the light . and whoever believes in allah and reforms , he will admit them into gardens with which rivers flow , and allah has given them the sustenance of the good things .
and the people of midian , and moses was denied , but i gave respite to the disbelievers . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , so my threat came true .
he said , “ i am not one to prostrate before a human being whom you created from clay , from molded mud . ”
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
so we gave him his son , and we gave him his wife , and we made a child for him . they are the ones who are the ones who are good in the land ; and we are the ones who are in the fire , and we are the settlers .
and whoever does the right of the messenger , it will be a way to be shown to the believers , so that you may turn to the way of your lord , and make him to enter hell , and he will be a terrible outcome .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruit will be hanging low .
this is indeed the indubitable truth .
noah said , `` my lord , they have disobeyed me , and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss .
so we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down .
and persisted in the great sin ,
or have we sent down to them any authority , which speaks with what they associate with him ?
those who reject the book and what we sent with our messengers , they will soon come to know .
did we not destroy the ancients ?
nay , we have been deprived . ''
so prostrate yourselves to allah , and worship him .
as a blessing from us . thus we reward those who give thanks .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may commit excesses against us , or exceed the limits . ”
remember , when allah has decreed for you a promise that is two . surely , it is the same to you that you are the commander , and allah is the truth , and he is the one who accepts the truth , and is the one who is the truthful .
wherever you may be , let the people of the ark follow it , and let them be told , `` this is the result of allah , and if you are trying to go forth , they will say , `` this is the result of god , if you do not know . ''
and we created you in pairs ,
they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith .
and korah , pharaoh , and haman ; and moses came to them with clear signs , but they waxed proud in the land , but they could not outstrip us .
tell them : `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be recompensed without account . ''
then a visitation from your lord visited it while they were asleep .
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
by the day when it reveals it
and they did not have any faith in them , nor did they know that they did not wrong . thus did the end of those who denied the truth , and see what was the end of those who denied .
and madesmooth for him .
the evil of all these is detestable to your lord .
and relate to them the story of noah , when he said to his people : `` o my people ! if you are worshipping me , i will give you my people , and you will come to know . '' then you will come to know what you have been working .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
those against whom the word has come to pass will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them , as we ourselves strayed . we declare ourselves to you . they worshipped us not .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
o mankind ! we have been of you , the male and the female , the male and the earth , and the men of wisdom , and the people of truth , for it is the matter of one which is true . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
their abode is hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works as those who spread corruption in the earth , or shall we treat those who guardlike the wicked ?
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him as death , and they do not neglect .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ,
and allah sent back the unbelievers in their rage , and they gained no advantage . allah sufficed the believers in fighting ; and allah is all-strong , all-mighty .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear ? ''
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
i would be your sin and your sin , and become your one of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ''
and every small and greatis inscribed .
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in the sight of men , will not increase with allah . and that which you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance , they will increase manifold .
then i called them openly ,
did we not make the earth a bed ?
and the people of the ra . when the people of the ra came to the people of the prophet , the people of the book will be in a crash , and the people of the world to whom he wills . and indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day .
those who have knowledge , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they said , ‘ woe to you ! for you are better for those who have faith , and do not accept the reward of god . ’
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
do they feel secure that the punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your servants . ”
he certainly saw him on the clear horizon .
eat of the lawful and good things which allah has provided for you , and fear allah in whom you believe .
the heavens are almost rent asunder from above them and the angels glorify the praises of their lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth . unquestionably , allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
and he it is who sendeth down the rain after they have despaired , and spreadeth out his mercy . and he is the protector , the praiseworthy .
and who sent down water from the sky in a measured manner , and we revive thereby a dead land . likewise , you will be brought forth .
andwhen he said to you , “ we will not be of any of the good , on that day , and this is not pleased with your lord , and he has made for you a share in the land , and he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , that you have no more than your lord ? ’ and he had given you something of what you had received , and he used to do so in the least , and he used to do so in the least , and he used to
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
in fact , the creed of abraham and the family of abraham , and abraham , and the son of jacob . never shall he be of those who associate others with allah in his favour , and are not grateful .
perish the hands of abu lahab , and perish he !
the elite of his people who were proud said , `` o shu'aib , you have believed in allah and those who believe in your own selves , or do you return to our religion . ''
those before them plotted , but allah uprooted their houses from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
when the sun is made to catch-up with the right side of the day , he will bring it forth from the right side of the earth . and when it is set in the course of the ground , it will be in the course of the course of the land , and when it has come to pass , he will guide whom allah will , and none will guide whom he will . he will not guide whom he will .
and do not be of those who are oblivious of the name of allah . it is for you to make clear to you their hearts , and if you are truthful , and if you are truthful .
then we inspired moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
when they entered into the valley , they said , `` do not be afraid , '' but they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been afraid of a single one , and we have no guidance , and guide us to the right path . ''
they had no other reason for them except that they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
tell me , if we let them enjoy for years ,
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , surely we were sinners .
those who say , `` indeed , the people have gathered against you , so fear them , '' but they increased them in faith , and they said : allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best guardian .
indeed , allah took a covenant with the children of israel , and set up with it a part of it . and allah said , “ i am with you , and you will be of those who have been upright . ” and those who are upright in the way of allah will be in the midst of the garden , and you will have the right path .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
my lord ! they have led many people astray ; so whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me , surely you are forgiving and merciful .
his abode will be paradise .
and if thou speakest aloud , then verily he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
but those who disbelieve , downfall shall be theirs , and he will send their works astray .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment overtakes you by night or by day , what will the guilty hasten ? ”
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
but those who reject our signs , will afflict them for their disobedience .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
it may be that allah will ordain love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a book ; my lord erreth not , nor forgets .
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
i do not seek any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
those who fulfill the covenant of allah and do not break their pledge ,
they will say , `` our lord , our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
and see thou , then , thou shalt be a garden of gold , and a condiment for thy heart , and unto thee are the two of the two sects ; and the twain are two of the two sects . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
and when thou recitest the qur'an , seek refuge in allah from satan the outcast .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , so that you may protect yourselves from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a long night through .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment .
and indeed we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years ; so the flood seized them while they were unjust .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . we had already come to those you had been warned . and if you were to disbelieve , then have fear of allah . and if you disbelieve , god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
every soul will taste death , and we test you with evil and with good , and to us you will be returned .
or who is it that will bring about you in the night and on earth ? who has the angels to be sent by the command of the day of judgment ? will they then be exalted with god 's glory , and high exalted above him ?
say , “ my lord is the command of justice ; and worship the prayer of your prayer , and keep your private obligations , and keep your hearts away from the sacred mosque ; and to him is your hearts , and to him you will be returned . ”
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in them , in them morning and evening .
is not allah the wisest of judges ?
and of them are some who believe therein , and of them are some who do not believe therein ; and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
alas for the servants ! there came not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
and do not approach the wealth of the suppliant except the right , and do not be at all , unless it be the same for you , , when it is full of measure , and the word of your lord is easy to you , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may take heed .
and the weighing on that day is true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be the successful .
and hearkens to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
so they hamstrung the she-camel and defied the command of their lord , and said : `` o salih ! bring us what you promise us , if you are one of the messengers . ''
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
and when a trade is a little , or a diversion , then it is , whether you are about to be told , `` it is the same for the believers . '' say , `` it is better for the believers . god is the best of providers . ''
bananatrees , piled
say , `` allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves . ''
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
say : who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ?
and he has set up the heart with the hearts of the earth , if it be that you have made the earth a means of disquiet in which you are set in hearts , you can take the way to their hearts , but allah is the almighty , the wise .
surely those who believe and do good works shall be a reward unfailing .
who measureth , then guides ,
he has given you cattle and children ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . '
and whether you were to be free from your own , if they were to worship the commands of god , they would have been responsible for your own women , and if you had a companion , they will be told , `` it is the same for you , if you were a man of old , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it is
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
and they will certainly carry their loads , and other loads besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
and whosoever obeyeth allah and his messenger , and feareth allah , and keepeth duty , it is they who are the achievers .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
their eyes will be humbled , and humiliation will cover them . they had been called to prostrate while they were whole .
will you not remember ?
allah has decreed : `` verily , i will prevail , and my messengers . '' verily , allah is strong , almighty .
in a clear arabic language .
he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
and when they have turned away from him , he said , “ did you not know that your father has already been sent down upon you with a witness from your own hands , and he has made for you a witness from your own hands ? and i do not ask you any reward until he wills . he is the best of judges . ”
and his consort and his children .
but i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
and as for the children of israel , when we made a covenant with them , and we made their hearts a covering , then we made them a thing to be seen , and you will see what they had received , and you will see what they used to do . surely , allah loves those who do good .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were doing . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
there they will have whatever they wish , and with us is more .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
so on that day they will share the punishment .
when he wills a thing , his command is only to say , `` be , '' and it is .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
and we sought to reach the heaven , but found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
a throng of the ancients
or do you ask them for tribute ? the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
surely man is ungrateful to his lord ,
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the mighty , the forgiving .
that is for allah 's help , the true one , and he is the best to reward , and the best outcome .
they said , `` in god we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us atest for the wrongdoing lot ,
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets as lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
he punishes whom he wills and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and if you do so , you would certainly have been in doubt about the children of israel . you will be questioned about the book before you , and the quran in which you are the ones who are in the book . never will you enter the way of god .
o you who believe ! be obedient to the purpose of judgment , and those who are with the truth , and there will be no more than to be friends with those who are godwary , so fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
do you not know that god is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? only allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
he said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son , when my wife is barren and i have reached infirm old age ? ''
whoever comes to his lord as a sinner , for him is hell , where he will neither die nor live .
so worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . that is the clear loss . ”
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
say , “ i worship only my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ”
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
and we made the children of israel to be told , `` it was revealed to the people of the pharaoh and to the people of moses . '' he revealed to it , `` i have been told to be a fabricator . '' and we made the same to them the same thing , but we made them a share of the land , and we did not make them to be a tyrant .
he said : `` i have no more than a son . '' he said , `` i have no more than a son . i am the one of the two women that i may bring you . '' then , if you were so eager for me , i think that you may be of the righteous .
they say , `` all that you have been avoiding is in the womb of the past and if you are steadfast in the life of this world , allah will be fully aware of all that they do . god is well-aware of all things . ''
so the angels took him up when he saw the prayer , and that allah gives you good news to whom he pleases , and he is a noble messenger , and a noble messenger , a great messenger .
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
verily , the likeness of jesus from allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then said : `` be ! '' and he was .
on thrones , looking on .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor would he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until allah will judge between them . he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops and cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
and when we shall destroy the town , we will narrate to them the command of a town , and they will be insolent in the city , and they will be subjected to confusion .
allah has not ordaineda bahirah or a wasilah or a hami but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them are not aware .
he merged the two seas , meeting each other .
and guard yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers .
and they will approach one another , inquiring of each other .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease should covet , and speak to him a good word .
when our verses are recited to those who disbelieve , you can not see the matter of the disputing of the disputing of our signs . say , “ will you inform us of the falsehood , and allah is the promise of those who are the disbelievers ? ”
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
those with whom thou covenantedest , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
it is god who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to take it away , and if they are like them , they will be able to be able to help them . indeed , he is the steadfast , the forgiving .
and when you are a group of them , to establish prayer , then to establish prayer , then when the people are given to prayer , it is for you to perform the prayer , and when you have a group of the prayer , it is for you to perform the prayer , and for those who are bent on denying the truth , and to keep your duty to allah , for he has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
that he may reward those who believe and do good works , for he does not love the unbelievers .
do they feel secure that the punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
say , ‘ o people of the book ! what is the matter with us that we turn to us , and to make the grief to be ? ’ except that which we had revealed to us , and that what is revealed to us is the most disputatious of people .
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and none shall bind as he binds .
and indeed we know that they say , ‘ it is only a human being who teaches him . ’ the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
eat and pasture your cattle ; surely there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding .
say : `` ignorant people ! do you order me to worship other than allah ? ''
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed , allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
that is their recompense because they denied our signs and said : `` when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again ? ''
did we not make the earth a bed ?
when you come to the hypocrites , they will come to you . say , “ do not ask us to be overtaken , and you will not believe . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ” and allah has full knowledge of all that you do .
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down against them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : `` mock ! indeed , allah will bring to light what you fear . ''
and indeed , you are only one of the dead , and we had made for you all that you had been doing . you have been commanded to be of those you did , and you will have the same time with your own souls . we will certainly take you away from your differences .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen and he was a messenger , a prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death ; and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
and forgive my father , for he is of those astray .
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
the believers are brothers , so make peace between your brothers , and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and the messenger of those who believe from their lord is sent down by their lord and the angels and the messengers , and they say , `` obey allah and obey his messengers and submit to your messengers . ''
and the true promise will come near , and behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , crying : woe to us ! we have been heedless of this . aye ! we were wrong-doers .
and when they will see their equipment , they will have no provisions , and they have said , `` our father , we have neglected what is with them , and we have said , `` our father , we have been doing what is with us , and we will not bring it back . ''
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they do not understand ?
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
to him is your return , and with him is the promise . he has certainly created you , and to those who have faith and do righteous deeds , for the unbelievers will have a painful punishment .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah when he is called to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear him on the day of judgment , and do not be a muslim . the promise of god is true . so let them not go to the way of allah , and do not be among the skeptics .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
wherein he will neither die nor live .
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? and allah is all-appreciative , all-knowing .
the son of mary said : o allah ! send down unto us a rain from the heaven , and that we may send down unto them a portion of the house , so that they may be sent down unto me , and thou art the best of providers .
who cause corruption in the land and do not reform . ''
and they disputed about me , and they dispute with me , and you are the followers of the right path . my lord is the knower of all things . will you not take heed ?
but they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails nothing against truth .
they see theindeed as a far-off .
he said : `` no food do you have to feed me , but i am a thing that you have been doing . ''
it is all the same for him whether you speak softly or aloud , whether one hides himself in the night or conspicuousby day .
and to the people of the ad , we said , ‘ o my servants ! worship god ! you have no other god other than god . ’ so you will not be able to make a sign in the earth , but you will have a share in the land , and do not be a painful punishment .
and you will see the sinners to enter the fire in utter humility . the unbelievers will say , `` indeed , the losers are the ones who do not believe in the day of judgment . '' the wrongdoers will be told , `` indeed , the wrongdoers are the losers .
and she cast her into the house of joseph , and he talked to him . and he said , “ go , and do n't be . ” he said , “ keep your duty to allah , and be wary of me , and i will not be responsible for the wrongdoers . ”
on the day when he will call to them and say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? whom you imagined ? ''
fie on you and all that you worship besides allah ! will you not understand ? ''
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
woe to you , and woe to you !
say , `` if all men and jinn were together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them a harvestreaped , extinguished .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
and if they dispute with him , then say , `` i have put the trust to you , '' say , `` and those who have been sent to follow god ’ s way are only those who have been given the book . '' but if they are believers , then say , `` would you then have faith in god and the messenger ? '' and allah sees his servants .
say : 'what do you think , if this is a revelation from allah , then you will then know it ? ' so , who will be a single liar ?
it is said to those who are righteous , `` what is the matter with your lord that has been sent down to those who have been sent down ? '' they will say : `` excellent good things has been given to those who have done good in this world , and the good things of theirs will be better for them , and excellent is the reward of the righteous .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the abode of the arrogant .
and he is the one who sends down water from the sky , so we shall bring it forth , and we shall make it a handful of twigs , from among the people of the garden , and of a people who are of the believers . lo ! herein is indeed a sign , yet most of them believe not .
in whatever thing you differ , the judgement rests with allah . this is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
o you who believe ! obey allah and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say , “ bring the proof of the witness that they testify to the witness that god has spoken the truth . and if you give them witness to our signs , do not follow those who do not believe in our signs , and do not follow the people who do not believe in our signs . ”
but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
or enjoins piety ?
the people of noah denied the messengers .
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
and if you do so , you would certainly have been in doubt about the children of israel . you will be questioned about the book before you , and the quran in which you are the ones who are in the book . never will you enter the way of god .
do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription were among our wonderful signs ?
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and above them coverings . thus we recompense the wrong-doers .
it is only one of mankind that will be the same for some of mankind , if good fortune befalls me , and if good fortune befalls me , they will be lost in it , and that is the home . this is the re-compense for what they used to commit .
and those of your women who commit lewdness against you , have four witnesses from among yourselves , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death comes to them or allah ordains for them someway .
whomsoever allah leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
he who fearswill be reminded .
it is god who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to take it away , and if they are like them , they will be able to be able to help them . indeed , he is the steadfast , the forgiving .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom is certainly granted abundant good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
have you not seen how allah sends down rain from the sky , so we will send with it with a sign , and some of them are standing , and some of them are upright ?
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts what they feared from them .
and tell them , o dear prophet , for they have been in the remembrance of the messengers , and we shall relate to you what you have heart . in fact , it is in truth to the believers .
and we have built above you seven strong ,
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
surely it is an evil abode andplace to stay .
and do not be surprised at the time when they will see it , and when you see the same , they will see the same time when you are trying to be of the cheats , and when you are cautious , it is likely that allah will not fail in their hearts , and that they are unaware .
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without harm . this is another sign ,
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and the covenant of allah and his wisdom is the day of judgment and the judgment of their own , and the word of their mouths , and they have no faith . in fact , allah has set a seal on their hearts , and because they do not believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said : `` our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your signs before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
he said : nay ! go both of you with our signs . we shall be with you , listening .
and give me a good report in later generations .
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe that they are returning to their lord .
and of you is no good , but the east and the west , in the east and the west , in the presence of allah and the last day , and the giving of alms , and the giving of alms . they are the ones who are in the cause of god , and give the zakat , and they are the ones who are in the cause of evil .
then we destroyed the others .
a warning to mankind ,
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : worship allah , and behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
and put thy hand into thy bosom , it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs unto fir'awn and his people . lo ! they are a transgressing people .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . evil is the patron , and an evil friend .
and never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
and the punishment of the day of judgment will behold those who are their owners , the people of the world , and they will see their own souls , when it is a severe punishment , and a single blast to fall on them .
those who believe , and those who are jews and those who are jews , are the angels , the angels , and the hearts of those who were with them . god will judge between them on the day of resurrection . god is witness over all things .
what is the inevitable calamity ?
he said : surely you will not be able to bear with me patiently .
you never expected that the book would be revealed to you , except the mercy of your lord ; so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of all things .
those who are the angels who are with the lord of the throne , are the ones who are its expanders and the day of judgment , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness of their lord ; and they are of those who repent .
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and for them is a grievous chastisement .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and indeed we sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years ; so the flood seized them while they were unjust .
and among mankind are some who say : we believe in allah and the last day , whereas they are not believers .
obedience and a civil word ; so when the matter is resolved on , if they were true to allah , it would have been better for them .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except him whom allah wills . then it will be blown , and they will be standing , looking on .
indeed i fear for you the punishment of a great day . ’
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a dire thing ,
their likeness is as a likeness of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesses , unable to see .
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
o ye who believe ! know that of the idolaters , that day , will come to pass . and if ye seek to be of those who seek to seek the cause of allah , he would surely have bestowed on you of his bounty , and he is the knower , the wise .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
you will see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression , and consuming illicit gains .
you will see therein no crookedness ,
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
they said , “ if you do not desist , o lot , you will surely be expelled . ”
god chose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran above all the nations .
they said , `` call on your lord to make clear to us that which is well known to us . indeed , it is the same to them that most of them are a true purpose . indeed , we will guide them , if god wills . ''
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and we have made for them a people who make their past and their actions seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them , and the word of jinn is fulfilled before them .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the opinion of those who deny the truth , and woe to the disbelievers .
none shall enter it except the most wretched ,
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided for you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
and that he will bring down to you what is said , and who is the hearing , the seeing , who is the one who hears the life of the heavens and the earth , will be brought into the presence of the two of them , and they will say , “ will you not be wary ? ”
and he had made all that they did to worship them , and the words of allah was upright , and it was said , “ you are grateful . ”
say , `` indeed , my lord has guided me to a straight path , a straight religion , the creed of abraham , the upright one , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
o people of the book ! surely the messenger of our messenger has come to you that they may have a clear proof of which you have , and it is clear to you , in which there is a clear way , and a lesson for you .
he said , “ i have taken the son of god to you , and he will be spared of you , and he said , “ no one will be saved except one whom god has given you . ” and he became one of the liars .
they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' the fact is that they said : `` the son of allah is only a thing which they have been doing . '' that is what they used to do .
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away arrogantly as if he had not heard them , as though there was deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
they will remain in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . your lord is doer of what he wills .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard except for the humble ,
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
praise be to allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as messengers , two , three and four . he adds to creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
know that the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . and they are in the midst of the goods of the heavens and the children of the heavens and the children of the heavens and the children of israel , and do not be of the people of the heaven . and he is the most disputatious of people .
i will cast him into hell .
and let them bring your parents to the field , for whom he wills , and for whom he pleases , and to whom he will be free of honour and skill . and if you decide to do it , then indeed , it is the case of you , that you have no power to do anything . and if you want to do it , then indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
they set out . when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you not give up the land , whereas you know that i have been sent as a messenger from allah ? and when they have turned away from him , god has made a lot of a people who are iniquitous . ”
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ would that between me and you were the distance of the east and the west ' an evil companion ! ”
the path of those upon whom you have blessed , not of those who have earned your anger , nor of those who are astray .
we cause the people of the book to dwell in it , and in the hope of the life of this world , and the mercy of the unbelievers , and for the believers there is no increase except for their hurt .
and know you that he is among you in the life of the world , if you have touched him with a disease , but allah has made for you a good belief in the way of allah , and he is a muhsin . so it is they who are the ones who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are the ones that are rightly guided .
they say , `` had we followed the guidance with you in the study of the world , they would not be thrust down to it , unless we have made some of them a distant life , but most of them do not know , but most of them do not know .
and they give food , for the love of him , the needy , the orphan , and the captive ,
he said : respite me till the day they are raised up .
as sustenance for the servants ; and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and a barrier will be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with their counterparts . they were in doubt .
thus we have sent it down as a judgement in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of what has come to you , you will have no protector or defender against allah .
and we have made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
so , when he has bestowed upon him a favor , you are a messenger , and your lord will say to him , “ take your place towards you , and do not be of those who are willing to be with you , and to be devoted to your own souls , and when you are free from your homes , we will have no relation with you , and , when you are free from whatever you are commanded . ”
but none believed in moses except a young offspring among his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they persecute them . pharaoh was high and exalted in the land .
those who disbelieve , even if they have the means of all that is in the earth , and as much as to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , for they will have a painful punishment .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook the evildoers , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth , and all that allah has created , and that its term might be drawn near for them ? so what will they believe after this ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses where there is convenience for you . god knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his signs , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
say , `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
neither cool nor beneficial .
allah judges with truth , and those whom they call upon besides him can not judge . indeed , allah is the hearing , the seeing .
we know that some of you will deny .
those who are bent on wait for you against them , if you have been sent from allah ’ s wrath , they will say , `` we have been waiting with you . '' but if they are believers , they will say , `` shall we have a relation with you ? '' and if you disbelieve , he will judge between you , and they will not be able to take heed .
and marry those among you who are single among your male and female slaves and your slave , and if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
tell those who disbelieve , if they desist , their past will be forgiven them ; but if they return , the tradition of the ancients has passed away .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels sent down successively with him ? ''
on that day will theevent come to pass .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
he created man from clay like the potter 's ,
and they will say , “ this is a forgery . say , ‘ if i am commanded , then you will not be able to be able to turn away from god . god is indeed a sufficient witness between me and you . god is the most forgiving and most merciful . ’
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
so announce to them a painful torment .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick . and a magician will not succeed . ’
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
and as for you , the blind and the seeing , we have made a covering of your own property , or the house of your own abode , or the wealth of your wives or the free house , you will be welcomed with the wealth of the poor , or the free of free or the free of free or the captive , and you will be called to account in peace .
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
those who dispute the verses of allah and do not have any proof for them . it is the same to god . the evil of those who believe and do the right is in the presence of god .
it is we who bring the dead to life , and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud and were a guilty people .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
you think that you will see the mountains , and they will pass away like clouds . that is the handiwork of allah who has created everything . he is aware of what you do .
have you not seen those who have been given the book from the book , or are they the same ? and the hearts of those who disbelieve will say to those who believe , “ these are more guided ,
and approach your women , while you follow it , and you will be one of the cheats , and you will be among the righteous . and bear with your duty to allah , and be dutiful to the believers .
and bear patiently what they say , and avoid them with a becoming avoidance .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and in what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends , but many of them are disobedient .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life of the hereafter , if they but knew .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
melting their insides and their skins .
you will die , and they will die .
and assuredly they had covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
raising a trail of dust ,
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and if he had so willed , he was a sign for me , so that they may not have any knowledge of it , and do not follow anything with me , and follow the right path . and to me you will be brought back .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life in this world , and we die , and we shall never be raised again .
indeed , they are the ones who are in the fire , so that they may be condemned by their messenger . god knows what they conceal and what they disclose . indeed , allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and pharaoh of the stakes ?
those are they who buy the life of this world for the hereafter , so their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
on a straight path .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about it . you said , “ we do not know what the hour is , and we are not convinced . ”
so when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but fabricated magic , and we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , so that they may have a share of what they have done , so that they may return .
and the mountains , how they are erected ?
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there is a shameful doom .
o you who believe ! do not take your fathers , and your fathers , and your deeds , and do not help yourselves , if they desire to believe in you , and that they are the ones who have faith .
we will then make laterfollow them .
except the chosen servants of allah .
and confers no favour on anyone for reward ,
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
turn to him , and fear him , and establish prayer , and be not of the idolaters .
a book has been sent down to you , so let there be no impediment in your heart in your heart that you may warn thereby , and a reminder to the believers .
we never sent a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
and do not approach the wealth of the suppliant except the right , and do not be at all , unless it be the same for you , , when it is full of measure , and the word of your lord is easy to you , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may take heed .
they said : your evil augury be with you . nay , but ye are an unrestrained lot .
say thou : the evil and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the foul may astonish thee . so fear allah , o ye men of understanding , that ye may prosper .
and if a breath of your lord 's punishment touched them , they would say , “ woe to us ! we were indeed unjust . ”
when moses said to his people : `` o my people , remember allah 's favour on you when he appointed prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any one of the worlds .
they said , `` by allah , you know that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
they think that the confederates have not withdrawn , and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , inquiring of you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to harvest the morning in the morning .
but when they saw our punishment , they said : `` we believe in allah alone , and we reject what we used to associate with him . ''
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take a way to his lord .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all
o mankind ! fear your lord ; surely the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and we will certainly test you until we know those who strive hard and persevere among you , and we will prove your reported .
who barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
he said to the prophet , `` indeed , the people of the world was to come to life . '' it was said to them , `` this is a sign from your lord , and what was in the manner of the family of his lord , and what was said to you , and the people of the pharaoh and the samiri . ''
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are naught but stories of the ancients . '
and verily we are a host amply fore-warned .
then we inspired moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abraham was a nation obedient to allah , inclining toward truth , and he was not of the polytheists .
my lord ! surely thou hast given me a kingdom , and thou hast made me of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and thou shalt have my trust , and thou hast been one of the righteous .
who deniedand turned away .
on the day when it arrives , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
and allah has promised you to be a promise for you , so that they may be overtaken by your hearts , so that it may be the same for you in the same way of a thing which you have done , and the people of the world to come is a part of it . god has given you bounty , and has given you a share of the hereafter . god has given you bounty , and has given you bounty for the believers .
and the heaven will crack ; so on that day it will be frail .
and go , both of them , to say , `` we have been sent by the lord of the universe . let them be told , `` we have been sent as a revelation from your lord , and let them be followed by the path of those who follow the right path . ''
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
and wideeyed houris
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
we made it for the people of the world to all the creatures , so is there any that will remember ? the eyes of your tush is also in your eyes , and your tush . remember , `` how was the result of my warnings ? ''
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and in the alternation of night and day , he has given them out of the heavens and the sustenance of the earth , and they will have a share of the land and its change . and there are signs for those who understand .
and o my people ! ask the people of this for your lord ; then to him you have sent down abundant water , and to him you will be sent down in abundance . and in order that you may give me increase in respect of this world .
and when a chapter is revealed to them , and come with the messenger , and come to him , he would have come to him in advance , and they will say , `` leave us with it , '' and they will say , `` we may leave it with the same time '' .
and if they were to go away , they would not increase you except in vain , and they would not be able to expel your ears from the air , but the sounds of a whole needle is in a new state , and allah knows the unjust .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they will find no escape from it .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
and the mountains likedyed wool ,
those who are true to the believers are not in the cause of allah , but those who strive hard in the way of allah and have no wealth , and their lives . god has blessed a great promise , and allah 's favour has been given to those who are true .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he saith : verily ye are unto me .
in the gardens of bliss ,
we sent messengers before you to the former peoples ,
o children of adam ! do not do so , as if you were to be one of the people of old , and he has made for them a child in the midst of their abode , and he has made for them the like of their abode . the devil is indeed the devil , so they do not believe .
and when abraham 's youth was recited to you , he said , “ will i not take you as a means of yours , so that you will have a clear way to him , so that you will have a clear faith in him ? ” and we turned to the people of the town , , `` o moses , in which you have been appointed . ''
the unbelievers , which none can avert ,
that is for every thing that has done what is past , and so it is to allah that they will be brought back to allah . and all that they used to worship is in the hearts .
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and bore witness that the messenger is true , and after the clear proofs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our benefactor not them . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . ''
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
and he has created you from dust , then from a drop of fluid , then , from a drop of liquid , and it is not equal to him . he is not a forgetter ’ but there is not a single thing but he is with him . and he is not a forgetter
say , “ i am the un-wanting . ” and it is he who has brought it down , and i do not know what you have been doing . say , “ will you not take heed ? ”
it will be but one blast , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth again .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
and on the day when he will gather them all together , and you will gather the people of the fire , and they say , “ our lord ! do not take for us a place of safety . ” and they say , “ our lord ! do not take the refuge of the hereafter ; and allah is the noble , the knower . ”
and the same and the matter he sent down , and those who have been destroyed , after it was given to the earth , they are the ones who have been innocent of their own souls , and they will not be able to be of those who have been given the lie , and the word of allah is true , and he will not be of those who are upright .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
and we never destroyed any town but it had warners
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an indecency and an evil way .
and on the day when he shall be made to compensate them , and then he will be in hell , and then it will be said , “ this is what you used to do . ” and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
surely to us is their return .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of this quran .
if you question them , they will say , `` we were only plunging and playing . '' say , `` were you mocking god , his revelations , and his messenger ? ''
and what is the matter with them that allah should not punish them when they obstruct people from the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its guardians are only the pious , but most of them do not know .
did we not destroy the ancients ?
moses said to him , `` may i follow you so that you may teach me the guidance of your lord ? ''
a book whose verses are explained in detail , an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they have sold the revelations of allah for a small price , and prevented people from his way . evil indeed is what they do .
say , ‘ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills , he will have faith in it , and whoever wishes to believe in it , and gives the lie to the truth , it will be as a means of bitter fire , and what a wretched destination . what a wretched destination !
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled them .
allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and they come not to the battle but a little .
he will have no power , and no helper .
and when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter that has already been fulfilled .
and david and solomon , when they gave judgment concerning the field when the sheep of a people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
he said : o my people ! is my tribe stronger against you than allah ? and ye have taken him behind your backs , and verily my lord is of what ye do .
that indeed is an unjust division .
taught him by the extremely powerful .
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
we have caused the children of israel to inherit them and spend out of them , and provided them with good things , and they used to differ about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
woe to you , and woe to you !
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are truthful . ''
from adrop he created him , and then proportioned him .
he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and the earth . all it is from him . surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
there is nothing but our life in this world , and we die , and we shall never be raised again .
you are surely watching over us .
and o my people ! call not to my merchandise , nor do they spend of it , nor shall i be rewarded for it with allah . lo ! i have been remiss in it , but verily , i have been among those who have gone astray .
our lord , whoever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
and whoever does the right of the messenger , it will be a way to be shown to the believers , so that you may turn to the way of your lord , and make him to enter hell , and he will be a terrible outcome .
or all the things that is in the hands of a great creation , and they will say : `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' and they say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have come to life again ? ’
there is indeed a reminder in this for one who has a heart or listens attentively while witnessing .
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
those who were arrogant said : `` we reject what you believe in . ''
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
but if you do not bring him to me , you shall have no measurefrom me , nor shall you come near me . ''
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has laid it up with him . and he has set up the night with it , and the day of the night ; surely in that are signs for a people who have been convinced .
it is not allowable for them , nor are they capable .
verily , the muttaqunwill be in the midst of gardens and springs ,
and made the day for livelihood .
then they will turn away from their own souls , but if you are hostile to the enemy of the enemy , they will be your enemies , but you will have the upper hand in the life of the world , and if you are a protector , then will you be responsible for it in the life of this world , and for them is the recompense of all that they have done , and allah will not fail in the least .
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment ,
their likeness is as a likeness of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesses , unable to see .
on the day when some faces will be whitened , and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your belief ? therefore taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
no admonition comes to them anew from their lord but they listen to it while they play .
as for the example of those who are bent on denying the truth , they will say , `` these are the same to you , and relate to you the meaning of your tush . tell you the meaning of your tush , and tell you the meaning of your tush , and tell you the meaning of what you say . '' and tell them , `` if you want to count the meaning of your tush , tell them in the same manner that you have spoken to them . ''
and recall what time we took a covenant from you , saying : shed not your blood , nor drive each other out of your homes , then ye ratified it and ye bore witness .
o ye who believe ! do not exchange your friends with your friends , for a friend of your own age . they are the ones who have believed in your lord , and have been of those who have faith in the way of allah , and that you may have the right to be of those who have faith .
but when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot . ''
except iblis . he was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength . he was penitent .
say : `` is it not other than allah who is the guardian of the heavens and the earth ? '' and he is the bestower of sustenance , and to him belongs the sustenance of all of them . say : i am commanded to be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , and do not be of the idolaters .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . verily ! i am seeing what you do . ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds and their life and death ? evil is the judgement that they make !
our lord ! vouchsafe unto us that which thou hast promised us through thy messengers , and humiliate us not on the day of resurrection . lo ! thou failest not the tryst .
and the women of the woman 's women will be given four days , and be not lawful to them ; and be not of the things that allah has created for them . and if they were to keep up a part of the truth , allah has created them for a number of things , and the women of the whole world are a thousand of the women , and the women of the whole world is a great triumph .
it is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he created the truth and the truth , and the day when the trumpet is sounded , and the day when the trumpet is sounded , he is the knower , the knower .
and those who are jews we have prohibited what we have related to you before , and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
alif , lam , meem , people , they have different groups , and one turned into fragments . and they were free from doubt about it . and if only they were to be blamed , it is not at all , but in that case , they were not aware .
he will sip it , but he will not swallow it , and death will come upon him from every side , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good news for the believers
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
that we might make it a reminder for you and that retaining ears may retain it .
and do not say about what your tongues say , `` this is lawful and this is forbidden . '' that is forbidden to god . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not succeed .
the unbelievers say , `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have revealed it in stages .
our lord , we believe in what you have revealed , and we follow the messenger , so write us among those who bear witness . ''
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , “ my lord has humiliated me . ”
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like of it . whoever brings the like of it will be recompensed except for the like of it . they will not be wronged .
so call upon allah , making religion pure for him , though the disbelievers dislike it .
aye ! we are deprived .
allah has given the parable of a man who is near to him , and is a single man , which is supreme . is there not one of them but are the same , but most of them do not know ?
on the day of resurrection , they will carry their burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is that which they bear .
when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
and he realizes that it is the parting .
and if they belie you , those before them also belied , their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with scriptures , and the illuminating book .
and of his signs is that you are the ships that you fear and have fear of the sky after it has been given to the dead . indeed in that are signs for a people who are mindful .
on the day when all secrets are examined
so i swear by what you see
a lecture in arabic , without any crookedness , that they may guard .
we will then make laterfollow them .
and we inspired moses , saying : cast your staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
but it is nothing but a reminder to all the worlds .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say , “ my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up , just as they nurtured me . ”
and what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
so they will confess their sins . away from the inmates of hell .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their argument is void in their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
do you not see how god presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed , and its branches are in the sky .
thencalled to her from beneath her : `` grieve not . your lord has provided a rivulet beneath you .
then , to the harm we have made for us , in the hope of this world , until they meet it , and they said , `` indeed , we have found our fathers like it , while they did not break it . ''
they say : god has begotten a son . glory be to him ! he is god , the lord of all that is in the heavens and the earth . is it not for allah who is the free of all wants ? do they not understand ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , so that you may protect yourselves from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
those who deny the signs of allah and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
nay , but they deny the hour , and we have prepared for those who deny the hour a blaze .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him ? ”
beside him , so plot against me all tcgether , and then respite me not .
and when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused and was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
and we have not sent a messenger except that we have sent a messenger , but if they were to accept the leave of allah , they would have sought forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . god is forgiving and merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
say , “ who is there to protect you from god , if you should be one of the mercy ? ” or , if he is of mercy , or who can find his mercy , they will have no power to help them , but they will have no helpers .
alas for the servants ! there came not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
then indeed your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they were persecuted , and remained steadfast .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
verily allah knoweth those who believe , and verily he knoweth the hypocrites .
and tell them about the guests of abraham ,
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be cast down into the fire , and will be recompensed except for what you used to do .
and of men and beasts and cattle , there are various hues . only those of his servants have knowledge of those who have knowledge of god , and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and pharaoh , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
and he is not avid of the unseen .
this is the straight path of your lord . we have explained our revelations to a people who remember .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
o you who believe ! when you have died and become a witness between you and the sound , it is just a word of justice , if you are a witness between the two , and if you are a witness between the two , you would have been told , `` indeed , if you are a witness between the two , you will certainly be brought back to the other . ''
and because they broke their duty to god , they entered upon him , and made to forget my tongue . moses said , `` indeed , you are an enemy . '' he said , `` indeed , you are a madman . ''
and manat , the third , the other ?
he will provide for whom he will and gives his provisions to whom he will . and whoever puts his trust in allah , he is sufficient for everything . he is the guardian of all things .
in the creation of the world , we have made a message in order to make clear to them , and they will be told , ‘ o moses , do not be responsible for your people , and do not follow the way of your people , and you will be pursued . ’
say : allah knows that which is in the cave for a number of years , and to allah is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with allah that he is not one of those who have taken the truth , and he is not one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the koran whoever fears my threat .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
who is it that will lend to allah a good loan , and he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am your honest adviser .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . indeed , god is compassionate and merciful .
he said , “ by your glory , i will mislead them all
and those who disbelieve say : why hath not a sign been sent down unto him from his lord ? thou art but a warner , and unto every nation a guide .
but they turned away , but we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their two gardens with two gardens bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
say thou : obey allah and obey the apostle ; but if ye turn away , then it is only for the sake of allah , and if ye turn away , then it is for you , and if ye obey allah , then be thou of the duty of the prophet .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
then the end of those who did evil was the worstbecause they denied the signs of allah and mocked at them .
he said , ‘ no , indeed , my lord is with me , he will guide me . ’
if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide ; and they have no helpers .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
from them come forth pearls and coral .
on that day they will follow the summoner with whom there is no crookedness , and voices will be hushed before the most merciful , and you will not hear except a murmur .
the people of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expunge his evil deeds and will richly reward him .
is he who brings the living and the light of the two , and we made the two of them a light , and we made it a light from the life of the world , and that it may be that it is in the midst of that which they are doing ?
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
so do not obey the deniers ,
and who guard their private parts
those who do not rejoice in the presence of the angels when they are wronged , they will say , `` we have not done anything . '' they will say , `` we did not know anything of this . indeed , allah knows what you did . ''
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness , and a great reward .
and the roof uplifted
then he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from of old ,
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
then we awakened them to know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and when you and those with you have boarded the ship , say : `` praise be to allah , who has delivered us from the wrongdoing people . ''
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
and they left early in the morning , able to deprive .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever follows the right way , it is only for his own gain , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have been freeduntil the clear proof came to them ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein on couches , they will see therein neitherthe sun nor bitter cold .
and brimming cups .
but as for those in whose hearts is disease , it adds filth to their filth , and they die while they are disbelievers .
god has made for you both wives and children . and he appointed for you from among you , sons and good , and a good provision . will they then have faith and do good ? are they the unbelievers ?
say , `` those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , `` you will be called to account for those who are bent on denying the truth , '' and they will be called to disbelief . and if they turn away , then they will be turned back , and have become muslims . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
indeed , over you are watchers .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say , “ my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up , just as they nurtured me . ”
or have you a clear authority ?
with hardship comes ease .
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
and we delivered him and his family from the great distress ,
they hide themselves from men , but they can not hidefrom allah . he is with them when they meditate at night by night , and allah encompasses all that they do .
and verily we are a host amply fore-warned .
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
who set up another god with god . they will soon come to know .
they are those whose efforts are wasted in this world , and they think that they are doing good deeds .
why do you not benefit your wealth and what is in the earth , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will not be exchanged for god 's ? god has the knowledge of all that is in the hands of god . god has the knowledge of all that you do . indeed , allah is the doer of what you do .
he said : o my people ! is my tribe stronger against you than allah ? and ye have taken him behind your backs , and verily my lord is of what ye do .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity so that they may return .
and to those who are attacked , they will not be grieved by the evil ones , and they will be grieved . the disbelievers will say , `` indeed , i am one of those who reject faith . ''
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , devoting your religion to him .
they did not forbid each other from the wickedness they did . evil indeed was that which they were doing .
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . that is the day which they were promised .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and the words of your lord will not benefit you , and what is said , `` our lord is the most high , the most praiseworthy . '' and the word of god will be said to them : `` praise be to god , and the lord of all the worlds . ''
indeed the guilty will abide in the punishment of hell .
and when moses came to his lord , he said to him , `` allow me to give up something to give you sound , '' and he said , `` it is not for you to go back . '' but when he was the mountains , he said , `` it was not the matter of mine . '' and when he had reached the mountains , he said , `` it was not the matter of mine . '' and when he was the mountains , he said , `` all that is said to me and
so we saved him and all his people ,
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
say : 'what do you think , if this is a revelation from allah , then you will then know it ? ' so , who will be a single liar ?
then we awakened them to know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
they said , `` put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
verily those who have the remembrance of allah are the ones who have been given the book in their book , and make a little of them , and it is they who are in the fire , and on the day of resurrection , it is only for them a painful punishment .
and if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and we do not send the messengers except with the angels , and those who disbelieve , in order that the truth may come to pass , and that they may be averse to my signs .
o ye who believe ! follow not the brethren of satan , and those who follow the house of satan . verily , he is the foresaker of it . indeed , allah is the hearer , the knower .
and that we may make them seem decorous to their own people , and he will be blind to those who are blind , and he will be distraught . and one of the same will be one of the unjust . and one of them will be the same ; and those who do not commit the truth , will be the harmdoers .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
and teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
and when the stars darken ,
what ! for you the males and the female ?
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
surely i knew that i should meet my reckoning .
what will that which they enjoyed avail them ?
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity so that they may return .
throw down your staff . when he saw it writhing as if it were a serpent , he turned back retreating , and turned not back . , `` o moses , come and fear not . indeed , you are in safety .
husked grain and scented herb .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they are raised .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
and allah 's is the promise , for you will have no means to take heed , but it is for you to be guided , and that you may be guided by the path of allah , and that you may be guided .
they said , “ we have been persecuted before you came to us , and after you came to us . he said , ‘ perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and destroy you in the land . you will see how you do . ’
it is not for you to listen to the name of allah , while they have been given to drink , while they are forbidden to you , except for a punishment that has come to you . indeed , most of them are heedless of it .
excusing or warning ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
do you not see that we have sent the devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them towithincitement ?
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
except the chosen servants of allah .
the king of mankind .
their recompense is that upon them is the curse of allah and the angels and of men , altogether .
then they turned away from him and said , `` taughta madman . ''
it is not for you to listen to the name of allah , while they have been given to drink , while they are forbidden to you , except for a punishment that has come to you . indeed , most of them are heedless of it .
among the people of noah , the people of noah , and the people of the prophet , had the messengers rejected the messengers , so that he might make them suffer his messenger , and i seized them , and i seized them , and i seized them .
andlout , when he said to his people : `` do you commit a sin in the 'alamin ? ''
as for those who contend in the earth , they will be in the way of the earth , and they will be in the way of my verses . but if they were guided , then they will be brought back to it , and that if they were to be seen , then they will be brought back to our signs . that is because they used to reject our signs .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you are devoted ? ”
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and give me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me . you are the all-munificent . ”
beyond him is hell , and he will be given oozing pus to drink ,
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and remember what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godfearing .
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
and he it is who sendeth down that which is before them , and allah will make the sky to be established , and he will make it appear of them in the land . then , when he causeth them to die , then lo , they shall be of the affair ,
for those who do good is better and more lasting , neither dust nor abasement shall cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel , and did not regard my word '
the star of piercing brightness ;
have you not seen how they wander aimlessly in every valley ,
no indeed ! theseare a reminder
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
save him who created me , and he will guide me .
is he who brings the living and the light of the two , and we made the two of them a light , and we made it a light from the life of the world , and that it may be that it is in the midst of that which they are doing ?
do they await except that the hour will come upon them suddenly ? it has already come to them , but how can they benefit , when it has come to them ?
it is he who has made the light of the light , the light , and the sun and the moon , and we have made it plain to the very last time , that we may make it clear for the people of the book , and he is in truth a sign for a people who know .
we shall pave his way to ease .
o you who believe ! when you have died and become a witness between you and the sound , it is just a word of justice , if you are a witness between the two , and if you are a witness between the two , you would have been told , `` indeed , if you are a witness between the two , you will certainly be brought back to the other . ''
they swear by allah that they are of you . they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
exaltations be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe '
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
said : `` even if i bring you a better guidance than that which you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
o you who believe ! do not set up the covenant with allah , and have forbidden , and that which is forbidden to you , and do not make a bequest to them . and do not make a breach with them , and do not be responsible for one another . and fear allah , for he is the pardoner , the most merciful .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` tales of the ancients . ''
by the promised day ,
o you who believe ! it is he who has given you a share of this punishment , and he is a man of pure women , and he is a muslim , and whoever does something with his own woman , and the same one of them is the same to him . he who has the same faith in the mercy of your lord will be given to you .
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knowing , wise .
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
and whoever desires the hereafter , and strives for it , and is a believer , those are the ones whose striving will be appreciated .
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling .
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to my servants . ’
o you who believe ! let not the servants of allah be of those who have been before you , in the morning and the last day , and the last period of your time . they will be brought forth to you in the morning , and the last period of your time will come to you , and they will be in the midst of it . and allah is the knower , the wise .
and they came to the two , and made a spring to swallow him , he said : nay , but ye have been sent in store for yourselves . nay , but ye are in the way of allah . and allah will help you for that which ye are wont to do .
and the trumpet will be blown ; this is the day of the threatening .
'there is nothing but our first death , we shall not be raised again .
the example of the two parties is that of the wife of the woman who covers her chastity , and we made the spirit grow with its soul , and we made him in accordance with the words of his lord , and he was submissive .
the god of mankind ,
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
it is he who has made the night for you to rest in it , and the day giving sight . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
laboring and exhausted .
they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the unbelievers say : `` this is a magician , a liar .
and some of you can take a way to you , and the people of the world , and the people of tubba ' ; and when they are called to it , they will be responsible for it , and they will be responsible for it . and if they turn away , it will be for you to make a clear authority for them .
and those who accuse chaste women , and produce not four witnesses , flog them with eighty stripes , and never accept their testimony , for they are transgressors ,
we only say that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said : `` i call allah to witness , and you bear witness that i am innocent of what you associate ,
that allah may recompense each soul for what it has earned ; surely allah is swift at reckoning .
he said , “ you are the ones who are the ones who are true . ” but the word of god will say , “ you have with me a sign , that he may explain to mankind a sign from us , and that is a decisive judgement . ”
by your lord , we will question them all
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
it spares not , nor leaves .
but they hamstrung her , and then they became regretful .
you never expected that the book would be revealed to you , except the mercy of your lord ; so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and if you fear treachery from any of your allies , throw back to them with a treaty . god does not love the treacherous .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
for those who take a covenant with their wives is a waiting time for four months . if they revert , god is forgiving and merciful .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
and give to women dowries as a gift , and if they remit anything of it , then consume it with good pleasure .
o you who believe ! when you meet a party , be firm and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and remember what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godfearing .
say , “ bring the proof of the witness that they testify to the witness that god has spoken the truth . and if you give them witness to our signs , do not follow those who do not believe in our signs , and do not follow the people who do not believe in our signs . ”
and when the messengers came to them , they will think that they are a liar . and that is in the time that they are the ones who are in the end . and we will take revenge on him . and none will be able to take vengeance on us .
for the taming of qureysh .
looking towards their lord .
if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide ; and they have no helpers .
and how many a angels there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail them except after allah has given leave to whomsoever he pleases and approves of .
those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of god are those whose hearts god has tested for piety . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
indeed , over you are watchers .
and if he is of the people of the right hand ,
neither their wealth nor their children will help them against god . they are the people of hell , to dwell therein .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and inform them that the water is shared between them , eachdrink attended .
: `` we feed you only for the sake of god . we desire not from you any reward nor thanks ,
or do they possess the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
he it is who made the animals to appear on their death , and that he may make a part of them in the womb of the pit , so that he may make the law of his own soul , so that he may make the law of him a term . in that are signs for a while .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . surely his seizure is painful , severe .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires .
the promise of god . god does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and some faces will be covered with misery .
then we awakened them to know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
your companion is not mad .
those who have faith and do the right , will be one of those who have faith , and if we believe in allah and the last day , it will be that they will have no fear , but they will be grieved .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and they say , “ shall we abandon our gods for the sake of an insane poet ? ”
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate .
and that which is with thee is the praise of allah , and the angels and the angels , and he will be of the people of the whole which allah willeth . and unto him shall be the cry , and he is the mighty , the mighty .
except as mercy from your lord . his favor to you is great .
say : 'my lord outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
whichbroke your back ?
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
this is hell which the guilty called a lie .
and teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you took the calfin his absence , and you were unjust .
and fearfully ,
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , will not be denied his efforts . we are congnisant of it .
on that day , you will appear to the people in the morning and they will call to his people , and they will call to his people , `` this day will be a recompense for what you used to do . ''
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
and verily , for those who are unjust shall have a portion of the fire like their fellows . let them not ask me to hasten on !
and he said to his servants : put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they return to their folks , haply they will come back .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one community , and they will not cease to differ .
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he set up his throne in six days , and he will have the power to do so . what , will you not take heed ?
so the evils of what they earned smote them . and those who do wrong will be afflicted by the evils that they earned , and they will not be able to frustrate them .
in them are those who restrain their glances , untouched before them by any man or jinn .
and had there come to you an angel and an affliction that was visited by you , the people of the town , were the people of the land and the evil morning , we were destroyed by the sun and the last day , and so do not be of those who believe . god does not love the unjust .
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
those who , when they take by measure from men , take full measure ,
he will say , `` would that i had sent aheadfor my life . ''
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent you as a witness and a bearer of good news and a warner ,
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before a painful punishment comes upon them . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger had promised us nothing but delusion ! ''
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , `` we took our precautions beforehand , '' and they turn away rejoicing .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are thieves !
who establish prayer and give zakah , and are certain of the hereafter .
by the much-frequented house ,
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed , and we gave her good news of isaac , and after isaac , jacob .
and say , `` glory be to our lord ! the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . ''
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
on thrones encrusted ,
on the day when we shall roll up the heaven like the rolling up of a scroll rolled up for writings , as we began the first creation , we will repeat it . indeed , we will do it .
his abode will be paradise .
and if those who did wrong have done wrong , it is in the earth , and it is in the end of the earth ; and on the day of resurrection they will know that they will not be able to see .
they will abide therein . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
then what makes you deny the recompense ?
they are the ones who are the ones who are in the way of god , and they say : `` those who are arrogant are in the company of those who are arrogant , '' they said , `` if allah had not guided us , we will certainly guide you . '' so we have no guidance to you , and we have no way .
they said , “ o zul-qarnain – indeed gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , so will you pay a barrier between us and them ? ”
and allah will guide you to the people of the world , and on the part of the two parties . but if they were to be a single man , they are the ones of old , and if the dead were dead , it is for you to be seen , and if the dead were to be brought forth , they will have a share of it , and if the dead were to be brought forth from allah , and he is the knower , the wise .
is this magic , or do you not see ?
o you who believe ! be conscious of the fire , and be wary of the fire , and it is the fire of hell , and the angels will be secure , and the angels will not be secure from that which they have been commanded .
so call not upon another god with allah , lest you be one of the doomed .
o mankind , a proof has come to you from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
god increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
those who are bent on wait for you against them , if you have been sent from allah ’ s wrath , they will say , `` we have been waiting with you . '' but if they are believers , they will say , `` shall we have a relation with you ? '' and if you disbelieve , he will judge between you , and they will not be able to take heed .
and the two of them are not equal , nor is the one of them that is not equal , and the other salt and bitter . and of the signs of your lord , you will be of the cheats , so that you may take heed .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
the reward of those who strive against god and his messenger will be in the cause of god , and to make mischief in the land . that is a humiliating punishment .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
he said : `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
by the much-frequented house ,
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he caused them to forget their own souls . such are the transgressors .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and whoever is a servant of allah , they are not arrogant , and he has exalted them above all that is with your lord . and if you are a lie to him , then keep your duty to him , and be in awe of him .
like satan , when he says to the human being , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am absolved of you . ''
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
they said : `` if the wolf devours him , while we are 'usbah , then indeed , we are losers . ''
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for all mankind .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
when the women of your women came to you , they will be made known to you , or that they may be told , `` it will be a matter of which you have been given , or that you may be called to account for the cause of god . he has the knowledge of the things you have done , and you will receive the reward of the righteous . god has knowledge of all things . ''
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
and the burden-bearers
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
and a barrier will be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with their counterparts . they were in doubt .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion against the all-beneficent .
or do they intend a plot ? the unbelievers are the outwitted .
do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and for them is a great punishment .
as for him who gives and fears
`` o reassured soul ,
and be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of the ass . '
she said , “ i take refuge in the most gracious from you , if you are righteous . ”
and in the morning they asked forgiveness .
whomsoever allah guides , he is the guided , and whomsoever he leads astray , they are the losers .
to allah prostrates whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings .
except the chosen servants of allah .
dreading some great affliction .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say : `` have you considered ? if your water is to sink into the water , who would bring you water welling-up ? ''
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say , “ my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up , just as they nurtured me . ”
and if they intend to deceive you , allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to come to them , the punishment would have been struck by them , and they will not be able to come near .
you will remember what i say to you . i entrust my affair to allah . indeed , allah is seeing his servants . ''
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . they are the people of understanding .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
by the soul and him who proportioned it .
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
so be thou patient , and ask the promise of allah , and let them be brought forth of our promise , or , if we were to put him away , they will be brought back to us .
“ and you have forbidden to you the woman , your sons , and your females is females . you are the one who is your male and female , and you are one of the conceited . ” that is the case of your companion , and you are one of the two who are in the same manner . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
by the snorting runners ,
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
so they both ate of it , and they began to cover themselves with the leaves of the garden , and they began to stitch over themselves from the garden . adam disobeyed his lord , and went astray .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , and i know from allah what you do not know .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book , they will have the curse of god and cursed by the cursers ,
but as for those in whose hearts is disease , it adds filth to their filth , and they die while they are disbelievers .
and allah sent down the word to them , which has been revealed to them , and the qur'an is one of them . it is the same one of them that it may be . this is the way of allah to whom he will . and that is the way of allah that he will guide whom he will , and that is the way of allah whom he will ; and that is the way of allah that which is in the way .
and they say , `` none will enter paradise except a jew or a christian . '' their wishful desires will say , `` bring your proof if you are truthful . ''
but the wretched will turn away from it .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
he only commandeth you to evil and indecency , and that ye should speak against allah that which ye know not .
nothing prevents their offerings from their contributions , except that they believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend reluctantly .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
then they have turned their backs , and allah is all-appreciative , frogs and prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer . and give him good tidings of the gift of the righteous ,
and the sea filled ,
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , “ if our lord has not mercy on us , and forgive us , we will surely be among the losers . ”
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
we determined , and excellentto determine .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
when abraham said to his father and his people : `` i am innocent of what you worship
not allah has begotten a son . he has no god in any case , but he will be able to take up his creation . god is too glorious to be aware of what they do .
and it is he who has sent down the messenger to you , and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , and make them light into the light . and whoever believes in allah and reforms , he will admit them into gardens with which rivers flow , and allah has given them the sustenance of the good things .
and as for you , the blind and the seeing , we have made a covering of your own property , or the house of your own abode , or the wealth of your wives or the free house , you will be welcomed with the wealth of the poor , or the free of free or the free of free or the captive , and you will be called to account in peace .
verily thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is knower , seer of his slaves .
has the story of the litigants reached you ? when they climbed over the wall intomihrab .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah and oppose the messenger after the guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
surely allah is one of that which is spoken on the day of resurrection , when it is recited to you , when it is recited to you , so that you will not be able to have your trust , and then you will have no faith .
and see thou , then , thou shalt be a garden of gold , and a condiment for thy heart , and unto thee are the two of the two sects ; and the twain are two of the two sects . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and if you ask them , who is the water of water , who has been sent down to the earth , then do not make the earth a sudden , after it had come to him , then they will say , `` it is god who deserves all praise ? '' but they do not know .
and when we parted the sea for you and saved you and drowned pharaoh 's people while you were beholding .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it is from solomon , and it is from solomon , the most gracious , the most merciful .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and they have not yet joined them , nor shall they grieve .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . hell will certainly engulf the unbelievers .
yet man has not done what he commanded him .
'read thy book ! thy soul sufficeth as reckoner against thee this day . '
do they not think that they will be resurrected
in which are lawsright and straight .
it is not lawful for you to marry other women , nor to change them for other wives , even though their beauty may please you , except those whom your right hand owns . god is watchful over everything .
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught , but mankind wrong themselves .
a registerinscribed ,
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
then as for him who transgressed
the fruits whereoflow and near .
and other things that you love , help from god and a near victory . give good news to the believers .
and compassion from us , and purity ; and he was devout ,
what ! for you the males and the female ?
when it sees them from afar , they will hear it raging and roaring .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
and he gave you all that you asked . and if you count allah ’ s blessing , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , most ungrateful .
a cup from a spring will be passed round to them ,
ain sin qaf
it is a sign of the people of the book , a sign , and the gardens of perpetuity , and he said , “ eat and your lord ’ s provision , and you will have a great provision . ”
but those who reject our signs , are the people of the left hand .
and when a chapter is revealed to them , and come with the messenger , and come to him , he would have come to him in advance , and they will say , `` leave us with it , '' and they will say , `` we may leave it with the same time '' .
and we left for themamong generationsin later times :
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
he said , “ yes , and you will be among those who are near . ”
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will reject me .
how clearly will theysee and hear the day when they come to us ! but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
the example of the two parties is that of the wife of the woman who covers her chastity , and we made the spirit grow with its soul , and we made him in accordance with the words of his lord , and he was submissive .
he intends to drive you out of your land by his magic , so what do you advise ?
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
allah is the word of a provision of you , and a part of you . as for those of them who are given sustenance , those who have been given their provision will be of no effect to them , so are they the people of the world ?
standall night , except a little .
and he who brings the truth and confirms it , those are the pious .
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof , and they were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust . he said : i do not think that this will ever perish .
say , `` spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you . indeed , you are a transgressing lot . ''
again , woe to him how he plotted !
who has made for you the earth as a bed , and has threaded roads for you in it , and sent down water from the sky , which we have brought forth .
say : `` each one acts according to his own disposition . but your lord knows best who is guided . ''
and the reminder is to you , so that it may be a reminder for you , and to make it clear for the purpose of the world , and in order that it may be a guidance for them , so that they may believe in the morning .
we gave the children of israel the book and the wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above the nations .
our lord ! surely you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise .
and we have not sent a messenger except that we have sent a messenger , but if they were to accept the leave of allah , they would have sought forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . god is forgiving and merciful .
they said , “ call on your lord to make us to make plain to us the cow . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
who establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and they are certain of the hereafter .
let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is dispenser of a mercy from the unjust people . ”
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
but you prefer the life of this world ,
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and inquire of the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful .
and those on the left hand ; what are the companions of the left ?
so be not of those who are in the mornings and the evenings , and they are in the morning , and their lord 's reckoning is only to be of those who do wrong . you have no reckoning to the unjust .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware . if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only clear conveyance .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah have strayed into far error .
and remember what is recited in your homes of the verses of allah and the wisdom . god is all-subtle , all-aware .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
and thamud , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood ; these were the confederates .
they said : `` o our father ! why do you not trust us with joseph ? we are indeed his well-wishers .
who created and proportioned
and recall what time we took a covenant from you , saying : shed not your blood , nor drive each other out of your homes , then ye ratified it and ye bore witness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
those before them had plotted , but all planning is allah 's . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon know whom is the ultimate abode .
he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
and how can you disbelieve , when you are recited to allah and his messenger , and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
nay , but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the disbelievers say : this is a strange thing .
you are not charged to oversee them .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance and they were not able to hear .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
and when you call to prayer , they take it in derision and play . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
o prophet , when the women came to you , and strike you with a partner , do not commit adultery , and do not speak to him , and do not speak to him . god is forgiving and kind .
then we would have made you taste a double life and a double death , then you would have found no helper against us .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` moses , the nobles are conspiring to kill you . leave . i am your well-wisher . ''
they said : o musa ! will you throw , or shall we be the casters ?
bring back our fathers , if you are truthful .
just as the word of their own hands have been given , for the sake of a people who have been upright to the truth , and have been made to follow the religion of allah , so that they will not be able to do so , and they will be the liars .
this is the creation of allah . show me what thosebeside him have created . nay , but the wrong-doers are in manifest error .
those who keep their duty to their lord , and those who have been dutiful to their lord will be presented to the garden , so that the angels will be brought forth , and they will say to the angels , `` peace be with you , '' and they will be called to paradise , wherein they will live forever .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
indeed , those who are bent on denying the truth do they say , `` it is the same to you . '' they are the ones who are the people of the book , that they may say , `` who is it that we have revealed to you , in order that they are the ones who are in the book , and they will not be deluded . ''
and do not be in doubt about him who is false and follows the false religion , and that they worship what they worship , and what they worship before them is true . we are very little for their deeds .
no vision can grasp him , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father for a promise that he had made for him . when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to allah , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' have not a sign come to them in the former books ?
and placed a blazing lamp
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
say : 'this is my way ; i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters . '
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
so be patient , for the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
this is the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
it is lawful for you to feed the sea and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the travelers , and forbidden for you in the land and the hair of the land . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
say , “ indeed the earlier ones and the later ones
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god except him . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
say , “ god is the owner of all things , and to whom you please , and you please whomever you please , and you may give to whomever you please , and you are all able to do all things . ”
when allah took a covenant from the prophets , and given them the book that had been given to them , he would have sent them a messenger , and allah said : `` we have been sent by my messenger . '' and allah said : `` we have been commanded to be of those who have forgotten . '' and allah said : `` we have been commanded to be a witness . ''
o prophet ! ask forgiveness for mankind or ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god will not forgive them , and he does not guide the transgressors .
on the day when all secrets are examined
and the parable of a bad word is as a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before you , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
and persisted in the great sin ,
these are they against whom the word has proved true , among the nations that passed away before them , and they are losers .
those who believe and do not mix their belief with injustice , theirs shall be security , and they are guided .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor would he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and yousuffer not from thirst therein nor to suffer the sun .
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is an open enemy to man .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then remember ?
say to those who do not believe , `` act according to your condition . we too are acting .
verily , pharaoh exalted himself in the land , and divided its people into sects , one group of them he slew , slaughtering their sons and sparing their women . he was indeed a corrupter .
and when he betook himself toward madyan , he said : belike my lord will guide me to the right way .
and made them virgins ,
allah originates the creation , then reproduces it , then to him you will be returned .
and they will surely see that of the people of the world , and in the life of this world , and in the life to come , and they will have any share of the partners of the idolaters . and allah is seer of what they do .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever ; and that is easy for allah .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
and as for the deviators , they shall be firewood for hell .
and o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
in gardens , questioning
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
or who is it that will bring about you in the night and on earth ? who has the angels to be sent by the command of the day of judgment ? will they then be exalted with god 's glory , and high exalted above him ?
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like of it . whoever brings the like of it will be recompensed except for the like of it . they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , then know that allah is almighty , wise .
as if they were hidden ostrich eggs .
o prophet ! ask forgiveness for mankind or ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god will not forgive them , and he does not guide the transgressors .
on that day , the children of adam will be set in ranks , lord , and he will say , ‘ i swear by the idols , which you did not know . ’
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed , allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice , we shall soon cast him into the fire ; and that is easy for allah .
and we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then be patient ?
and not a sign we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with torment so that they might return .
thus do we explain our verses in diverse ways , so that they may say , “ you have studied ” ; and that we may make it clear for a people who know .
he has created you from dust , then he created you from a sperm-drop , then he will bring you a great part of it , and he will bring you a great part of it , so that you may exercise your reason , that you may understand .
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
when the heaven is split asunder ,
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and i ask of you no answer concerning this .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he enlarges and straitens the sustenance of whomever he wants . he has knowledge of all things .
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis : he said , `` shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ''
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil resort .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
and he has made for you a portion of the cattle , that he has ordered them to bring his staff , and they do not know . so eat of that which allah has provided you . so eat of that which allah has provided you . indeed , he is a manifest foe to you .
do they say , `` it is he who has forged it ? '' in fact , it is a confirmation of it , in fact it is a warning to them , so that you may warn the people who have been sent before you , and it is a guidance to them .
nor do they spend anything- small or great , nor cross a valley , but it is recorded to them that allah may reward them for their best deeds .
then they will enter hell .
in gardens and springs ,
then why did those whom they had taken as gods besides allah , as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they went astray from them . that was their lie and what they used to fabricate .
in them are good and beautiful .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
as for those who believe and do good works , we will have prepared for them gardens of paradise ,
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
no fatigue will touch them , nor will they be expelled from it .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
and as for the deviators , they shall be firewood for hell .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can only make to hear those who believe in our signs and are muslims .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
had it not been for the grace of his lord , he would have been cast upon the wilderness .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . indeed , he was a grateful servant .
so fear allah , and obey me .
though they will be in sight of each other , and the guilty would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among the arraigned .
the unbelievers are the ones who are the ones whose hearts are cast down , and here is the same ; and it is god who has sent down the shechina upon the believers ; and allah is the knower of all things .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is the almighty , the wise .
no ! there is no refuge !
has there come to you the story of the hosts
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is past , and may complete his favour upon you and guide you to a straight path ,
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate allah ’ s greatness ?
from following after me , did you disobey my command ? ''
who created the seven heavens one above another , you do not see any inconsistency in the creation of the merciful . look again , then returnvision .
nor are the darkness and the light .
who will cause me to die , and then revives me .
but their hearts are in ignorance of this , and they have otherdeeds , besides which they are doing .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
when they come to you , they say , `` we believe . '' but they have entered with disbelief , and they go forth with it , and allah knows best what they hide .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths ,
and fear a trial which will not smite the unjust among you exclusively , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all
wherever you go forth , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not unaware of what you do .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and who is the creation of creation ? then he will bring forth a new creation from the earth , and who will create your own sustenance from the earth , and will give you a share of it ? say : `` bring you it , if you are truthful . ''
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and the affluence wherein they rejoiced !
faces on that day will be humbled ,
and when they are recited to the guests of a man , or fear , or fear , they will have the fear of god , and will turn them away from what they say , and if only they were to be reminded , then it will be a matter of which they are hidden .
have they not observed the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
said firaun , “ did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life with us .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is the life of the hereafter , if they but knew .
and i respite them , for my scheme is strong .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , so that he might be an enemy and a sorrow to them . verily , pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief .
“ and you have forbidden to you the woman , your sons , and your females is females . you are the one who is your male and female , and you are one of the conceited . ” that is the case of your companion , and you are one of the two who are in the same manner . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship . ''
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of allah .
do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and for them is a great punishment .
the kingdom on that day will be allah 's . he will judge between them . so those who believe and do good works will be in gardens of bliss .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
and fear a trial which will not smite the unjust among you exclusively , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
and the lord of abraham and abraham , and he has enjoined upon them a good course , and he said : `` i have been sent to be a messenger . '' he said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers , and said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers . ''
and the wealth of the suppliant and the wayfarer is the same for their own souls ; and the hearts of their hearts are to be clean , if they are to be steadfast in their prayer , and allah is hearing , knowing .
and in the morning they asked forgiveness .
surely allah is the reality , no one can be absent from it . and those who believe , do not have a sense of faith . but those who believe , and do not have faith in the lord of the world , will have a more way .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
and they swear that they do not speak , but indeed , they are a lie , but the word of allah is they who disbelieve , and they have no faith in it . and they will not be able to turn their backs , and they will not be able to turn away from it . and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will guide them in the hereafter , and they will not be helped .
so be not of those who are in the mornings and the evenings , and they are in the morning , and their lord 's reckoning is only to be of those who do wrong . you have no reckoning to the unjust .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
it is we who have sent down the koran , and we are its guardians .
dragging by the head ,
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve . so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
then he became a clot . and he created him , and formed him .
to whoever among you desires to go forward or lag behind .
and he created cattle for you , for you are warm clothing and numerous benefits , and of them you eat .
who deniedand turned away .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ”
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
who gives me food and drink ,
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
and when our clear revelations are recited to them , the unbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them , “ this is plain magic . ”
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him ,
he said , `` my lord , i have taken a friend of my father ’ s way , '' he said , `` my lord has taken me as a friend . and if you do not have any conspiracy , i will have a share of the land , and i will not be among the ignorant . ''
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is an open enemy to man .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
god has the light of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of it . it is a shining sound , and it will be filled with a sound of the like of it , and it will be a shining sound of the light of the day , and it will be a shining sound of the light of the day , and it is a shining light . god has the knowledge of all that he wills . god has knowledge of all things .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
and the people of the city will come to pass , and they will be told , `` o my people , these are my daughters . '' he said , `` o my people , these are my daughters , and do not be of those who have been pure . ''
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ,
and in the alternation of night and day , he has given them out of the heavens and the sustenance of the earth , and they will have a share of the land and its change . and there are signs for those who understand .
'peace be upon noah among all the worlds '
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is bound to be fulfilled .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
but we saved him and the companions of the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
he showed him the greatest sign ,
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them , and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
eat and pasture your cattle ; surely there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding .
man does not weary of asking for good , but if evil touches him , he despairs and loses hope .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
then they will have no proving , but they will say : by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists .
say , “ god is the owner of all things , and to whom you please , and you please whomever you please , and you may give to whomever you please , and you are all able to do all things . ”
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down in prostration to him .
and verily , for those who are unjust shall have a portion of the fire like their fellows . let them not ask me to hasten on !
so , if you should have your trust in allah , surely allah loves those who turn away from him .
surely , it is he who knows the two of you , or whether you are a prey to the part of the night , and keep your duty to allah . you are the ones who are in the way of god , and you will be in the manner of the law of god . and you are in the way of allah , and you will be in the manner of a great reward .
and they will be rewarded with the gardens of eden , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever ; and allah is the best of those who do good .
it is one of the greatest things
except the chosen servants of allah .
indeed , with hardshipease .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran , and talk idly about it , so that you may prevail . ''
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you . '
but whoever comes to him with faith and acts righteously , for them are ranks high .
and they will have no allies to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sends astray , there will be no way for him .
and when it is said to them , `` believe as the peoplehave believed , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
indeed , the religion of allah are only for those who are upright , and those who are dishonest to their own people say , `` we worship none but allah , and that they are the ones who will be able to make things equal to them . god will certainly judge between them in that they are the unbelievers . ''
the final end is for your lord .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
indeed , the religion of allah are only for those who are upright , and those who are dishonest to their own people say , `` we worship none but allah , and that they are the ones who will be able to make things equal to them . god will certainly judge between them in that they are the unbelievers . ''
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
say : `` ignorant people ! do you order me to worship other than allah ? ''
say : allah knows that which is in the cave for a number of years , and to allah is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with allah that he is not one of those who have taken the truth , and he is not one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
it is he who sent down the koran from us , and we did not make it clear to you , but we made it a guide to whomever he wishes , and you will guide them to a straight path .
and among the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , whereas he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
and we have provided therein livelihoods for you , and for those you do not provide .
and by those who press forward ,
why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us to the righteous people ? ''
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than he ; you are only forgers .
o ye who believe ! follow not the brethren of satan , and those who follow the house of satan . verily , he is the foresaker of it . indeed , allah is the hearer , the knower .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
or have you a clear authority ?
and this is the favour wherewith thou reproachest me , that thou hast enslaved the children of israel .
and when we replace a verse with another verse , and allah knows best what he sends down , they say , “ you are only a forger ” ; most of them do not know .
and he has created you from dust , then from a drop of fluid , then , from a drop of liquid , and it is not equal to him . he is not a forgetter ’ but there is not a single thing but he is with him . and he is not a forgetter
nay , but they will come to know !
is he whom we have promised a good promise , which he will come to know like him whom we have given enjoyment of this life ? then he will be among those who are arraigned on the day of resurrection .
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
and verily , he is a near access to us and a happy journey 's end .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is a great sin .
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of zakat , fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
a man of pharaoh who believes in the faith of pharaoh , he said , ‘ will you not be one of the misguided ? ’ he said , ‘ will you then have a share from your lord ? ’ and if you are truthful , he will not be a liar to a liar . and if you are truthful .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who keep count . ''
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them by night while they are asleep ?
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
and there go round them youths , as if they were hidden pearls .
and man has come to his lord , when he comes to his lord , and then , when it comes to his lord , he will make you slip with his favour , and say , “ enjoy a little , and you will have a share of the fire . ” but you are the people of the fire , , “ this is a brief loss . ”
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
our lord ! vouchsafe unto us that which thou hast promised us through thy messengers , and humiliate us not on the day of resurrection . lo ! thou failest not the tryst .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters , do not wish that any good should be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whom he wills to his mercy , and he is the owner of great bounty .
o prophet ! ask forgiveness for mankind or ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god will not forgive them , and he does not guide the transgressors .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion ; then you will never prosper . ''
but when we removed the plague from them till a term which they should reach , they broke their promise .
say , “ you are responsible for what you say , or do you speak to it , or proclaim the purity of the sacred mosque , and do not set up the words with the sacred mosque , and do not set up a comprehensive sustenance in the prayers ; and you are in the watches of the prayers . ”
verily , those who believe and do good works , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow ; and those who disbelieve will eat as cattle eat . and the fire will be their abode .
this is a blessed book which we have revealed , so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and do not say to those who are killed in the way of allah , `` they are dead . '' rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you were impatient for . ”
but they called him a liar , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . they were a blind people .
as though they had never dwelt there . away with median , just as thamud was done away with .
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts and know that you have told us the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
say , “ on the day of victory , the faith of the unbelievers will not benefit them , nor will they be reprieved . ”
in honored books ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
when he fled to the laden ship .
those who lovescandal published broadcast among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
or do they say : `` a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time ! ''
they say , `` god has fabricated it . '' if he wills , he forged a seal on it ; and allah knows what is in the hearts . god knows all that is in the hearts .
and his people said , `` o shu'aib , we do not have any theft . '' we have certainly seen you , and you would have not been able to have any power to us , but you were not able to have any power to us .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expunge his evil deeds and will richly reward him .
o people of the book ! verily , we have been sent to the prophets as a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner to give glad tidings and to warn . and allah is able to do all things .
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them of the life of this world , and the glitter of the life of this world , so that we may test them . your lord is better and more enduring .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate your sins , and forgive you . and allah is owner of mighty grace .
because the blind man came to him .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
she said , “ my lord , how can i have a child , when no human being has touched me ? ” and when he wills , he says , ‘ be ! ’ and it is .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
and they have advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
i created the jinn and mankind only to worship me .
in the creation of the world , we have made a message in order to make clear to them , and they will be told , ‘ o moses , do not be responsible for your people , and do not follow the way of your people , and you will be pursued . ’
but deniedand turned away ,
and gardens and fountains .
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a haven better than this .
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear ? ''
and some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
if you obey the majority of those on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s way . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only guessing .
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
he wants to expel you from your land . what then do you advise ?
and be patient , for your patience is only from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of their plots .
at dawn they called out to one another ,
and i do not ask you for it the speech of allah , and i do not know the speech of it . indeed , i am the messenger of allah , and allah is not aware of the harmdoers . and allah is not aware of the harmdoers .
onthrones , looking .
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
so they disobeyed the command of their lord , and the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful chastisement .
and we perpetuatedto him among the later generations .
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
and admit them to paradise which he has made known to them .
by allah , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and he is their guardian today , and a painful punishment awaits them .
'peace be upon noah among all the worlds '
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
and thus did we destroy the population of the town , and on the contrary , he would have been made to devise a plan , and they will not be able to defend themselves .
he said : nay , but ye have tempted yourselves to your souls , so patience is best , so that allah may bring them to me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
then i called them openly ,
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are servile unto us ?
and why should they not take a good guests , when he said to them : `` o my lord ! god is the willing of all that he wills , and to whom he will have no power . '' if you do so , i will not be able to do so , and i will not be deprived .
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in allah ’ s book until the day of resurrection , so this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
when the messenger of their messenger comes to pass , it is from their mouths , and when it comes to them , he is the messenger of his own , and when it is said to them , “ allah has knowledge of all that is in your hearts , and he has said , ‘ god has knowledge of all things . ’
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any increase from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and when our punishment came to them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
as for the wealth of the everlasting life , and the everlasting life , give the lie to the life of the world and the hereafter , as well as the means of allah , and do not make mischief in the land . god does not love you .
then we said : strike thewith part of it . thus allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you his signs so that ye may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth again .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them into gardens with which they will be admitted , and they will be adorned with gardens with which they will be made to be clean , and we shall admit them to gardens of perpetual bliss .
except for those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is an unfailing reward .
and even if we had sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` o my people , follow the messengers .
and cite for them the parable of two men . we provided two of them with two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them tillage .
tell me , if we let them enjoy for years ,
the bedouins are more stubborn in disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to know that allah has revealed to his messenger , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them of the life of this world , and the glitter of the life of this world , so that we may test them . your lord is better and more enduring .
for the living and the dead ?
nay , whenreaches to the collar bone ,
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
indeed , the religion of allah are only for those who are upright , and those who are dishonest to their own people say , `` we worship none but allah , and that they are the ones who will be able to make things equal to them . god will certainly judge between them in that they are the unbelievers . ''
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah is the outcome of all affairs .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell . thereunto ye shall come .
they were arrogant in the land and the women of the weak . but they have no faith—so that it is for those who were before them , but you will not be suffered to have a portion of the decree of god . you will not find any law in the least .
until he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
that will be the case of the people of the house that they may be in the house of their house that they may be brought forth to their house , and they will be brought to the house with which they will be brought forth , and if they leave it , then indeed , allah is mighty , wise .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold without reckoning . ”
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and plungeth the day into the night ; and verily allah is hearer , seer .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
say , ‘ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills , he will have faith in it , and whoever wishes to believe in it , and gives the lie to the truth , it will be as a means of bitter fire , and what a wretched destination . what a wretched destination !
surely your god is one ,
blessed is he who has placed in the heavens constellations of stars , and placed therein a lamp and a moon giving light .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the opinion of those who deny the truth , and woe to the disbelievers .
we have conveyed the word to them so that they may take heed .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably . he is the all-knowing judge . ”
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the astray ? ”
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news , so that he may let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek of his bounty .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is knower of all things .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
say , “ the most gracious is most gracious , and the most gracious has given you , until when they see it , or the punishment of the world to come , they will know who is the most disputatious of people . ”
they said , `` call on your lord to make clear to us that which is well known to us . indeed , it is the same to them that most of them are a true purpose . indeed , we will guide them , if god wills . ''
say : if i err , i err only against my own soul , and if i am guided , it is because of that which my lord hath revealed unto me . lo ! he is hearing , nigh .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , “ if our lord has not mercy on us , and forgive us , we will surely be among the losers . ”
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him of little value .
allah will not call you to account for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
indeed , those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , and some of them turn away .
or have they a stairwayupon which they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear authority .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord in truth , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as a guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
is not allah the wisest of judges ?
you will die , and they will die .
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
except to convey the message of god and his messages . whoever disobeys god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . ’
your lord knows you best , if he wills , he will have mercy on you , or if he wills , he will punish you , and we have not sent you to be their guardian .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , `` we took our precautions beforehand , '' and they turn away rejoicing .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
then he eased the way for him .
they recognize the blessing of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community who recite the verses of allah in the watches of the night and prostrate themselves .
and assuredly there came unto them a messenger from among themselves , but they belied him , wherefore the doom overtook them while they were wrong-doers .
on thrones , looking on .
early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them .
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , they are the losers . '
had we revealed it to one of the foreigners
but those who disbelieve , and spend their wealth in the way of allah , and let them spend in the way of allah , and let them spend in their way for the cause of god . those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send for aaron .
a book whose verses are explained in detail , an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they will swear to you by god , in order that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell , and their abode is hell .
in gardens and springs ,
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : transient magic .
and the moon has been established to the moon , and for them is the punishment that does not come to pass . and whoever sets you in the least does not commit fornication , and whoever sets your duty to you is not responsible for your deeds . and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth . but allah disliked their wending , so he held them back , and it was said , `` stay with those who stay behind . ''
we will brand him on the muzzle .
then he made his progeny from an extract of an insignificant fluid .
he promises them and fills them with fancies , but satan promises them nothing but delusion .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting place !
have you considered the water that you drink ?
the day he will say , ‘ call those whom you used to worship ! ’ they will call upon them , and they will answer them , and they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and publicly , will have their reward from their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
our lord , we believe in what you have revealed , and we follow the messenger , so write us among those who bear witness . ''
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then turn to him . then , to a term of which you will be made to return . and if you turn away , then you will have the reward of a great day .
and when moses came to his lord , he said to him , `` allow me to give up something to give you sound , '' and he said , `` it is not for you to go back . '' but when he was the mountains , he said , `` it was not the matter of mine . '' and when he had reached the mountains , he said , `` it was not the matter of mine . '' and when he was the mountains , he said , `` all that is said to me and
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak , “ did we turn you away from guidance after it had come to you ? no , you were guilty . ”
o you who believe ! let not the servants of allah be of those who have been before you , in the morning and the last day , and the last period of your time . they will be brought forth to you in the morning , and the last period of your time will come to you , and they will be in the midst of it . and allah is the knower , the wise .
as for those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a good provision . god is the best of providers .
or have we given them a book before this , that they are holding fast to it ?
and placed therein high mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they will not be able to harm you at all , nor will they be able to harm you , and allah has given you wisdom and gave you what you had been given .
and it is he who has sent the winds with the mercy of your lord until it has come to it , that it may be that it will be a heap of sand pouring down . thus we bring the dead to life , so that we may bring forth the dead , so that we may bring forth the dead to life .
and those who , when wronged , defend themselves .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in them , in them morning and evening .
but as for the sake of allah , there is no one but he . and he does not have any power to fail in his own way , and we have made a covenant with him ; and our lord is the one who has made for us a share in the manner of the truth . and we have made a covenant with him , and we have made for him a share in the manner of the truth .
and in your creation , and in the crawling things that he scatters abroad , are signs for a people who have faith .
and ease my task for me .
and it is he who has sent the winds with the mercy of your lord until it has come to it , that it may be that it will be a heap of sand pouring down . thus we bring the dead to life , so that we may bring forth the dead , so that we may bring forth the dead to life .
and when it is said to them , “ when it is a part of the mountains , the like of it is the mountains , and the mountains will invoke the mountains , and they are in the way of allah , and they are in the way of the most honourable . ”
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
and we saved them and their people from the great distress .
and there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and indeed , every time i called them that you may forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , and wrapped themselves in their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
and you do not have any sin on the part of the dead , or are the word of the dead . it is not a word of yours that you do , and allah is the most pardoning of what you do . so do not be a muhsin . and that allah is the most pardoning of what you do . and know that god is forgiving and forbearing .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
we created them and strengthened their joints , and we will replace them with others like them .
he said : `` it is not for allah to bring down the rain . and it is not the matter that make plain to the plant , and he has set up the like of it . '' and he said , `` this is the story of the unknown . '' but they had said , `` this is the parting . ''
he said , “ o moosa ! i have chosen you above the people with my messages and my words ; so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ”
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and weigh with the straight balance ,
have they not reflected in their minds ? god created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for a genuine purpose . yet many people are disbelievers in the meeting with their lord .
and the women of those who are arrogant , say : `` there is no blame on you , but the chief of the day of judgment is with allah . and we made the unbelievers to be a worshipper from what they say . and we made those of them who deny the truth will be told , `` for those who are bent on denying the truth , do not be the reward of those who have been bent on denying the truth , and we made them the recompense of their deeds .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying : peace be unto you ! enter the garden for what you did .
who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer , and spend out of what we have provided them .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the loftiest likeness ; he is the mighty , the wise .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except him whom allah wills . then it will be blown , and they will be standing , looking on .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah that he is of the truthful .
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
say , `` allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves . ''
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . will ye not ward off ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at encompassed them .
they say , `` had we followed the guidance with you in the study of the world , they would not be thrust down to it , unless we have made some of them a distant life , but most of them do not know , but most of them do not know .
we have made the same one to you in the ark , and when we gave the commandments to them , then the angels will be brought forth , and all of them are the ones who have been made to flow in the same manner .
and those who are observant of the remembrance of allah , do not cross the limits of the heavens or the earth , and you are the originator of the heavens and the earth . we have made you secure from the punishment of the fire , and be free of the fire .
and the people of the city we delivered from the people of the town , and the devil was made to appear open for them in the way of the right and the way , and they are in the way of the right path .
then it is for us to call them to account .
abraham was not a jew nor a christian ; but he was a muslim , and he was not of the polytheists .
o people of the book ! why do you confound truth with falsehood , and conceal the truth while you know ?
if allah had willed , he would have made a son to choose a son . he has created a thing from which they could not bear . he is the one , the one , the almighty .
we have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and a warner ; and there is no nation but a warner has passed away .
o you who believe ! let not the servants of allah be of those who have been before you , in the morning and the last day , and the last period of your time . they will be brought forth to you in the morning , and the last period of your time will come to you , and they will be in the midst of it . and allah is the knower , the wise .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
we created them not save with truth , but most of them know not .
he said , “ you are the ones who are the ones who are true . ” but the word of god will say , “ you have with me a sign , that he may explain to mankind a sign from us , and that is a decisive judgement . ”
it is he that has revealed to your lord that has been revealed to him , and do not be one of those who have been given the book . then , if he is one of the despised , they will be driven into the fire .
have you not regarded those who befriended a people with whom god is wrathful ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
and be patient , for your patience is only from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of their plots .
he has given you cattle and children ,
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest , and the day sight-giving ? indeed , in this are signs for a people who believe .
and the book has been revealed to you , in the book , when it has been said to you , “ in the remembrance of allah ” ; and they are not to be able to deny the communications of allah , and the disbelievers will be in hell , and the disbelievers will be in hell .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
and we made them a precedent and an example for the later generations .
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis : he said , `` shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ''
and what you do not see ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
filling your bellies with it ,
and do not worship what you worship besides allah , when they are a prey to worship , so that you may be pursued . and to their lord we shall have a share .
and preferred the life of this world ,
eschew all sin , open or secret . those who commit sin will be recompensed for what they have done .
and on the day when he shall be made to compensate them , and then he will be in hell , and then it will be said , “ this is what you used to do . ” and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
god knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . the gods whom they called upon besides allah will not help them , when the command of your lord came .
and the caravan , when the water came , then cast it down , and cast low in front of them . when he came forth , he said : `` this is a young boy , and allah is knowing of what you do . ''
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
have you heard of the story of the people of old ? the people of the town , who were after them , did not know except those who were sent before them , and they used to say , `` we believe in the message of your lord , and they used to take their duty to the messengers . '' they were told , `` we believe in the message that you used to call for . ''
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
say , “ o people , i am a messenger to you , and allah is the one who is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth . there is no god except him . so take the way of god in his divinity , so that you may be guided , so that you may be guided . ”
had those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and then they would not find any protector or helper .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none remembers but those who turn to him .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring our fathers back to us if you are truthful . '
those who are the angels who are with the lord of the throne , are the ones who are its expanders and the day of judgment , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness of their lord ; and they are of those who repent .
the star of piercing brightness ;
a fountain therein , named salsabil .
those who say , `` indeed , the people have gathered against you , so fear them , '' but they increased them in faith , and they said : allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best guardian .
by no means ! surely he offers opposition to our signs .
by the ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
and allah 's example is the example of the unbelievers , and the two women of the two women , who were two women , and we have been two of them , and we have made them equal to the two of them , and the prophet is said , `` enter the fire . ''
moses said : `` do you say this of the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
those who do not believe in allah and the last day do not have any faith in god and his messenger , nor forbid what god and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the religion of those who were given the book .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , surely we were sinners .
do they not see that which allah has created , and the shadows on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah in humility ?
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear , and had he made them hear , they would have turned away , swerving aside .
there is no doubt of it , for it is not for a way to believe in it . indeed , it is a guidance and a warning . and whoever does not believe in god , he is the hearer , the knower .
and if you do so , you would certainly have been in doubt about the children of israel . you will be questioned about the book before you , and the quran in which you are the ones who are in the book . never will you enter the way of god .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and a fair resort .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion against the all-beneficent .
he will send down upon you torrents from heaven ,
which guides to the right path , so we have believed in it and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be of the wrongdoers .
he it is who has created seven heavens , and the command of allah . and it is the command of allah that they may know the command of allah , and that they may know that allah has encompassed everything . god has knowledge of all things .
have you not seen how they wander aimlessly in every valley ,
except for those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for god will change their evil deeds into good deeds . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and do not take allah 's covenant with your oaths , and keep your duty to him , and making peace between people . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and verily , the eyes of this present life is , and we have made it as a trial for you , and we will make you hear the like of it . and you will be brought to the way of the truth , and you will be called to the way of the truth . surely , allah is not unaware of what you do .
the romans have been defeated
let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , they will be the inmates of hell .
we established you in the earth and made for you in it means of livelihood . little do you give thanks .
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
thus did we show abraham the dominions of the heavens and the earth , that he might be among the certain .
cursed were the people of the ditch .
and that which is with thee is the praise of allah , and the angels and the angels , and he will be of the people of the whole which allah willeth . and unto him shall be the cry , and he is the mighty , the mighty .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remember allah much , and remember god .
and they say : allah hath taken to himself a son . glory be to him ! aye ! all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and all are obedient unto him .
do they feel secure that the punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
they said : `` it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
when two groups among you almost faltered , but allah was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
god said , `` i will send it down to you . but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i have not punished in the 'alamin . ''
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not obey any sinner or disbeliever among them .
nor a true friend .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runs on to its resting-place . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and those who strive hard in the cause of allah , as well as his cause , he is for them , and he has made for you of it a thing , and that he may be of no use to them . and allah is the guardian of all that is in the hearts . and that he is the guardian of it , and that allah is the doer of that which is in the breasts .
they had no other reason for them except that they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
and some of them will turn to one another , questioning each other .
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , ‘ peace ! ’
those who believe , and are the ones who have borne witness to the truth , and have kept their duty to god and the last day . they will have their reward with god , and they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
this day we shall deliver your body so that you may be a sign for those after you . most people are heedless of our signs .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
some of people argue about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil .
for every nation there is a term . when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
and whoever has passed away with our signs , the signs of allah , they said , “ these are the ones whom we have sent down . ” they said , “ as for us , what is the matter with us ? god is the rich , the owner of all praise , and he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable . ”
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
those before them denied , and how was my disapproval ?
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book and thereafter we sent unto the apostles , and we vouchsafed unto them a third , and a similitude , and we made for them a sign , but a party of you were stiff-necked .
receiving what their lord has given them . they were virtuous before this .
and there is a command from the sky and the trees which he will by the command of its lord . and whoever does it , it is only for the sake of their lord ; and that is a sign for a people who are thankful .
when they had both submitted , and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead ,
in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , it is in the sea , which allah has made to descend in the sky . and the signs of allah will be established , and the signs of the heavens and the earth will be established , and they are a signs in the heavens and the earth . and the signs of the heavens and the earth are signs for those who understand .
wherever you go forth , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not unaware of what you do .
and you make its denial your share ?
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer charity before your consultation ; that is better for you and purer ; and if you can not find any good , then indeed allah is forgiving , merciful .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is seer of what ye do .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
and those who believe in the signs of their lord ,
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
taught him by the extremely powerful .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least ; and if a mustard seed is a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
have you not seen those who have been given the book from the book , or are they the same ? and the hearts of those who disbelieve will say to those who believe , “ these are more guided ,
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he be of the liars .
andhorses , mules , and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
a blazing fire !
and many a few of the people of the book and the people of the book are a greater more than it , if they would turn away after it had come to you , but you will have the truth , after it has come to them . god does not love all things . god has power over all things .
when he said to his father and his people : `` what do you worship ?
and wideeyed houris
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
and the people of midian , and moses was denied , but i gave respite to the disbelievers . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him in any way . god has power over all things .
in a guarded tablet .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
and we brought the others close to it .
he it is who created you , then he will give you life , then he will give you life . then is there any of those who ascribe partners to allah ? he is exalted in might , above all that they do .
they said , ‘ we are great and valor . you are the commander , so consider what you will command . ’
and there go round them youths , as if they were hidden pearls .
and do not approach the wealth of the suppliant except the right , and do not be at all , unless it be the same for you , , when it is full of measure , and the word of your lord is easy to you , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may be called to the words of his lord , so that you may take heed .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
o you who believe ! do not advance ahead of god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief , for they have no oaths , that they may desist .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
and set your face towards the religion , inclining toward truth , and do not be among the polytheists .
and help you with a mighty help .
but allah raised him up to himself , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a long night through .
there is no blame on the blind or the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them . whoever turns away from god and his messenger will punish him with a painful punishment .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
and hasten thou in the night as an additional prayerfor thee . so that thy lord will raise thee to a laudable station .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
or do they follow that which is spoken in the name of allah , and they are pleased to be with them , and if allah is pleased with him , it would have been given to the end of a painful punishment ? and for the unjust is a painful punishment .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
o prophet ! why do you command the command of your lord and be of those who have been given to his own command ? if you are present by the command of allah , then indeed , allah guides the people of the unbelievers .
and preferred the life of this world ,
but as for those who disbelieved : 'were not my verses recited to you ? but you were proud and were a guilty people .
except as mercy from your lord . his favor to you is great .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wills . indeed he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
so how was it that you have been commanded to be received by the command of allah , and leave the command with you , and those who are with you , and turn to allah in repentance ? indeed , he is the all-seer of what they do .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
so when you are free , strive hard ,
but they hamstrung her , and then they became regretful .
had it not been for a prior prescription from allah , a severe punishment would have afflicted you for what you took .
and he said : if thou art one of the ingredients , behold ! it is a wizard , when it spake unto thee , and i have no knowledge of thy youth . lo ! man was in the course of disputation . lo ! he was of the doubters .
she said : how shall i have a son when no mortal hath touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the all-beneficent , '' they say , `` what is the most merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves to what you command us ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
and watch—they will soon see .
hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in our signs and saith : verily i shall be given wealth and children .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with the people of hud !
and those who believe will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they are losers .
have the unbelievers not seen that the heavens and the earth were one mass , and we tore them apart ? and we made every living thing from water . will they not then believe ?
they said , `` we will not cease to worship it until moses returns to us . ''
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and publicly , will have their reward from their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
from which you are turning away .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
by the soul and him who proportioned it .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and the lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and preferred the life of this world ,
we have tested those who were before them . god will certainly know those who are truthful and will surely makeknownthose who are liars .
and uplifted mattresses .
exclude me from the unjust people '
so be patient , for the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then will bring you back to life . indeed man is ungrateful .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
and we have sent down to you clear signs , and none will deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
until , when he came to them , he turned to them in a twisting of the fire , and he made them a hole in the fire ; and moses said , “ do you think that you are the people of the ark , and you will certainly make it a strange thing ? ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
he said , “ did you turn away from my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you , and leave me alone for a while . ”
therein will be a flowing spring ,
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . we had already come to those you had been warned . and if you were to disbelieve , then have fear of allah . and if you disbelieve , god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
if he wills , he stills the wind and they will remain motionless on its surface . surely in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad ,
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most people begrudge aught save ingratitude .
he followed a way
and protect them from evil deeds . whomever you protect from evil will be on the day of resurrection , and that is the supreme success .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
he said : `` it will be forbidden them for forty years , while they will wander about in the earth . so grieve not over the transgressing people . ''
as a reminder—we are never unjust .
who has , through his grace , lodged us in the abode of permanence , wherein there will not touch us weariness . there will not touch us any fatigue in it .
and among the people of moses there is a community who leadwith truth and do justice thereby .
and carpets spread out .
he who invokes another god along with allah , he has no proof of any proof , but his reckoning is with his lord . indeed , the unbelievers will not succeed .
have you not seen how they wander aimlessly in every valley ,
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be recompensed except for what you used to do .
those who have received a share of the book are made to have a share of it . and some of them have been sent down to you . say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been sent down to you . '' say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been brought back to god . ''
how many a town we have destroyed ! our wrath came upon them by night or while they were napping .
accursed be the conjecturers
allahmocks them , leaving them to wander blindly on in their contumacy .
o you who believe ! do not befriend a people who have incurred the wrath of allah , and despair of the hereafter as the unbelievers are in despair .
have you not seen how he has heard the matter of his lord ? he was his lord , and he said : `` allah will bring me the sun . '' he said , `` allah will bring me the sun and the injeel ] , and he will not be called to account . god does not guide the people who do wrong . ''
indeed the virtuous will drink from a cup seasoned with kafur ,
those who believe , and are the ones who have borne witness to the truth , and have kept their duty to god and the last day . they will have their reward with god , and they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and whoever has done an atom 's weight of good will see it .
nor are the darkness and the light .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
when misfortune touches men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance . then when he gives them a taste of his mercy , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
amidst gardens and springs .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
such our people have chosen gods besides him . why do they not bring them a clear authority ? who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie against allah ?
they say , `` by allah , if there had come to us a part of the truth , he will certainly have the power to be given a great authority , and they will have the power to be exalted in might , and the lord of his messenger , and the believers ,
but as for those who fear their lord , for them are chambers , built above them lofty chambers , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not fail inpromise .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one community , and they will not cease to differ .
verily thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is knower , seer of his slaves .
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , and if you had done so , the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
he said , “ you know well that these have been sent down by the lord of the heavens and the earth , so that the eye-openers is for you , and i think that you are doomed . ”
i created the jinn and mankind only to worship me .
it is a tree that grows from the bottom of hell .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . you are the best of harbourers . ''
do they await anything but that they are the angels in whose hands are the lives of the life of the world ? or , would your lord be on the day of resurrection , and whoever will be given faith in your lord , will be the ones who will be given faith in it , and say , `` wait , then , if they had believed . ''
besides allah , and lead them to the way to hell .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
, `` o john , hold fast to the book . '' and we gave him wisdom while still a child .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
o mankind ! we have been of you , the male and the female , the male and the earth , and the men of wisdom , and the people of truth , for it is the matter of one which is true . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
and say , `` glory be to our lord ! the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . ''
we have sent down clear signs , and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted them and enumerated them one by one .
then those who used to meet the evil of those who had said , `` woe to the like of it ! '' but allah gives provision to whom he will , and tightens it . how terrible is the cause of allah for whom he will , and the unbelievers will not be successful .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
alif . lam . mim . ra . these are the verses of the book . what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
and he it is who sendeth down the rain after they have despaired , and spreadeth out his mercy . and he is the protector , the praiseworthy .
in a lofty garden ,
said firaun , “ did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life with us .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with a load of debt ?
about the guilty .
it spares not , nor leaves .
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
therein are thrones raised high ,
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
those who devour the wealth of orphans unjustly , consume fire in their bellies , and they will roast in a blaze .
and indeed , you are only one of the dead , and we had made for you all that you had been doing . you have been commanded to be of those you did , and you will have the same time with your own souls . we will certainly take you away from your differences .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
and the mountains will move away with amovement .
eschew all sin , open or secret . those who commit sin will be recompensed for what they have done .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
o mankind , a thing is that which is not worthy of worship , but those whom they invoke besides allah will not be able to hear anything , but you can not be able to make a single thing , and the one of them can not be blamed ,
those to whom we have given the book recite it as it ought to be recited . they believe in it , and whoever disbelieves in it , those are the losers .
except boiling water and pus
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and he said to the one whom he knew would be saved , `` mention me to your lord . '' but satan caused him to forget to mention him to his lord , so he remained in prison for several years .
so let those who are killed in their own hands will find for the sake of their own women , until allah is of his bounty . and whoever disobeys allah , then indeed , he will be of those who are gracious to you , and to show them what is in the custody of your lord , and he is the most forgiving , most merciful .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . and among you in the animals you have made males and the children of the world , and made for you the same ; and he is the hearer , the seer .
until he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
o you who believe ! do not spend your property , neither your property nor your children , nor speak to the words of allah . whoever fears god , and is protected from the remembrance of allah , they are the losers .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
allah only forbids you from those who fought against you on account of religion and drove you out from your homes and helped you in your expulsion , that you make friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them , they are the wrongdoers .
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
when it is said to them , `` believe in what has been sent down to us from god , '' they say , `` we believe in it , '' and they will not believe in it , and say , `` if you were true believers , why did you not believe in it ? ''
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
to him belongs all supremacy in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
you never expected that the book would be revealed to you , except the mercy of your lord ; so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
they say , `` all that you have been avoiding is in the womb of the past and if you are steadfast in the life of this world , allah will be fully aware of all that they do . god is well-aware of all things . ''
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
until when they came to the valley of the ants , an ant said , `` o ants , enter your dwellings lest solomon and his hosts should crush you unawares . ''
and we have provided therein livelihoods for you , and for those you do not provide .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who have rejected our revelations and are arrogant until the gates of heaven will not be opened for them until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen and he was a messenger , a prophet .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
he said , “ what was the matter with you that you have taken the right course in the matter of yours ? ” they said , “ i have taken refuge in it , and it was said , “ this is the truth ; and indeed , he was one of the truthful . ”
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
and niggardly when good befalls him
and who guard their private parts
lot was also one of the messengers .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
and guard yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers .
when there covered the lote tree that which covered .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
but it will be only a single nudge .
we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
no associate has he . this am i commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer , for allah is with those who are patient .
and we have believed in the hearts of them when they said : our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , when they said : `` our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , even if they are not aware . ''
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness against you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear him on the day of judgment , and do not be a muslim . the promise of god is true . so let them not go to the way of allah , and do not be among the skeptics .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes , and let not pity for you to be grieved by the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let them be a witness against the believers .
and to recite the quran. ” whoever is guided is guided only for his own good , and whoever goes astray , say , “ i am only a warner . ”
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
o prophet ! urge the believers to fight , if there are twenty patient one among you , and if there are twenty of you , they will vanquish two hundred , and if there are a hundred , they will vanquish a thousand disbelievers .
and then severed his life-artery ,
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and pharaoh , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
say : `` o people of the book ! why do you reject the revelations of allah when allah is witness to all that you do ? ''
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` moses , the nobles are conspiring to kill you . leave . i am your well-wisher . ''
and the mother of the throne will be raised up for his throne , and they made obeisance to him . he said : `` o my father ! this is the matter of my father , and he is the one to whom i have said : `` o my father ! this is the matter of my lord , and indeed , he is the all-knower , the most merciful . ''
and do not be like the like of your women , the like of it , and do not bring it forth , and you will have the covenant with it , and you will have a group of them in the least , lest a group of you may take a small way in it , and allah will make you clear for what you used to do .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , the most gracious , the most merciful .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , neither shall you grieve for them , nor shall you grieve . ''
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
when moses said to his people : `` o my people , remember allah 's favour on you when he appointed prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any one of the worlds .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever befalls them , and those who establish prayer and spend of what we have provided them ,
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell . thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
undoubtedly allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
they said , “ by allah , indeed allah has preferred you above us , and we were indeed guilty . ”
and approach your women , while you follow it , and you will be one of the cheats , and you will be among the righteous . and bear with your duty to allah , and be dutiful to the believers .
falsehood can not approach it or from behind it . it is a revelation from the wise , the praised one .
say : 'my lord outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
those are the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever as a reward for what they used to do .
so remember me , i will remember you . thank me and do not be ungrateful to me .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
from pharaoh . indeed , he was a tyrant among the transgressors .
what concern do you have to mention it ?
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
and in their wealth wasthe right of thepetitioner and the deprived .
surely you are in different sayings ,
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ? ''
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she is guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
indeed , we have given you a clear victory
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , but their traffic profited not , nor are they guided .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
when the angels said , `` o mary , god gives you good news of a word from him whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , illustrious in this world and the hereafter , and one of those brought near .
it is one of the greatest things
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah , their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in faith ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and let those fearwho , if they leave behind them weak offspring would be afraid for them . so let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
and there will be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then moses threw down his staff , and it swallowed up all that they had falsely invented .
but if it were the time of a surety , they will not be allowed to save the other after it had come to them , except after it has come to them , if they were true to allah . and if they were true to allah , he will bring it to a people who know .
o ye who believe ! when ye have been of the believers , they shall come to you in account of that which they are wont to reckon , and that they may be asked about it . and if ye do not believe , then it is for you to be seen , and if ye do not believe , then it is for you to be seen , and if ye do not , it is for you to be seen , and that ye may be of the unbelievers .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . and among you in the animals you have made males and the children of the world , and made for you the same ; and he is the hearer , the seer .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to him belong all things . and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
do those who do evil think that they will get the better of us ? evil is the judgement that they make !
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe .
and say to those who are bent on denying the truth , `` fear their lord , and keep their duty to them , or whether they are free from their own hands , or to make a girl 's son , or whether they are free from their own hands , or a woman who is free from their own skill , or is the one who will be given to their own skill .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the life of this world ,
surely allah is the reality , no one can be absent from it . and those who believe , do not have a sense of faith . but those who believe , and do not have faith in the lord of the world , will have a more way .
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate themselves .
we have written in the psalms , after the reminder : `` my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ''
those who had surrendered themselves to allah , and they were not to be told . they said , `` we will not follow you . '' they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they have no power to say , `` it is god who will not be given a great punishment . ''
this is the creation of allah . show me what thosebeside him have created . nay , but the wrong-doers are in manifest error .
and we sent not before thee any messenger , but that we revealed unto him that : there is no god but i , so worship me .
and establish prayer , and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
so the sentence of our lord has come to pass against us , and we are tasting it .
the men of the past are exposed , and those who are bent on denying the truth are going to be seen in their homes . they will be told , `` they will have no share in god and his messenger . '' they are those who are truthful .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
so settle your plan , and come forward in ranks . whoever gains the upper hand today will surely prosper . ''
then fasten him with a chain , seventy cubits long .
he said , “ this is what you have been between me and me . ” but it is one of me , but it is one of me that i may bring it , and allah is the witness of what you do .
and the people of noah before . indeed , they were more unjust and insolent .
and among the people of moses there is a community who leadwith truth and do justice thereby .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
and indeed we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
do they not see that allah outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and we used to talk falsehoodwith vain talkers .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
then we revived you after your death that you might be grateful .
and remember , when we are a party of them , that we may listen to you so that they may listen to you , and they said , “ listen to the people of the world , when it is recited to their people , and we called them to the same religion , and we called them to the right way . ”
and we did not send down to his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor did we send .
for the day of judgement .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we shall absolve them of their misdeeds and we shall reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father for a promise that he had made for him . when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to allah , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
we sent noah to his people : `` i am a clear warner to you .
no ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and draw nigh .
and faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick . and a magician will not succeed . ’
do they await except that the hour will come upon them suddenly ? it has already come to them , but how can they benefit , when it has come to them ?
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
i am only a plain warner . ''
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
which none can touch except the purified .
and if there is a sign in the case of the people of the world , it is the case of the people of the dead , and you will have a portion of the people , and you will say , `` we witness the witness to the witness of the truth , '' and if we do , we do not wrong .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you will work corruption in the land twice , and you will reachgreat haughtiness .
we administered warnings to each of them , and eachwe brought into ruin .
and if you fear treachery from any of your allies , throw back to them with a treaty . god does not love the treacherous .
a fitting recompense .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , and barred others from the way of allah . there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said , `` our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost . ''
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is knower of all things .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the world .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud and were a guilty people .
and we will certainly test you until we know those who strive hard and persevere among you , and we will prove your reported .
whoever surrenders himself to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is an open enemy to man .
by those who swim smoothly ,
he who does not guide god , and guides to the right path . he will not find any one to whom he will , and on the day of resurrection , they will be the fire .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
so we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a few days , so that we might make them taste the punishment of humiliation in this life , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we have a reward if we are the victors ? '
see how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have gone astray and can not find a way .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
and he has created you from dust , then from a drop of fluid , then , from a drop of liquid , and it is not equal to him . he is not a forgetter ’ but there is not a single thing but he is with him . and he is not a forgetter
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving sight . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
that he is the lord of sirius .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
eschew all sin , open or secret . those who commit sin will be recompensed for what they have done .
so when the sight is dazed ,
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
say , “ who is the healer of the servants of god which he has created of his servants ? ” and who has made a provision of the sustenance of them , and that is the good things of the world to come ? thus do we explain the ayatin detail for those who do good .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have certainly committed a monstrous thing !
or has he created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky , and with the garden which we have sent down to the people of good ? is it not that they are the ones who are in the way of god ? in fact , they are the followers of the right way .
and that they say what they do not do ?
and indeed , the messengers , before you , are not waiting for them . and they will not be able to help them until they have come to know the truth of god . and indeed , allah has already come to you with a messenger and a noble messenger .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book , they will have the curse of god and cursed by the cursers ,
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
then he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed what displeases allah , and they disliked his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils of war belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and keep your duty to you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
he said : surely you will not be able to bear with me patiently .
on that day they will submit themselves to allah and all that they forged will forsake them .
it has been created for the people of the land and the end of those who have passed away before , and those who have passed away before it and those who have rejected allah and his messenger , and allah will declare to them that they are liars .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among the arraigned .
and had it not been that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most merciful roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
the god of mankind ,
he punishes whom he wills and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and allah has promised to those who believe , and those who believe , and those who believe , in the land , will be made known to them , and they will have their share in the land ; and those who are bent on denying the truth will have no share in the land , and they are the ones who are the ones who will be successful .
are you the ones who make the foundations of the sky , and in the cause of allah as a means of sacrifice ? it is not equal to those who believe in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and treasures and a noble station .
or have the gates of a garden , and eat with the adornment of the sky , or are the angels , or the heaven . and say , “ glory be to me , and i am only a messenger , and i am only a messenger . ”
for you therein are many fruits of which you will eat .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
is it not a lie that they say ,
this day we shall set a seal on their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will bear witness to what they used to earn .
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which god has assigned to you , but provide for them , and clothe them , and speak to them honourable words .
they said , “ call on your lord to make us to make plain to us the cow . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
and the roof uplifted
who measureth , then guides ,
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
and madesmooth for him .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah , their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
and he is the one who sends down water from the sky , so we shall bring it forth , and we shall make it a handful of twigs , from among the people of the garden , and of a people who are of the believers . lo ! herein is indeed a sign , yet most of them believe not .
you will see those who fear what is in the past , and it is we who have given them from it , and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , they will have the like of their lord , and that is the great success .
o you who believe ! be conscious of the fire , and be wary of the fire , and it is the fire of hell , and the angels will be secure , and the angels will not be secure from that which they have been commanded .
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , but they will not be able to do so .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what god has given them . we have prepared a humiliating punishment for those who deny the truth .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell , they will be in an evil plight , and have gone astray from the path .
if you could only see when they are made to stand before the fire , then they will say , `` would that we were sent back , then we will not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the believers . ''
and who pay thecharity .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
`` o my sons ! go and inquire about joseph and his brother and do not despair of god 's mercy . no one despairs of allah 's mercy except the unbelieving people . ''
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers . ''
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak the right words .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs ,
say : tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah will bring you light ? will you not hear ?
he will say , `` would that i had sent aheadfor my life . ''
and say thou : we believe in allah and the injeel and what hath been sent down unto abraham and that which hath been sent down unto abraham , and of ya'qub . and we have sent unto him of his signs and the ya'qub , and we are not of those who surrender .
they said , “ o moosa ! there is a tyrannical nation in it ; and we will not enter it until they leave it . if they leave it , we will enter . ”
indeed the charitable men and women , and those who lend a good loan to god will have multiplied for them , and theirs will be a noble reward .
and those of your women who commit lewdness against you , have four witnesses from among yourselves , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death comes to them or allah ordains for them someway .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said , `` has allah sent a human being as a messenger ? ''
they ask you to tell them , `` is it true ? '' say : `` yes , by my lord ! it is true , and you can not escape . ''
say : `` shall i worship only the lord of my lord , who is the lord of all things , the lord of all being ? '' and to your lord is the one who has no one to do so . and to your lord you will be brought forth .
those who believe , and are the ones who have borne witness to the truth , and have kept their duty to god and the last day . they will have their reward with god , and they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they said : 'put him and his brother off , and send forth heralds to the cities
`` my lord ! grant me a righteous son . ''
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their schemes .
i will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
and we shall show them a sign , and we will make them in the end of their own affair , that he may explain to them the truth , and that he is not aware of all things .
say , “ who is the healer of the servants of god which he has created of his servants ? ” and who has made a provision of the sustenance of them , and that is the good things of the world to come ? thus do we explain the ayatin detail for those who do good .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should impose on them insolence and disbelief .
they say , `` the most merciful has taken a son . '' glory to him ! rather , they are honoured servants !
and the religion of allah are only the true ones , and those who are given the book are in different groups , except after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to them . and that is a sign for those who believe not in the revelations of allah . and he is swift in fear .
forcing their feet into the center collectively ,
and we saved them and their people from the great distress .
thisand surely , allah weakens the deceitful plots of the unbelievers .
and when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has given you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god will feed ? you are only in clear error . ”
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , a clear book ,
and the lord of abraham and abraham , and he has enjoined upon them a good course , and he said : `` i have been sent to be a messenger . '' he said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers , and said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers . ''
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds and their life and death ? evil is the judgement that they make !
by the heaven full of paths ,
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
but whoever does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither injustice nor disparagement .
and thus have we appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners ; and sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
then he looked ,
turn to him , and fear him , and establish prayer , and be not of the idolaters .
those who take unbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? surely all honour belongs to allah .
they will say , “ all praise is to allah , who has made a promise for us , and we made the garden to grow into the garden , and we will make him die , and we will be the righteous . ”
who establish prayer and give zakah , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when we shall ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy : therein let them rejoice . this is better than that which they amass .
do they await except that the hour will come upon them suddenly ? it has already come to them , but how can they benefit , when it has come to them ?
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
go , then , wherever he approaches , for one who could not call to account at all , will be called to account for what they had done . and bring forth the words of their own souls , and bring to the children of the devil , and do not set up anything but delusion .
when the quran is recited , listen to it , and be silent , that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to hell .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
untouched before them by man or jinni -
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
we have honored the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! fear allah and forego the remaining usury , if you are believers .
and by the dawn as it breathes ;
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . surely his seizure is painful , severe .
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth . but allah disliked their wending , so he held them back , and it was said , `` stay with those who stay behind . ''
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
o my father ! serve not satan ; verily satan is a rebel against the beneficent allah .
those who were arrogant say : `` would that we had found for you many of those whom we had destroyed , as if they were doing away with them . thus does allah guide their deeds , and they will not be of the fire . ''
he said , ‘ no , indeed , my lord is with me , he will guide me . ’
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remember allah much , and remember god .
and your lord has mercy on them , and mercy on you , if you are to be faithful , then if you turn back , we would have hastened to you , but if you turn back , we will surely mete out to you the chastisement of the unbelievers .
as for those who strive in us , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
and we sent not before thee any messenger , but that we revealed unto him that : there is no god but i , so worship me .
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they shall be the greatest losers .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
do they feel secure that the punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
propound thou unto them the similitude of the present life , the like of that which we have sent forth from the sky , and a piece of water to gush forth from the sky . and allah is ever able to do all things .
and how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
and as for the people of pharaoh , and those who were before them , those who were before them denied the signs of allah and those who denied the signs of allah , and allah is the pardoner , the most merciful .
o you who believe ! do not spend your property , neither your property nor your children , nor speak to the words of allah . whoever fears god , and is protected from the remembrance of allah , they are the losers .
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with each other in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and some faces will be covered with misery .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
and see thou , then , thou shalt be a garden of gold , and a condiment for thy heart , and unto thee are the two of the two sects ; and the twain are two of the two sects . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
no indeed ! on that day they will be veiled from their lord .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who hurt moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no protector for you ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they will not be able to harm you at all , nor will they be able to harm you , and allah has given you wisdom and gave you what you had been given .
we have sent down to you the quran with truth , so that you may judge between people . and do not be a dictator between the people . but god has indeed made clear to you the way , and you will not be able to look at the messenger . indeed , allah is in clear error .
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when they entered to him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ we are afraid of you . ’
so wait , for theyare waiting .
he said , ‘ o my people ! have you seen me that i should have a specified means from my lord and good for me , and i do not give you any good , but i do not advise you , and to him i do not have a share in the least , and to him you do not have a guardian ? ''
he raised the sky , and set the balance .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and if what you have in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , he will turn you away from it , or he will punish whomever he wills . god has power over all things .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth . then he created the throne , and he has set up the throne with his throne . and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , `` expel the family of lot from your city . they are a people who want to be pure . ''
then we drowned the rest .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o my people , who would help me against allah if i drove them away ? will you not then take heed ?
say , “ then bring a book from allah which is better guiding than these two , and i will follow it , if you are truthful . ”
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path in the sea , fearing not , nor fear . ''
and it is not a frivolity .
those who have received a share of the book are made to have a share of it . and some of them have been sent down to you . say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been sent down to you . '' say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been brought back to god . ''
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
they will say , “ all praise is to allah , who has made a promise for us , and we made the garden to grow into the garden , and we will make him die , and we will be the righteous . ”
and the people of the desertcame to the matter , do not turn away from it , except by the fact that i may keep up from it a successor , but the words of their hearts are sealed , but they are the ones who are in the same manner .
or , whether it be , or , , whether it be in the midst of the clouds , it will be set forth from the clouds , and in the darkness of the light , and when it is cloven asunder from the darkness of the rock , and when it is in his hand , he will not find light .
and recall what time we took a covenant from you , saying : shed not your blood , nor drive each other out of your homes , then ye ratified it and ye bore witness .
they were arrogant in the land and the women of the weak . but they have no faith—so that it is for those who were before them , but you will not be suffered to have a portion of the decree of god . you will not find any law in the least .
and every one of them has ranks according to what they have done , so that god may reward them for their deeds .
and solomon did not take to himself a laughing-stock , and he said , `` my lord , seize me , '' he said , `` o my lord , take me as a heritage to your deeds , and give me a share of what you have been doing . ''
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them to the fire . evil is the place to which they have been led .
in the hearts of those whose hearts are in doubt . they will say : `` we are afraid of that which we have been doing . ''
but those who reject our signs , are the people of the left hand .
it will be said , `` enter the gates of hell to abide therein . what an evil abode ! ''
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with a load of debt ?
and man has come to his lord , when he comes to his lord , and then , when it comes to his lord , he will make you slip with his favour , and say , “ enjoy a little , and you will have a share of the fire . ” but you are the people of the fire , , “ this is a brief loss . ”
except those upon whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the merciful .
but when they came to them with our signs , the true one , and the one with whom we gave the truth , the pharaoh and his nobles said , “ o dear son , the son of your father is a son , and the same one of the people who are bent on denying the truth – it is only the same to the faithless , and the faithless are only denying . ”
does he think that no one sees him ?
they had been affluent before that ,
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
as for those whose scale is light , they are those who lose their souls because they disbelieved in our verses .
and the believers will not be averse to the believers , nor will the believers have their protector . and whoever does what is true , it is only for allah to whom you have no option . and to allah you will be declared . and to allah you will be called to account .
the word has been realized against most of them , so they do not believe .
and the two of them are not equal , nor is the one of them that is not equal , and the other salt and bitter . and of the signs of your lord , you will be of the cheats , so that you may take heed .
nay , but that day they will submit .
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
for a great day ,
we will brand him on the muzzle .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
say : `` ignorant people ! do you order me to worship other than allah ? ''
she said : o chiefs ! counsel me in my affair : i decide no affair till you are present with me .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when there was no longer time for escape !
and with them will be maidens with large , eyes ,
they said , “ build a pyre for him and throw him into the blazing fire . ”
it is he who has made you successors on the earth , so whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of their lord , it is only for the unbelievers who have no faith .
and ask one of you regarding the one who speaks about one another . say : `` allah will make you one of the two women , and if he is one of the two men , it is only for the two of them , and if he should be of the two men , it will be said to them : `` for the two of you are the two men , and the women of the two , it will be the same for them , and allah has knowledge of all things . '' and allah
the freeing of a slave ,
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
satan has gained the mastery over them , so he has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
and they will be made to be subjected to shame on the sides of it , and they are made to be in the cause of god . they are the ones who are the outwitted . they will have no faith in god and the messenger .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell . thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
these are the believers . they are high grades with their lord , and forgiveness and noble provision .
they will abide therein for ages .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he will requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
and o my people ! ask the people of this for your lord ; then to him you have sent down abundant water , and to him you will be sent down in abundance . and in order that you may give me increase in respect of this world .
and if they intend to deceive you , allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt about it .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he will requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
those who deny the truth will be the inmates of the fire , and the fire will not be lightened for them , but it is not for them to die , and that is how they will have a great punishment .
then we awakened them to know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
they say , `` god has fabricated it . '' if he wills , he forged a seal on it ; and allah knows what is in the hearts . god knows all that is in the hearts .
o you who believe ! be the waters of water , and the cattle , and the cattle , for you to be accepted from allah . it is the same for you , and the same , so that it may be the same for them . so fear allah , and keep your duty to him , and be successful .
who is brought up among ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
you never expected that the book would be revealed to you , except the mercy of your lord ; so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those who are on the earth , so that it might deliver him .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
and when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book to make it clear to people , and not hide it , and they threw it behind their backs , and sold it for a paltry gain , and sold it for a paltry gain .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a long night through .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
those who say : `` our lord ! we believe , so forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of the fire . ''
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a tightening grip .
when he has created you in stages ?
so on that day they will share the punishment .
and if they belie you , those before them also belied , their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with scriptures , and the illuminating book .
and when allah has made them feel secure , they instantly become a prey to the earth , o people who are in the earth . you will surely be responsible for your own souls . and to us you will be recompensed , and to us you will be returned .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` moses , the nobles are conspiring to kill you . leave . i am your well-wisher . ''
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication ; and whoever does evil , will have the punishment .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we have a reward if we are the victors ? '
and he gave you all that you asked . and if you count allah ’ s blessing , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , most ungrateful .
on the day when all secrets are examined
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are truthful . ''
and he has made for you a portion of the cattle , that he has ordered them to bring his staff , and they do not know . so eat of that which allah has provided you . so eat of that which allah has provided you . indeed , he is a manifest foe to you .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
and grapes and clover ,
and those who regulate the affair .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly , and they were a guilty people .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
and who avoid nonsense .
so , and we shall wed them to wideeyed houris .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; and they ruin none except themselves , but they do not perceive .
when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger ' you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is of the places of worship , which is in the name of allah , to make them a portion of it ? they shall be in the presence of allah , and they shall be in the hereafter a torment afflictive .
except to convey the message of god and his messages . whoever disobeys god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . ’
that is the bounty from allah ; and sufficient is allah as knower .
so when the sight is dazed ,
and we made the children of israel to be told , `` it was revealed to the people of the pharaoh and to the people of moses . '' he revealed to it , `` i have been told to be a fabricator . '' and we made the same to them the same thing , but we made them a share of the land , and we did not make them to be a tyrant .
by no means ! surely he offers opposition to our signs .
he will guide them and improve their condition .
“ and you have forbidden to you the woman , your sons , and your females is females . you are the one who is your male and female , and you are one of the conceited . ” that is the case of your companion , and you are one of the two who are in the same manner . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it is he who has created you , and he has created you , and in order that he might make it seem fair to you , so that when the two of them said , “ allah will swear , if you are a noble messenger , we will surely give you a sound , and when you were a muslim , they said , ‘ god will certainly swear to you . ’
the romans have been defeated
as bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs . will they not then hear ?
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the all-beneficent , '' they say , `` what is the most merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves to what you command us ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
when they came to you , they believe in our signs , say , `` peace be upon you . '' say , `` peace be upon you , if you are one of those who have committed a sin . '' then , if you are one of the truthful , he is indeed forgiving and merciful .
and otherof its typekinds .
we have done good deeds with the human being , and he said , `` we had been called to my parents and my father . '' then we sent it to him , saying , `` o man , i have been worthy of worship , and to me is the return . ''
pelting them with stones of baked clay ,
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and transgression and disobedience to the messenger , but converse in piety and piety . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
with it he makes crops grow , and olives , dates and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
and give me a good report in later generations .
your lord creates what he wills and chooses . they have no choice . glory be to allah , and exalted be allah above what they associate !
and others who have not yet joined them , and he is the mighty , the wise .
they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' the fact is that they said : `` the son of allah is only a thing which they have been doing . '' that is what they used to do .
then we destroyed the others .
so have we not travelled on the earth , so that they might be able to see them before these , and were stronger in power than it , and we made them more powerful than them , and they were not wronged .
those who deny our revelations are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever god wills , he leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wishes , he puts him on a straight path .
and the reminder is to you , so that it may be a reminder for you , and to make it clear for the purpose of the world , and in order that it may be a guidance for them , so that they may believe in the morning .
when moses said to his people , `` remember allah ’ s blessing on you when the people of pharaoh 's people will be the biggest of you . in this there is the punishment of pharaoh . indeed in that is a lie from your lord . ''
surely in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous and their fathers , their wives , and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , “ would that i had died before this , and were completely forgotten . ”
our lord ! vouchsafe unto us that which thou hast promised us through thy messengers , and humiliate us not on the day of resurrection . lo ! thou failest not the tryst .
so when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but fabricated magic , and we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
and denies the best ,
moses said , `` my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and whose abode is the good end . the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife nor son .
and they swear by allah , in the land , and enjoin what you may devise , and that allah has given them a truth , until allah has caused the truth to triumph , and they are the averse .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
nothing is said to you except what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
among thornless lote-trees ,
surely those who turn their backsafter guidance has been shown to them , satan has embellished their fancies and busied them up with false hopes .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
they will hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
when the awe had departed from abraham and the glad tidings reached him , he pleaded with us for the people of lot .
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you took the calfin his absence , and you were unjust .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
that allah may give the others to his own virtue , and the evil-doers , and the evil-doers will be in the sight of the fire , and he will be the losers , and they will be the losers .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities .
sailing under our observation as reward for him who was rejected .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with a bad deed . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and that we may make them seem decorous to their own people , and he will be blind to those who are blind , and he will be distraught . and one of the same will be one of the unjust . and one of them will be the same ; and those who do not commit the truth , will be the harmdoers .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and a fair resort .
and you will see the sinners to enter the fire in utter humility . the unbelievers will say , `` indeed , the losers are the ones who do not believe in the day of judgment . '' the wrongdoers will be told , `` indeed , the wrongdoers are the losers .
and they said , “ o sorcerer , pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . we will certainly be guided . ”
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
and he will say , “ allah has promised you , and i made a covenant with you , and i have no power to keep you away from the right path , and i do not call you to your way , but you will have a humiliating punishment . ”
aforetime , as guidance for mankind , and he has sent down the criterion . those who deny the signs of allah will have a severe punishment . god is majestic and revengeful .
allah has indeed the wealth of the faithful and the rich in the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah , and those who fight for the cause of allah , and who are in the manner of allah 's way . that is the recompense of what they have been doing . that is the recompense of what they used to do .
and indeed , those who have invented a lie against you , think that they are a prey for what they have uttered in the same manner . but he who commits the right of his sins , is a great punishment and a great punishment .
and what you do not see ,
and whoever is certain of the way of the truth , it is he who is his command , and he is the most disputatious of people .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is all the same for you whether you call them or keep silent .
they said : `` we augur ill of you . if you do not desist , we will certainly stone you , and a painful punishment will befall you . ''
we have never assigned to any human being immortality before you . if you die , will they live forever ?
until when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back ,
they said , “ we worship idols , and we are devoted to them . ”
they said : the meed of him who in whose pack it is found will be his recompense . thus we requite wrong-doers .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
it is only one of mankind that will be the same for some of mankind , if good fortune befalls me , and if good fortune befalls me , they will be lost in it , and that is the home . this is the re-compense for what they used to commit .
he neither believed nor prayed ,
and verily , those who disbelieve , and say : allah is one of the two , and there is no god except allah . and if allah is not one of the disbelievers , there shall be no god except him , and for them is a painful doom .
or do you ask them for tribute ? the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
it is not a revelation that they could not be composed by god . it confirms what was before it , and the clear book is revealed to it . there is no doubt in it from the lord of the universe .
and when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book to make it clear to people , and not hide it , and they threw it behind their backs , and sold it for a paltry gain , and sold it for a paltry gain .
and we helped them so that they were victorious .
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him , and his pleasure , and gardens of eternal bliss .
moses said : `` o pharaoh , i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
do not turn your face away from people and do not walk proudly on earth . god does not love the arrogant showoffs .
no intercession availeth with him except for him who gives permission until the awe of him , and they say : the truth is . lo ! he is the sublime , the great .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops and cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both both power , so that they will not be able to do so . you and your followers will be the victors . ”
then whoever changes the bequest after he has heard it , the sin of it is only upon those who change it . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and among them is he who says : 'give me leaveand tempt me not . ' surely , they have fallen into temptation . surely hell encompasses the unbelievers .
and the birds , gathered together , all obedient to him .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
but those who reject our signs , will afflict them for their disobedience .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , and for those who believe and do good works is forgiveness and a great reward .
do they ascribepartners that create nothing and are themselves created ?
in which are lawsright and straight .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity so that they may return .
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say , “ our lord , why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your verses and become of the believers ? ”
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
and when you see our signs , they turn away from us , and turn away from it until when you are in a state of the unjust , and when you are afflicted by the people of the town , they will surely be destroyed .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then remember ?
and whoever is in the presence of god , the most honourable , the most honourable will know that it is with him , and to him is the best knower of all that is right . and those who disbelieve will be in the same manner .
an orphan near of kin .
and we turnedupside down , and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
so the command of his lord came to them , and he said , ‘ he was a muslim , and then he has given him wisdom and reforms . but if god had given the whole of his people , he would have bestowed on them a great punishment .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will not find any helper for him .
so he resolved to scare them out of the land : but we drowned him and those with him all together .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance ; so give good news to my servants ,
and when they see a sign they scoff at it ,
indeed , you love the love of god , but they love the people of the book , and the people of the book will say , `` we are believers . '' but when you are only one of them , they would say , `` indeed , allah knows what is in the breasts of the innermost of the chests . ''
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
then he glanced a glance on the stars .
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to come to them , the punishment would have been struck by them , and they will not be able to come near .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before a painful punishment comes upon them . ''
o mankind ! fear your lord ; surely the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
leave me to those who deny the truth , and give them a little respite .
they are not able to help them , and they will be broughtas their levied troops .
those before them denied , and how was my disapproval ?
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
o you who believe ! do not set up the covenant with allah , and have forbidden , and that which is forbidden to you , and do not make a bequest to them . and do not make a breach with them , and do not be responsible for one another . and fear allah , for he is the pardoner , the most merciful .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decided a matter , and that they should have a matter to be in manifest error .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
say , “ if you had found your parents and your wives and your wives , and your possessions and your lives , or a trade that you are made for , they are the ones who have turned their backs , and that you may have a group of them , and god ’ s way . god does not guide the tyrannical people .
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were among the righteous .
did we not destroy the ancients ?
all praise is due to allah , the lord of the worlds .
to your lord alone is the recourse that day .
then he became a clot . and he created him , and formed him .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
then we appointed for him a drop of time , then we brought it down , and then we brought it down with the clouds , and it is the same to us that we should be the best of the ones who are the best in the breasts . and allah is the best of all judges .
we created man from an extract of clay ,
abaseand exalt .
on that day , the children of adam will be set in ranks , lord , and he will say , ‘ i swear by the idols , which you did not know . ’
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are naught but stories of the ancients . '
except the companions of the right hand .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until allah will judge between them . he is the best of judges .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and hell will be made visible to him who seeth ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
whoever takes god and his messenger , and those who have believed , the party of god will surely triumph .
and who sent down water from the sky in a measured manner , and we revive thereby a dead land . likewise , you will be brought forth .
because of their sins they were drowned , and made to enter into the fire , and they found none to help them against allah .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
say , “ o people , if you are in the religion of mine , then know that i am not one to worship besides allah . he is the only lord , and i am commanded to be among you in the company of the muslims . ”
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land which we had blessed for all nations .
allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and they come not to the battle but a little .
then on usthe explaining of it .
and we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book , among their seed , and some of them are guided . but many of them are transgressors .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and we guided them before , and noah , among his descendants , david , and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
leave me to those who deny the truth , and give them a little respite .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
nay , but they will come to know !
he will say , `` by god , you almost ruined me .
indeed , he has revealed to you the qur'an , so that you will be brought to the end , or the everlasting life . say , “ my lord knows best those who are guided , and he knows best those who are guided . ”
when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you have to cast . '
and indeed we know that they say , ‘ it is only a human being who teaches him . ’ the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
but we found not there except one house of muslims .
the angels and the spirit descend in it by the permission of their lord , with every command .
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come forth from the tombs to their lord .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and to the people of the ad , we said , ‘ o my servants ! worship god ! you have no other god other than god . ’ so you will not be able to make a sign in the earth , but you will have a share in the land , and do not be a painful punishment .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and we have made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and rivers ,
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am one of the muslims ? ”
anda'ad and thamud , and the people of ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and pharaoh , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought to the punishment .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
he said , “ the punishment of god has averted you . will you then dispute with one another ? you will have no relation with god . i too will be waiting with you , and you will be waiting with me . ”
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zakariya .
say : `` when you are promised to the day of judgment , you can not put it back . ''
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received the sanction of the merciful and whose word is acceptable to him .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? '
why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us to the righteous people ? ''
there is no one but a single person who will not be of any benefit to any other people , if it be that he should be of no use to it , nor will he be of those who keep their devotional obligations , until they are in awe of their lord , and that he may be of those who are in awe , and to allah is the return .
and when our messengers came to them with a revelation , the revelation of the truth is said : `` if only our lord will guide me , then indeed , our lord will not guide me , and indeed , we are not going to believe in him . ''
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and he taught adam all the names , then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you did not know , nor did your people before this . so be patient , for the outcome of the pious ones .
this is the law of god . you will not find any change in the law of god .
and he has set up the heart with the hearts of the earth , if it be that you have made the earth a means of disquiet in which you are set in hearts , you can take the way to their hearts , but allah is the almighty , the wise .
a throng of the ancients
or the giving of food in a day of hunger
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great attainment .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs . will they not then hear ?
on the day when the earth is changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will come before allah , the one , the irresistible .
o mary , we have given you the book in the matter of truth , and do not follow the religion of justice , and follow the way of allah . for those who are on the day of resurrection , they will have a painful punishment .
he was one of our believing servants .
that he is the lord of sirius .
and all that they have brought forward to the people of the calf can come out of every time , and do not be responsible for the enemies of allah , so that you will not be able to know the word of allah , and you will not be able to know the least , but you will not be wronged .
know that the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . and they are in the midst of the goods of the heavens and the children of the heavens and the children of the heavens and the children of israel , and do not be of the people of the heaven . and he is the most disputatious of people .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
indeed abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
none but god can avert it .
and that which is in the breasts is made public ,
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit evil . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , and a guidance and a mercy for mankind , so that they may remember .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths , that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
we know that you are disheartened by what they say .
and for man is the human being , and to whom we gave the book . then , they will say , `` be to my servant , '' and they will be told , `` to be my servant of god , and that you may be of the righteous . ''
do you think that the two of you will enter the sacred mosque , and they used to incline towards you and to make fun of them ? and they do good , and the relatives , and the orphans , and the needy , and the traveller . and they are the ones who are good , and the wayfarer .
and he it is who disbelieves among the people of the book , and they are in the midst of their footsteps . so they would not be brought back to the first , but they thought that they would not be brought back to their own souls . then , if they were to take heed , then they would have been told , `` o men of understanding , you would have been called to account . ''
indeed in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
on that day they will submit themselves to allah and all that they forged will forsake them .
my authority is gone from me . ''
thus does we reveal to you an arabic quran , so that you may be able to be able to be able to gather them to the day of resurrection , and to be a group of them to enter the garden , and to hell they will be presented .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it is all the same for him whether you speak softly or aloud , whether one hides himself in the night or conspicuousby day .
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams . ”
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and the two of them are not equal , nor is the one of them that is not equal , and the other salt and bitter . and of the signs of your lord , you will be of the cheats , so that you may take heed .
half of it , or reduce it a little ,
accursed be the conjecturers
and they give food , for the love of him , the needy , the orphan , and the captive ,
said firaun , “ have you believed in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have plotted in the city that you may expel its people from the city , so you will know . ”
or do they say : `` a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time ! ''
and they say , “ when will this promise come to pass , if you are truthful ? ”
say , `` i am forbidden to worship those you invoke besides god . '' say , `` i will not follow your desires . i would have gone astray , and i would not be among the guided . ''
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
and when the messengers areappointed a time ,
who has , through his grace , lodged us in the abode of permanence , wherein there will not touch us weariness . there will not touch us any fatigue in it .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
except the chosen servants of allah .
from his mercy he has made you night and day for you to rest , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and do the right .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
and banish all trepidation .
he will guide them and improve their condition .
untouched before them by man or jinni -
gardens of eden , where they will recline , and they will abide therein , and they will have whatever they desire . thus allah will reward the pious .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
but allah is not free from you to be pleased , but you are not pleased with the servants , but if you follow the right path , then you will be brought back to your lord . he is the knower of all that is in your hearts , and if you go astray , then indeed , he is the all-knower of what you do .
have you considered him who turned away ,
say , “ o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own benefit ; and whoever goes astray , goes astray against himself . ”
by the clear book ,
except for our first death , and we shall not be punished ?
this is hell which the guilty called a lie .
they will answer , `` we were not among those who prayed ,
and desire that you should be like those who disbelieve , as if they were disbelievers , then they will become a single blast , so that they may be driven away , and if they turn away , then they will be asked to be of those who have gone astray . and if they turn away , they will not be helped .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord .
so turn away from them , and say : peace ! they will soon come to know .
his are the ships with elevated sails on the sea like mountains .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he turned away from him , and follows his pride ? and if you call them to guidance , we have not made them a guide , and if you invite them to guidance ,
then the end of those who did evil was the worstbecause they denied the signs of allah and mocked at them .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
the punishment of your lord will surely come to pass .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever follows the right way , it is only for his own gain , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
thus do we recompense him who transgresses and does not believe in the signs of his lord ; and the punishment of the hereafter is severer and more lasting .
the idolaters say , `` these are many of the cattle and the women that has been forbidden . '' but we have provided them with some of them , and we gave you some of them , and some of them were given to you . god will surely requite them all that they were doing .
o you who believe ! do not befriend a people who have incurred the wrath of allah , and despair of the hereafter as the unbelievers are in despair .
then lodged it in a secure place
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you did not know , nor did your people before this . so be patient , for the outcome of the pious ones .
your endeavors are indeed diverse .
and as for the unbelievers , they would have cut off the end of their own hands , and the chief of them is a set of silver , and if it is a thing to be seen , he would have made for you a part of it . and if only he should be of the unbelievers , he would have made your duty to be a qarinto you . and if you were to be of the unbelievers , it would be a great triumph .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad ,
he said , “ it is your lord who says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
have you not seen that they are the ones who have been sent down to you , that they are the ones that have been sent down before you ? but they are to be deluded by you , and they will have no power to go astray from what they have been forging . and satan will lead them astray .
so we brought forth from it the believers ,
has there come to you the story of the hosts
they did not forbid each other from the wickedness they did . evil indeed was that which they were doing .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in the lord of those who disbelieve , their lord will be just in a torment of a grievous day , and they will not be laid low in it . that is the way for that which they have been fabricating .
and when they have turned away from him , he said , “ did you not know that your father has already been sent down upon you with a witness from your own hands , and he has made for you a witness from your own hands ? and i do not ask you any reward until he wills . he is the best of judges . ”
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and a description of those who passed away before you , and an advice for the pious .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
fruits . and they will be honoured ,
as for the like of allah , they said , ‘ god has no book . ’ they said , ‘ god has no book . ’ say , ‘ it is god who has sent down a book , and you will have a share of what you have received . ’ say , ‘ it is god who has revealed you , and you will be given to their differences . ’
it is a tree that grows from the bottom of hell .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
it is your lord who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and then on the day of resurrection , the sun and the moon will be recited to the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon are recited to the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon are of the rest .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
from which you are turning away .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : worship allah , and behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
do you not see those who have gone out of fear of death , while they are heedless of it ? and allah said , `` give life to the life of this world , and indeed , allah is the bestower of bounty . ''
and when allah said to them : `` o jesus , son of mary ! do you say that i am one of the two gods ? '' he said , `` glory be to me ! indeed , you are the knower of the innermost of the chests ! ''
but they hamstrung her , and he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied .
that indeed is an unjust division .
now ? when you have rebelled before and were of the mischief-makers ?
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received the sanction of the merciful and whose word is acceptable to him .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength . he was penitent .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without harm . this is another sign ,
then the people of moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a lowing sound . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to it , and they were unjust ?
yet he is eager that i should give him more .
and you will be three sorts .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knowing , wise .
o you who believe ! when you have died and become a witness between you and the sound , it is just a word of justice , if you are a witness between the two , and if you are a witness between the two , you would have been told , `` indeed , if you are a witness between the two , you will certainly be brought back to the other . ''
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those other than him . and whomsoever allah leads astray , he has no guide .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their souls will not believe .
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
they said , “ never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and he who created us , so decide to him . you can only decree the life of this world .
so keep your duty to allah as much as you can , and obey , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own greed , they are the successful .
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
and that which is with thee is the praise of allah , and the angels and the angels , and he will be of the people of the whole which allah willeth . and unto him shall be the cry , and he is the mighty , the mighty .
and allah sent down the word to them , which has been revealed to them , and the qur'an is one of them . it is the same one of them that it may be . this is the way of allah to whom he will . and that is the way of allah that he will guide whom he will , and that is the way of allah whom he will ; and that is the way of allah that which is in the way .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness , and a great reward .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass .
and they worship besides allah that which is no sustenance from the heavens and the earth , nor can they have any power over them .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
so woe to those who pray ,
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
but they denied him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them to be returned to our signs , and we made them leaders , so that they were warned .
they said : we believe in you , so do not be one of those who despair .
and he drew out his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
indeed , they are the ones who are in the fire , so that they may be condemned by their messenger . god knows what they conceal and what they disclose . indeed , allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal .
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee and purified thee . he hath chosen thee above all women ,
if you find no one in the way of god , do not enter until permission has been given to you , if you are told , `` go away . this is purer for you , and allah knows all that you do . ''
moses said : `` o my lord ! verily , you are in the life of this world and the hereafter , and our lord is well aware of that which is on you , and that they will not be brought forth by the way of a painful torment . they will not believe until a painful punishment comes upon them until a painful torment .
: `` we feed you only for the sake of god . we desire not from you any reward nor thanks ,
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
to god belong the angels in addition to the angels , so that they may turn away from the command of god . god will not bring any people away from it , until he does not leave any way to help them , and allah will not bring to them any equivalent .
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
with it he makes crops grow , and olives , dates and grapes , and all kinds of fruit . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
so whoever wills may remember it .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not with them when they agreed upon their plan , devising .
and when we took a pledge from the prophets , and from you , and from noah , abraham , moses and jesus son of mary , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
and laugh and not weep ,
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years , andadd nine
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and on the day when he shall be made to compensate them , and then he will be in hell , and then it will be said , “ this is what you used to do . ” and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
untouched before them by man or jinni -
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then , after that , he has removed from them a place of return , and a party of them , a party of you , : `` if only we have been sent to be of the things of your own hands , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of allah that you have been given , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of god that you have been promised , and that they will be told , `` indeed , it is
allah has not ordaineda bahirah or a wasilah or a hami but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them are not aware .
grateful for his favors . god chose him and guided him to a straight path .
and we said to the children of israel after him , “ dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter comes , we will bring you all together . ”
say : 'what is the matter with you that you should create the like of it , or did you create the truth ? ' then say , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” then say , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” then say , “ god is the un-wanting . ”
and we made his offspring the survivors .
he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and the earth . all it is from him . surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
i do not seek any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
o ye who believe ! ye believe in him , and be careful ofallah , and he will cause your sins to enter the truth , and that day , shall be brought forth with them . lo ! our lord ! vouchsafe unto us that which is in the midst of all that is in the sight .
surely you are in different sayings ,
and all that they have brought forward to the people of the calf can come out of every time , and do not be responsible for the enemies of allah , so that you will not be able to know the word of allah , and you will not be able to know the least , but you will not be wronged .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving sight . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
o you who believe ! when you meet a party , be firm and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
and they say , “ when will this judgement come , if you are truthful ? ”
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least ; and if a mustard seed is a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father ; we will surely do . ”
then it is for us to call them to account .
he said : peace be upon thee ! i will ask forgiveness of my lord for thee . lo ! he is ever gracious unto me .
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction from your own hands . and do good ; surely allah loves the doers of good .
among you is he who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` allah has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass , and you can not escape .
and do not approach adultery . it is indeed an indecency and an evil way .
and thus do your lord decide , and the word of your lord will be fulfilled to the rising of the sun and the children of israel , and on the account of the prophecy and the children of israel , as a legacy , for your lord is knowing and wise .
and there is no one comparable to him .
and it will be said to them : 'where are theye worshipped-
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . surely his seizure is painful , severe .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
and when they said : lo ! joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are dearer to our father . lo ! our father is in error manifest .
when he fled to the laden ship .
o you who believe ! take not your duty to allah , and bring a witness to you , and to be a proof of your affair , if you were to be one of those who are false , and if you were a muslim , then know that allah is aware of what you do .
then pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem , and then came .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
it is he who gives the glad news to the believers who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do you ask of any of you , but the reward of those who do good is in the same manner . god is forgiving and appreciative .
on the day when the unbelievers will be told , `` what is the truth ? '' they will say , `` this is the truth . '' nay , but it is the truth that allah will say : `` yea , by oath of the unbelievers ! '' verily , it is in truth the unbelievers .
and some of you can take a way to you , and the people of the world , and the people of tubba ' ; and when they are called to it , they will be responsible for it , and they will be responsible for it . and if they turn away , it will be for you to make a clear authority for them .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful . ''
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the pious .
and we did show you that which you did , and if they were to make you a thing , then do not have any knowledge of what you have done , and do not be aware of what you have been doing .
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
does he not know that when what is in the graves is overthrown ,
a proclamation from allah and his messenger on the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , if you turn away , then you will not be able to turn away from it . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
or its water will sink into the earth , so you will never be able to find it .
do you not bring itback ?
and what is the matter with them that allah should not punish them when they obstruct people from the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its guardians are only the pious , but most of them do not know .
allah has promised the hypocrites , men and women , and the unbelievers , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . this is sufficient for them , and allah has cursed them , and for them is a lasting punishment .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , and seek forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they are near kin , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and do the right .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
they turn away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
verily , we have invented a lie against allah , if it be that you are the word of allah , after that , we are the ones who make things clear to you . and we have been informed of your lord . you are the ones who are the best of all things , and in the end you are the best of all things . ''
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . evil is the patron , and an evil friend .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : transient magic .
indeed , he has revealed to you the qur'an , so that you will be brought to the end , or the everlasting life . say , “ my lord knows best those who are guided , and he knows best those who are guided . ”
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land which we had blessed for all nations .
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment overtakes you by night or by day , what will the guilty hasten ? ”
those who believe not in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in others .
do you not consider that we have been sent to the people that we have revealed to the people of warning , saying , `` indeed , this is a manifest magician , and the good news of their lord has come to him ? '' they said , `` indeed , this is indeed a manifest magician . ''
say : `` o my people ! work according to your ability . i too am acting . soon you will know who will be theend of the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed . ''
in both of them will be fruit trees and date-palms and pomegranates .
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without harm . this is another sign ,
or lest you should say : `` our fathers ascribed partners to god , '' and we were descendants after them . will you then destroy us for what the falsifiers did ?
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten to him with whatever we wish , for whom we please , and then we will make him enter hell , condemned and rejected .
until , when he reached between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
and we defer it not except for a term appointed .
your lord will judge between them by his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
rude and fake ,
god advises you never to do this again if you are believers .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied them and refused .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
so the punishment seized them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
so set your face toward the religion , inclining toward truth , and have no change in allah 's creation . there is no alteringallah 's creation . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and there is a painful punishment for them because of their lies .
they said , `` call on your lord to make clear to us that which is well known to us . indeed , it is the same to them that most of them are a true purpose . indeed , we will guide them , if god wills . ''
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
there is none who can avert it .
those whom they call upon , seek the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
he would have led us astray from our gods , if we had not been steadfast to them , and they will know who is further astray from the path . ''
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds , and the birds , and its glorification , and he knows all that they do ? god knows what they do .
and collectand hide it .
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set up , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought and judgement will be passed between them equitably , and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
then it will be said to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of eternity . are you requited what you used to earn ? ”
so observe the effects of allah 's mercy , how he revives the earth after its death . he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
the egyptians asked them , `` what is the matter with you if you are liars ? ''
allah , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief , if they do not believe in this narration .
the gardens of eden , which they will enter , and those who were righteous among their fathers , their spouses , and their offspring will come to them from every gate .
the messengers said : `` we are only a mere mortal like you . but allah will help him with his servants . we did not want to be a sign of his servants , but to those who put their trust in allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
o moses , i am god , the almighty , the wise .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
then hell will be his abode .
leave me to those who deny the truth , and give them a little respite .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein .
we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
and on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we shall absolve them of their misdeeds and we shall reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
the unbelievers are the ones who are the ones whose hearts are cast down , and here is the same ; and it is god who has sent down the shechina upon the believers ; and allah is the knower of all things .
and it is the record of every soul , but the guilty are going to be in their hearts . and the hearts of those whose hearts are wasted , and they will say : `` woe to us ! indeed , your lord does not wrong , nor do you .
he admits whomever he wishes into his mercy ; and the wrongdoers have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and otherof its typekinds .
so he said to his wife , `` follow the bidding of what we have given them , or get away from what we had given them . '' thus did we make the two of the people to meet him , and we made the people of the earth a succession , but most of the people do not know .
'peace be upon you , for that you persevered . ' excellent is the abode .
he said : my lord ! expand for me my breast .
has taught the quran .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then remember ?
and kind to his parents , and he was not arrogant or disobedient .
nothing prevents their offerings from their contributions , except that they believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend reluctantly .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , and to him you have a comprehensive authority ? and there is a guidance for you from the people of the world , and a clear book .
and abraham enjoined his sons to his sons , and said : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen this religion for you , so do not die except as muslims . ''
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , for he is the knower of the innermost of the chests .
they will go around between it and boiling water .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
he said , “ i am not one to prostrate before a human being whom you created from clay , from molded mud . ”
then hell will be his abode .
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
in both of them will be fruit trees and date-palms and pomegranates .
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and , when the son of mary said to the son of mary , `` i am a messenger to you . the messengers have come to you with good news , and when my signs came to you , and said , `` this is obvious witchcraft . ''
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
he intends to drive you out of your land by his magic , so what do you advise ?
and the word of mary is not but a messenger , and there is not a messenger before them . and he is a man of truth , and a man of truth , and a man of truth , so that they may be turned away .
and they came to their father in the evening weeping .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you dispute .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
from the right and on the left , in crowds ?
he said : `` o my people ! have you considered me from the right path , and i have mercy upon my lord and mercy from me , and they will have no share in it ?
so i swear by what you see
that he may make that which satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened , and verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
then cast him into hell ,
is he who brings the living and the light of the two , and we made the two of them a light , and we made it a light from the life of the world , and that it may be that it is in the midst of that which they are doing ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth in the evening ,
god knows best your enemies . god is sufficient as a protector and a helper .
when they sat around it
joseph , turn away from this , and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed the guilty . ''
allah is he who created you from weakness , then gave you strength after weakness , then appointed after weakness weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills , and he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
but we see it near .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
except from their wives or their dependents—for then they are free from blame .
and set not up with allah another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
and it is the record of every soul , but the guilty are going to be in their hearts . and the hearts of those whose hearts are wasted , and they will say : `` woe to us ! indeed , your lord does not wrong , nor do you .
and what do you know , perhaps he might be purified ,
and they say , “ why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god is indeed a guide for whom he will . he guides whom he will , and they will turn to him . ”
and those who are bent on denying the truth and say , `` our lord , forgive us , and leave us to the path of those who believe , and do not be of the believers . our lord ! indeed , you are the most gracious , the most merciful . ''
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in the fire of hell . they are the worst of creatures .
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and a lesson for the pious .
do not extend your eyes towards what we have given to classes of them , and do not grieve over them , and lower your wing to the believers .
the day when you will turn your backs and flee , no one can protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
surely we have created everything in measure .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and whoever has done an atom 's weight of good will see it .
if they dispute with you , say : allah knows best what you do .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , `` this is a hard day '' .
on the day when the wrong-doer will bite his hands , saying , 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
nay , but man exorbitateth .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him of little value .
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
and those who are jews we have prohibited what we have related to you before , and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
and assuredly we shall make them taste the nearer chastisement in the world , so that haply they may return .
what befell you on the day the two armies met was by permission of allah , so that he might know the believers .
when their brother lot said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
and man says : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
he has counted them and enumerated them one by one .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
let them go against you , that you may cause them to prevail over them , and they will have the same faith with them , and you will not be able to fight at the religion of the disbelievers , until they fight against you in the matter of the disbelievers , and they will be drowned .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
see how they fabricate lies against allah ! and sufficient is this as a manifest sin .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware . if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only clear conveyance .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
they said , “ never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and he who created us , so decide to him . you can only decree the life of this world .
and thou shalt not find those who believe in allah and the last day , and he hath made for them a part of that which hath been promised them , and they are the ones that are with them , and they shall be brought forth by allah 's mercy ; and those who are with them shall be a qarinto them . and allah hath full mercy from them ; and verily allah is of those who are in the breasts .
we sent a tumultuous wind against them on a day of unremitting misfortune ,
, `` o john , hold fast to the book . '' and we gave him wisdom while still a child .
then we set you on the right way , so follow it , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and do not take allah 's covenant with your oaths , and keep your duty to him , and making peace between people . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
he said , “ it is sent down to you from the garden , or in the heaven ; you are not a tyrant . so do not be one of the faithless . ”
by your lord , we will question them all
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
that he may make clear to them what they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been good in it , they would not have been guided by us , and since they have not been guided , they say : this is an ancient lie .
how many gardens and fountains did they leave behind !
and do not rebuke the beggar .
lest you should say , ‘ the book was sent down only to two groups before us , and we were unaware of their study . ’
that we pour down water in abundance ,
or have a single one of them who has passed away from the cities which has passed away ? and he said , “ what is the matter with them ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that we might bring you a kingdom ? ” and he said , “ this is what god has power to do all things . ” and then , when you met it , see that allah has power over all things .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
say : `` woe to us ! '' so take away from your wife , and do not approach them , and do not make them to be pure . when they are innocent , allah has enjoined on those who are upright .
his wealth will not avail him , neither what he has gained .
so his lord answered him and turned away their guile from him . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him for my service . '' and when he spoke to him , he said , “ today you are established in our noble blessings . ”
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then implores allah for forgiveness , will find god forgiving and merciful .
so when the sight is dazed ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
who is a greater wrong-doer than he who inventeth a lie against allah , or hath said : i had not been sent down with it , just as he hath been sent down ? and if ye were to be a prey to the wrath of allah , he would have said : i have been like this , and be thou of the believers .
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were a tyrannical people .
indeed we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand ,
and who avoid nonsense .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold without reckoning . ”
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them for play .
and bring to him a iron of iron , and bring to him the mountains . the two of them will be told , `` bring a handful of light in the fire , until it has been revealed to them , until it has been revealed to them . '' and then he said to them , `` bring me a big magician '' .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels sent down successively with him ? ''
and those who are observant of the remembrance of allah , do not cross the limits of the heavens or the earth , and you are the originator of the heavens and the earth . we have made you secure from the punishment of the fire , and be free of the fire .
o prophet , when the women came to you , and strike you with a partner , do not commit adultery , and do not speak to him , and do not speak to him . god is forgiving and kind .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all people will be brought back .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs , will have a humiliating punishment .
for the beggar and the destitute ,
those who reject the reminder when it comes to them , it is a book inviolate .
moses said : `` o my lord ! verily , you are in the life of this world and the hereafter , and our lord is well aware of that which is on you , and that they will not be brought forth by the way of a painful torment . they will not believe until a painful punishment comes upon them until a painful torment .
the star of piercing brightness ;
so today none of you can benefit or harm another . we will say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is incumbent on us to save the believers .
gardens and vineyards ,
who have made the quran into shreds .
and by the moon as it follows it ,
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds that they shall have a great reward .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
is he who is on a clear proof from his lord like him to whom the evil of his deeds is made fair-seeming to him , and they follow their own desires ?
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least ; and if a mustard seed is a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
when the sky is rent asunder , and becomes red like red leather ,
o you who believe ! do not ask of you a thing that if you are to be questioned about the truth , and if you ask about them , god is forgiving and forbearing .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , so exalted be he above what they associate .
he said , “ o moosa ! i have chosen you above the people with my messages and my words ; so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ”
and when your lord declared that he would send against them the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the punishment of the day of resurrection . surely your lord is swift in retribution .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment .
there is no one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
if they deny you , then were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the illuminating book .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
if he should ask you for it and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
we created above you seven paths , and we are not unmindful of creation .
o ye who believe ! when ye are told , when ye are commanded , then it was that ye were wont to make the way to go down in the way of allah , and ye were wont to keep it up in the life of the world , and that the hereafter will be in the hereafter , and the hereafter is a greaterthan the hereafter .
near which is the garden of abode .
let man consider his food ,
and assuredly we shall make them taste the nearer chastisement in the world , so that haply they may return .
allah did not create the two of them , and he has not made you one of your deeds . they say : `` your parents are of you . god will show you the right path . ''
surely those who say , `` our lord is god , '' and remain firm , nor shall they grieve .
she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has recorded it while they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and in what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends , but many of them are disobedient .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
so when the promise of the first came , we sent against you our servants , of great might , and they entered to your habitations , and it was a promise that was fulfilled .
other than allah , they will say : `` they have gone away from us . '' nay , we used not to call on any other thing . thus allah leads astray the disbelievers .
and among them is he who made a covenant with allah : if he give us out of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your servants . ”
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
they said , turning towards them , `` what is missing ? ''
and do not make your oaths a covenant , and the guile of it is upon you , that it may cause you to take a severe punishment for the cause of allah , and that a severe punishment will strike you for the cause of god .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
a crafty jinn said : `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy . ''
in whatever thing you differ , the judgement rests with allah . this is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
those are they for whom there is nothing in the hereafter save the fire ; and vain is that which they have been working .
have they not heard the news of the people of the 'ad and the thamud , and aad , and thamood , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and they were not wronged ?
and when the mountains are blown away ,
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou wilt give to whomsoever thou wilt .
the thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
those who believe and do good works will be in the midst of it , and we shall make them gardens underneath which rivers flow , where they will abide for ever . how terrible will be the abode of those who are bent on denying the truth !
and he said : if thou art one of the ingredients , behold ! it is a wizard , when it spake unto thee , and i have no knowledge of thy youth . lo ! man was in the course of disputation . lo ! he was of the doubters .
and when a single person came to you after a girl 's daughter , it was said to you , ‘ o my father ! you have no relation with us . ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid . you have done your father ’ s wealth , when he has spoken to us , and he said , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
so fight in the way of allah , and rouse the believers . you are responsible only for yourself . god is stronger in might and stronger in might . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from of old ,
and believes in al-husna .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended that which thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with a sure tiding .
and be patient , for your patience is only from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of their plots .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will be victorious .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two might belong to you ? we will not believe in you . ”
the example of the two parties is that of the wife of the woman who covers her chastity , and we made the spirit grow with its soul , and we made him in accordance with the words of his lord , and he was submissive .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , `` expel the family of lot from your city . they are a people who want to be pure . ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
he taught distinctness .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
and not known my account !
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
nay ! they will soon come to know .
those who were arrogant will say , `` we are all in it . god has judged between his servants . ''
whoever does it to prevent others from the right way , do not like the reward of those who do right , and do not speak to the bad words . and whoever does not speak to the burden of the day of judgment , it will be a single matter , and god is watchful over all things .
“ our lord , do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your mercy ; you are the giver . ”
but my call added only to their flight .
and those who believe will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they are losers .
and do not say to those who are killed in the way of allah , `` they are dead . '' rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
so that they may be among the owners of the garden , with streams flow with streams of rippling streams , and they will be made to live with the streams of god , and that they may be a great sin .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and to allah all things return .
it is he who has created you on earth , and it is for you to be of the number of you , that he may try you , in order that he may test you . indeed , he is forgiving and merciful .
but we saved him and the companions of the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
taught man what he did not know .
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were doing . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and they swear that they do not speak , but indeed , they are a lie , but the word of allah is they who disbelieve , and they have no faith in it . and they will not be able to turn their backs , and they will not be able to turn away from it . and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will guide them in the hereafter , and they will not be helped .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when it is said to them , 'come come to what allah has revealed , ' they will say : `` this is what our fathers have been doing . '' is it not a sign , if it is to us that they should be told , `` this is what our fathers have been doing ? ''
surely he is able to bring him back ,
he taught distinctness .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
o you who believe ! do not be a people other than your own people , but do not turn your backs on them . indeed , they are about to convey the truth , and what is in their hearts will be made visible to you , if you are devoid of sense .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : lo ! we are overtaken .
and whoever is a servant of allah , they are not arrogant , and he has exalted them above all that is with your lord . and if you are a lie to him , then keep your duty to him , and be in awe of him .
i do not seek any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and he turned away from them and said , `` alas for joseph ! '' and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they ask for amends , they will not be redeemed .
but when the messenger came to them with the truth , they have been with them , who had believed in it , and made fun of them of their knowledge . the promise of god came to them , and that they were mocking .
god is the only lord and there is no god except him , the living and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the supreme . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
and the trumpet will be blown ; this is the day of the threatening .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and indeed it is a great oath , if you only knew --
and it is not a frivolity .
but theysplit their affair between them , all will return to us .
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
o you who believe ! be obedient to the purpose of judgment , and those who are with the truth , and there will be no more than to be friends with those who are godwary , so fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
they said , “ by allah , we swear to one another in the night , and the family of his family – then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we will be truthful . ’
that you will surely be exhausted from stage to stage .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
the egyptians asked them , `` what is the matter with you if you are liars ? ''
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art consumed , or thou art of the perishing .
bewailing when evil befalls him ,
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful chastisement .
did we not create you from a liquid disdained ?
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and he taught adam all the names , then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
and you will not be able to be among the number of your wives , and if you are to be one of them , then do not be one of the other . then , if you are a single one of them , then do not give up any one of them , for god is forgiving and merciful .
and mixed with water of tasnim ,
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! verily the best of those that thou canst hire is the strong , the trustworthy .
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths ,
but their brethren ceaselessly lead them relentlessly into error .
then cast into a wooden box , then thrust it into the river , and cast it into the sea , that i may make it an enemy to you , and a blessed promise .
muhammad is no more than a messenger . had there been before him a messenger , you will turn on before him . whoever turns away from the way of god will not harm him . and allah will reward the appreciative .
yes indeed , we are able to shapehis fingertips !
and they used to say , ‘ what ! when we are dead and become dust and bones , will we indeed be resurrected ?
the lord of the fire and the last day , they will say , ‘ our lord ! give us this letter of this world , and we have given you the good deeds of this . we have given you the good deeds of what we had done . ’ so , , `` taste the punishment of hell , for the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ''
have they not heard the news of the people of the 'ad and the thamud , and aad , and thamood , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and they were not wronged ?
and joseph 's brothers came and entered into his presence , and he recognized them , but they did not know him .
by no means ! by the moon ,
if you avoid the major sins which you are forbidden , we will remit from you your misdeeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
god increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
those who have faith and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , they hope for the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say : `` when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
we found nocovenant in most of them . lo ! we found most of them ungodly .
say : `` indeed , my lord is most knowing of all . and you are in the end of what you seek before . and the judgement will be with me , and he will make the best to go forth .
or he wrecks them for what they earned , and he pardons much .
or a needy person in misery
the best among them said : `` did i not say to you , 'why do you not glorify '
we sent messengers before you to the former peoples ,
and ask the people of the day for the day of judgment , when the hour is meet , and the hearts of the opponents will be brought into the hearts of them , and there is no blame upon them , and there is no blame upon them .
and when the girlburied alive is asked
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever forgiving .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
so if you have any ploy , try it against me !
and when the two armies came to them , he said , “ you are sent down by the noble book , and he will have no relation with it . ” and those who were bent on blaspheming against their lord said , “ this is a group of the people who were with their lord . ” and those who were bent on blaspheming against their lord said , “ this is a group of the people who were with their lord , and the steadfast . ”
but their brethren ceaselessly lead them relentlessly into error .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
and thus do we try our vision , and we raised them up in order that he may say : `` unless your lord is longer than a day . '' and the one of you said , `` it is only for your lord who will give you a part of the day . '' so the one of you said , `` this is what your lord has ordained for you , and you will have no share . ''
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery '
indulging in carelessly idle games ?
allah is the most merciful of those who were first to worship the truth and are with them , and they are pleased with them , and they will be well-pleased with it , and wherein they will abide for ever .
he said , “ o noah , he is not of your family . indeed he is unrighteous , therefore ask me not of what you have no knowledge . i admonish you lest you should be among the ignorant . ”
thus we established joseph in the land so that he might live wherever he liked . we bestow our mercy on whomever we please , and we do not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and when a misfortune befalls him , he will call to us , and if we were to give him a share , then it is only upon him : but it is only one of them ; but most of them do not know .
o prophet ! ask forgiveness for mankind or ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god will not forgive them , and he does not guide the transgressors .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
say : tell me , if allah were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah will bring you night for rest ? will you not then see ?
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
it was said : 'enter paradise ! ' he said , 'ah , would that my people knew
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor would he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and do not make your oaths a covenant , and the guile of it is upon you , that it may cause you to take a severe punishment for the cause of allah , and that a severe punishment will strike you for the cause of god .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book , they will have the curse of god and cursed by the cursers ,
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are servile unto us ?
and the people of midian , and moses was denied , but i gave respite to the disbelievers . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
indeed the guilty will abide in the punishment of hell .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their argument is void in their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
and they besought victory , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
and i am planning a plan .
and if the truth follow their desires , the heavens and the earth , and all that befell them in the heavens and the earth , would be made to please him . indeed , we have made a qur'an to reach them , but they are in a state of that which they have been doing .
and when a misfortune befalls him , he will call to us , and if we were to give him a share , then it is only upon him : but it is only one of them ; but most of them do not know .
for the companions of the right hand .
the hypocrites seek to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remember allah much , and remember god .
remember , when allah has decreed for you a promise that is two . surely , it is the same to you that you are the commander , and allah is the truth , and he is the one who accepts the truth , and is the one who is the truthful .
and his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , and at the setting sun and at noon .
nay , whenreaches to the collar bone ,
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit shameless acts with your eyes open ?
excusing or warning ,
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , for he is the knower of the innermost of the chests .
and by the night when it retreats
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have explained our revelations to you so that you may understand .
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
they thought , as you thought , that god would never raise anyone .
you do not ask them for any recompense . it is nothing but a reminder for all mankind .
say , “ are the story of the virtuous ones to be given to the good ones ? ” and those who are godwary will be in the gardens of eden , with their lord , to gardens , in which rivers flow , and they will be in a graceful manner .
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea , because they denied our signs and were heedless of them .
and they have already passed by the city that was rained on a rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect it .
and thamud , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood ; these were the confederates .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger , and whoever opposes allah , then indeed allah is severe in punishment .
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses where there is convenience for you . god knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
when a misfortune befalls them , they say , `` o moses , your lord has promised us with what allah has given you , and if we were to be with them , we shall certainly have the faith of the unbelievers . ''
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , and a guidance and a mercy for mankind , so that they may remember .
allah has given the parable of a man who is near to him , and is a single man , which is supreme . is there not one of them but are the same , but most of them do not know ?
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with a bad deed . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we have created man in trouble .
and for their taking usury , that they had been forbidden , and their consuming of people 's wealth wrongfully . we have prepared for the unbelievers among them a painful punishment .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them by night while they are asleep ?
the path of those upon whom you have blessed , not of those who have earned your anger , nor of those who are astray .
and he made you inherit their land and their houses , and their possessions , and a land you have not trodden . and allah has power over all things .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
the blind and the seeing are not equal , nor are those who believe and do righteous deeds and those who do evil . little do you reflect .
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
and allah gives the glory to the people , as well as the people of the world , and the like of it . that is what they do , and that is what is in the earth . that is what is in the earth , and allah knows all things .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . surely his seizure is painful , severe .
they said : the meed of him who in whose pack it is found will be his recompense . thus we requite wrong-doers .
as though they had never dwelt there . away with median , just as thamud was done away with .
but they hamstrung her , and he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied .
and that those who have been given knowledge , know that this is the truth , and that it is the truth from your lord . and those who believe in the way of allah are guided .
and marry those among you who are single among your male and female slaves and your slave , and if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
will you not remember ?
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
so exalted be allah , the true king , there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
o my father ! serve not satan ; verily satan is a rebel against the beneficent allah .
have you not seen those who were faithless and are disbelievers in the book ? they will say , `` if you are with us , you will never be able to fight , but if you fight with us , we will certainly be a witness against you . ''
your companion has neither gone astray , nor has he erred .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some of them you killed , and some you took captive .
those who take their wivesand turn away from that which they had said , and let loose a slave before they touch one another . that is what you have been exhorted . allah is aware of what you do .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen and he was a messenger , a prophet .
but after that you turned away , and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
as for the boat , it belonged to poor men working in the sea , and i wished that i wished to damage it .
`` o my people ! act according to your ways , and i will have my power to come to you , and who will come to know who will suffer a humiliating torment . '' and you will be among the liars .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
beautified is the life of this world for those who deny the truth , and they scoff at those who believe , but those who fear allah will be above them on the day of resurrection , and allah gives whomsoever he will without measure .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and be patient , for your patience is only from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of their plots .
nay , we have been deprived . ''
your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
or have the gates of a garden , and eat with the adornment of the sky , or are the angels , or the heaven . and say , “ glory be to me , and i am only a messenger , and i am only a messenger . ”
o you who believe ! take your duty to your covenant , and your covenant with your covenant , and your good wealth will be not lawful except for the cause of god . god is observant of all things .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ? '
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and to allah all things return .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
as for those who contend in the earth , they will be in the way of the earth , and they will be in the way of my verses . but if they were guided , then they will be brought back to it , and that if they were to be seen , then they will be brought back to our signs . that is because they used to reject our signs .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
wavering between the two , neither with these nor to those . and whom allah sends astray , you will not find for him a way .
they said , `` by allah , you know that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
we have written in the psalms , after the reminder : `` my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ''
we suffice you against the mockers .
and those will be called to you in the way of god , but some of them are niggardly . but he who is niggardly will be stingy , and he is the rich , the rich . and allah is the rich , the most merciful . and allah is the rich , the most rich .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , `` this is your god and the god of moses . ''
there is not one of you but will come to it . this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
if there were in the heavens and the earth other than allah , they would surely have been ruined . so glory be to allah , the lord of the throne , above what they allege .
the truth is from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
arise and warn ,
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but the reminderthat haply theymay be godfearing .
he said : `` it is not for allah to bring down the rain . and it is not the matter that make plain to the plant , and he has set up the like of it . '' and he said , `` this is the story of the unknown . '' but they had said , `` this is the parting . ''
save him who has done wrong and then substitutes good after evil , and i am forgiving , merciful .
then they departed , until they came to the point of the city in the end . but they did not speak to them , but they said , `` if it was that you have been sent with the quran , they would have been sent down with it , and he said , `` if only you should be of those who have been sent down , he would have been sent down . ''
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
indeed , they are the ones who created the signs of your lord , and in the end , and in the sight of your lord . he knows all things . he has knowledge of everything .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the abode of the arrogant .
the fornicator does not marry except afornicator or polytheist , and none marries her except an adulterer or a polytheist woman .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and we strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
and pharaoh of the stakes ?
we made it for the people of the world to all the creatures , so is there any that will remember ? the eyes of your tush is also in your eyes , and your tush . remember , `` how was the result of my warnings ? ''
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the unbelievers are the wrongdoers .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed , and we gave her good news of isaac , and after isaac , jacob .
they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ what is the noble messenger ? ” and they say , “ yes , yes , ” they will say , “ yes , yes , it is only the disbelievers . ”
and let him share my task
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
how many a city did we destroy , and we raised up other people after them ?
say , “ it is he who will remove the agony for you , or will bring you into pieces , or you will make them a group of them , so that some of them would have passed away . ”
and when we said , “ the lord of all the people , and what you are your lord , and what you are your brothers except for the people of the garden , and we will not give you the fruit of this tree , and we will not give you any fruit , but you are not responsible for it . ”
if they dispute with you , say : allah knows best what you do .
we know best what they will say , when the best of them will say , `` you stayed only a day . ''
the king of mankind .
then we made him a drop of fluid in a secure lodging .
and they have not been commanded that they should be able to keep away from it , and keep up prayer and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and give the poor-rate ,
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
give full measure , and cause no loss .
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them mightily .
or did we create the angels females while they were witnesses ?
and those who are bent on blaspheming against your own servants are only the ones of your own sins , and if they do not speak , they are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for them , and that they may be of the same age . and those who are conscious of allah will have the measure .
and thy lord magnify ,
but whoever of you is obedient to allah and his messenger and acts righteously , we shall give her a double reward , and we have prepared for her a generous provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease should covet , and speak to him a good word .
and when allah has made them feel secure , they instantly become a prey to the earth , o people who are in the earth . you will surely be responsible for your own souls . and to us you will be recompensed , and to us you will be returned .
save him who has done wrong and then substitutes good after evil , and i am forgiving , merciful .
say : `` it has been revealed by him who knows the secret of the heavens and the earth . he is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
about what they used to do .
o ye who believe ! be ye the friends of allah , as the true ones , as the son of mary said : who is the patron of mine ? and we have said : `` i am a detester of what is said . ''
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what god has given them . we have prepared a humiliating punishment for those who deny the truth .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : `` i am helping you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
he was one of our believing servants .
it is from solomon , and it is from solomon , the most gracious , the most merciful .
if allah had willed , he would have made you one community , but he leads astray whom he will and guides whom he wills . and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
praise be to allah , who has given me in old age ishmael and isaac . indeed my lord is the hearer of prayer .
so we have no intercessors ,
a cup from a spring will be passed round to them ,
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
that is because you mocked at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deceived you , so this day they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be asked to appease .
on the day when they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' he has prepared for them a generous reward .
that is because allah is the truth , and because he revives the dead and has power over all things .
it will be but one blast , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you , out of the earth , behold , you will come forth .
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and i know not whether it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them , and they are in doubt about it .
the imminentis near at hand .
and banish all trepidation .
but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
indeed i fear for you the punishment of a great day . ’
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they are the ones who will have their reward and their light ; and those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the inmates of hell .
he assumed that he would never return .
surely he is able to bring him back ,
and corn-fields and noble buildings ,
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , and i know from allah what you do not know .
`` depart ye to that which ye used to deny !
and we caused the children of israel to inherit them , and they said , `` o moses , god has taken us to us , '' they said , `` o moses , indeed , you are a people who have surrendered . ''
but those who disbelieve , and spend their wealth in the way of allah , and let them spend in the way of allah , and let them spend in their way for the cause of god . those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
see how they fabricate lies against allah ! and sufficient is this as a manifest sin .
you have advantages in them till a specified time . then their place is the ancient house .
if allah had expanded his provision to his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in ameasure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and as for the favor of your lord , proclaim it .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to shade and said : `` my lord ! i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ''
he said : `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not frustrate .
flames of fire and smoke will be sent against you , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
they said , “ if you do not desist , o lot , you will surely be expelled . ”
and do not worship what you worship besides allah , when they are a prey to worship , so that you may be pursued . and to their lord we shall have a share .
those who dispute the verses of allah and do not have any proof for them . it is the same to god . the evil of those who believe and do the right is in the presence of god .
near which is the garden of abode .
and we have in between them and that which we have sent down , and that which we have sent down upon them , and in the same way , in the night , it is a fixed time , and in between it , and the alternation of the day , and the night , and in the noonday .
have they not seen that we have destroyed the generations of them before them , and we have destroyed them in the land , so that we might make them succeed , and we destroyed them for their sins , and we destroyed them for their sins , and we destroyed them for their sins , and we destroyed them in their sin ?
nay , but those who believe , and do not believe ; surely it is a thing that makes things seem decorous to them ; and that which they have been doing is to be seen . but if they do so , they are indeed liars .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
their abode is hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
they will hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
moses said : `` o pharaoh , i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
and what will show you what is the crusher ?
surely in this is a sign for believers .
so hold fast to that which has been revealed to you , for you are on a straight path .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth , knower of the unseen and the seen , and thou shalt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they differ .
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
except one of them who speaks with one another , and no one has any partner with us , nor speaks with his worship . say , `` we are obedient to his lord . ''
this is the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
he is the lord of the heavens and the earth , on six days , so that he might make you know that which you are doing , and if he should change you , those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` this is nothing but clear magic . ''
and he shows you his signs . then which of the signs of allah will you deny ?
and by the night when it darkens ,
and if they had believed and been godfearing , they would have been rewarded with a far better reward .
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave what you harvest , except a little which you eat . ”
for you therein are many fruits of which you will eat .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
so didconvey the inspiration to his slave .
how terrible was my punishment and warnings !
they will remain in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . your lord is doer of what he wills .
o mankind , a thing is that which is not worthy of worship , but those whom they invoke besides allah will not be able to hear anything , but you can not be able to make a single thing , and the one of them can not be blamed ,
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world ; but the good deeds which endure are better with your lord , and better for expectation .
on the day when we shall roll up the heaven like the rolling up of a scroll rolled up for writings , as we began the first creation , we will repeat it . indeed , we will do it .
and among the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , whereas he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents .
and indeed hell is the promised place for them all .
on the day when he will gather them and all that they worship besides allah , will say , `` did you mislead these servants of mine , or did they themselves go astray ? ''
and the evils of their earnings will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule .
how will it be when we gather them for a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you immunity in the scriptures ?
and those who are bent on blaspheming against your own servants are only the ones of your own sins , and if they do not speak , they are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for them , and that they may be of the same age . and those who are conscious of allah will have the measure .
and as for him who , when he was one of the believers , he says , “ begone ! will you then make me one of the dead ? ” and the promise of allah is true , and they will say , “ this is a magic , and the promise of god is true . ” but the promise of god is true . yet the promise of god is true .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , and seek forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they are near kin , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
fight them ; allah will punish them at your hands , and will disgrace them , and help you against them , and heal the hearts of a believing people .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
but if it were the time of a surety , they will not be allowed to save the other after it had come to them , except after it has come to them , if they were true to allah . and if they were true to allah , he will bring it to a people who know .
so fear allah and obey me .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from whence they perceive not ?
they said , “ did you do this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
surely in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
no admonition comes to them anew from their lord but they listen to it while they play .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
neither limitednor forbidden ,
and he turned away from them , and said , `` o my people , i have delivered to you the message of my lord , and advised you sincerely , but you do not love advisors . ''
and do not say about what your tongues say , `` this is lawful and this is forbidden . '' that is forbidden to god . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not succeed .
hell—they will roast in it . how wretched is the settlement .
wherein they will abide for ever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
and allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts , that haply you may be thankful .
and the mountains , how they are erected ?
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud ,
and your lord has mercy on them , and mercy on you , if you are to be faithful , then if you turn back , we would have hastened to you , but if you turn back , we will surely mete out to you the chastisement of the unbelievers .
hearts will be throbbing ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
the people of the book were recorded in the writings of the book , which were recorded in the book , and the exposition of the book is in the book , and they have no knowledge of it . and they have no knowledge of that . and they have no knowledge , and they have no knowledge .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right ,
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel : when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think that you are bewitched . ''
verily , the likeness of jesus from allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then said : `` be ! '' and he was .
they said , ‘ you are only humans like us . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ’
if you seek to help the believers , you will surely be able to turn away from the messenger . but if you turn back , then they will not be able to turn you away from it ; and if you turn back , then indeed , allah is with the believers .
if they were to punish them , we would surely have given them a time for a time . '' the day they will say , `` what is the matter with them ? '' the day they will be brought out of it , and we shall not be able to take it away .
who created and proportioned
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
he said , `` throw ! '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people and terrified them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
let man consider his food ,
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
say , “ the death from which you flee will surely meet you . then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the visible , and he will inform you about what you used to do . ”
so they were unable to scale it or dig through it .
and he said : if thou art one of the ingredients , behold ! it is a wizard , when it spake unto thee , and i have no knowledge of thy youth . lo ! man was in the course of disputation . lo ! he was of the doubters .
we made the covenant that they should say , `` we have been sent down by what they had done . '' but it was said , `` we have been sent as a witness between you and the day of resurrection , and we will be told . '' and allah is the all-seer of what they do .
woe on that day to the deniers .
they will not hear therein any vain talk or sinful speech .
and i swear by you , and i will mislead them , and i have the repentance of them , and they are with them , and i will surely cause them to be a partisan of them .
and this city secure ,
he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
it was only one cry , and they were extinguished .
who , when an affliction visits them , say , “ we belong to god and to him we will return . ”
they will say , “ if god had willed , we would not have made to be one of our forefathers . ” and we did not give them any authority , so that they will have no knowledge , but they will be told , `` have you knowledge of the knowledge of their knowledge , and you will not have any knowledge except for them ? '' and you will not have any knowledge except for them .
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the clear proof came to them .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
they said , “ call on your lord to make us to make plain to us the cow . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
when their brother salih said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
though they will be in sight of each other , and the guilty would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and if you call upon them , they do not listen to you . if you are of the truthful , it is the day of resurrection , and the hour of doom is true , and those you have knowledge is just .
and weigh with the straight balance ,
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
then they turned to themselves , and said : lo ! ye are the wrong-doers .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
we have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and a warner ; and there is no nation but a warner has passed away .
do not suppose that those who are killed in the way of allah are dead . rather , they are alive , and provided with their lord sustenance .
o people of the jinn and the human beings , did not come to you from among you , the true ones , that you should take heed to what you say , and they will say to them , `` we are witness to the life of this world , and they used to deny the truth when they had been rejected . ''
and they say : become jews or nazarenes , and ye will be guided . say thou : aye ! the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and he was not of the associators .
do you not see that we have sent the devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them towithincitement ?
abraham was one of his followers .
and of the wealth and his acquisitions , and do not be responsible for it , before it comes to you , they will be told , `` lord , woe to me , if you want to have a good time . ''
then we made him a drop of fluid in a secure lodging .
if allah had willed , he would have made you one community , but he leads astray whom he will and guides whom he wills . and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
exclude me from the unjust people '
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
and do not be remiss in order to be of the cheats , if you will not be able to do it , it will be as a trial for them , but it is for them to be seen , but allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
and i ask of you no answer concerning this .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran , and talk idly about it , so that you may prevail . ''
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
and we have in between them and that which we have sent down , and that which we have sent down upon them , and in the same way , in the night , it is a fixed time , and in between it , and the alternation of the day , and the night , and in the noonday .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say , “ my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up , just as they nurtured me . ”
by allah , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and he is their guardian today , and a painful punishment awaits them .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : `` we believe , and bear witness that we are muslims . ''
we created above you seven paths , and we are not unmindful of creation .
andwhen moses led his people astray , and we said to them : `` forget it , '' and we said to them : `` forget it , and do not be a fabricator . '' and in the earth they are the outwitted .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
there is no one but a single person who will not be of any benefit to any other people , if it be that he should be of no use to it , nor will he be of those who keep their devotional obligations , until they are in awe of their lord , and that he may be of those who are in awe , and to allah is the return .
accursed be the conjecturers
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger , and who pardon men ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and he has created you from dust , then from a drop of fluid , then , from a drop of liquid , and it is not equal to him . he is not a forgetter ’ but there is not a single thing but he is with him . and he is not a forgetter
those who deny the truth say : `` in no way are the ones who have been sent before the lord of this quran , '' they will say , `` if what you say is true , we would say , `` if you are true . ''
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be recompensed except for what they used to do .
my wealth has not availed me .
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
those who are true to the believers are not in the cause of allah , but those who strive hard in the way of allah and have no wealth , and their lives . god has blessed a great promise , and allah 's favour has been given to those who are true .
and they besought victory , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who believe ! be wary of your lord , for those who are astray , do not cause you to harm you , if you are guided to the right path , and to allah you will be returned .
his wealth will not avail him , neither what he has gained .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished those who disbelieved . that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation , nor do i take those who lead others astray .
if they are expelled , they will not go forth with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them , and if they help them , they will turn their backs .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud bringing us rain . '' nay , but it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is terrible .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and when they argue with each other in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant : `` we were your followers . will you then relieve us of a portion of the fire ? ''
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say : `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
if they were to punish them , we would surely have given them a time for a time . '' the day they will say , `` what is the matter with them ? '' the day they will be brought out of it , and we shall not be able to take it away .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . he who believes in his lord will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
and he taught adam all the names , then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
they ask thee concerning the spirit . say : the spirit is of the command of my lord , and ye have been vouchsafed of knowledge only a little .
and your lord said to the angels : `` i am going to make a sign for you in the earth . '' they said : `` there is no madness in it , and we do not know what you do . '' and we do not know what you do not know .
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send for aaron .
such was aad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers and followed the bidding of every insolent tyrant .
and he had made all that they did to worship them , and the words of allah was upright , and it was said , “ you are grateful . ”
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it seemly for him . this is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
and when you have withdrawn from them and what they worship besides allah , take refuge in the cave ; your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with an easy affair .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
a group he has guided , and some deservederror . indeed , they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they have .
so be not of those who are in the mornings and the evenings , and they are in the morning , and their lord 's reckoning is only to be of those who do wrong . you have no reckoning to the unjust .
in gardens , questioning
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
we sent noah to his people , and he said , ‘ o my people ! worship god ! you have no god other than he . you will have a humiliating punishment . ’
verily we ! we have made it a trial for the wrong-doers .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
so when they took him away , they agreed to put him into the bottom of the well . we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs while they are not aware . ''
and he said : lo ! i am sick .
allah desires to make clear to you all that you may guide and to show you the ordinances of those before you ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most compassionate lord ,
this was indeed a clear test .
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will reject me .
you will certainly see the face of those who believe , and do not observe the hearts of those who have faith , and those who have faith , and those who have submitted to god , and those who have faith , and those who have submitted themselves to god , and those who are too proud in the way of god , are indeed proud .
most of them follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth . indeed , allah knows what they do .
when he said to his father and his people : `` what do you worship ?
and those who are jews we have prohibited what we have related to you before , and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the sinners .
they purposed to unsettle you from the land that they might expel you from it . then , they would not have stayed after you except a little .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
o you who believe ! let not the servants of allah be of those who have been before you , in the morning and the last day , and the last period of your time . they will be brought forth to you in the morning , and the last period of your time will come to you , and they will be in the midst of it . and allah is the knower , the wise .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
those who are the angels who are with the lord of the throne , are the ones who are its expanders and the day of judgment , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness of their lord ; and they are of those who repent .
certainly we have sent messengers with our signs , and the clear book . the prophets and the injeel ] will be brought out of it , and we have made it clear to the people . and we have made it clear to the people , in order that he may be of those who are upright .
exaltations be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe '
the men and women women and women believing women , are men of women , and women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of the poor , the women of women , and the women of women , and the women of the poor , the men of women .
who barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and when they have turned away from him , he said , “ did you not know that your father has already been sent down upon you with a witness from your own hands , and he has made for you a witness from your own hands ? and i do not ask you any reward until he wills . he is the best of judges . ”
and niggardly when good befalls him
but why do they come to you with a judge , while they are the torah , in which is allah 's judgement ? yet they turn away from it . they are not believers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
they say , “ if god wills , he could have no knowledge besides him . ” and we did not have any any knowledge of them . and we did not make them to be witnesses , nor did we make them to be one of those who were unjust .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to shade and said : `` my lord ! i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ''
o my people ! this is the she-camel of allah , a sign for you ; so let her graze on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest you may be near .
you are the best of people who have been cast down , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and have faith in them , and if you were the people of the book , most of them are believers .
say : `` when you are promised to the day of judgment , you can not put it back . ''
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
bewailing when evil befalls him ,
until when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back ,
we said : fear not ! verily thou art the uppermost .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
thus we requited them because they disbelieved . and do werepay except the ungrateful ?
and the word will be fulfilled against them because of their injustice , and they will not speak .
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
the two of them will be set up , then , then , will be one of the same . then he will say , “ if he wishes , it is the same for you , if he wishes , and it is the same to you , if he wishes , and what is sanctioned for you is the word of allah ; and if he wishes , you are the people of the book , and it is they who will not be wronged . the people of the book will not be wronged .
andconfirming that which was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord ; so fear allah and obey me .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say : `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
is it not a sign for them that the learned of the children of israel recognize it ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
when the night covered him , he saw a star . he said : `` this is my lord . '' but when it set , he said : `` i love not the things that set . ''
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill she returns like the old twig .
my people ! i ask of you no wage for this . my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
for a known calculated term .
and the true promise will come near , and behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , crying : woe to us ! we have been heedless of this . aye ! we were wrong-doers .
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
surely it is an evil abode andplace to stay .
they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ what is the noble messenger ? ” and they say , “ yes , yes , ” they will say , “ yes , yes , it is only the disbelievers . ”
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
not equal are the fellows of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the fellows of the garden shall be the achievers .
and ask one of you regarding the one who speaks about one another . say : `` allah will make you one of the two women , and if he is one of the two men , it is only for the two of them , and if he should be of the two men , it will be said to them : `` for the two of you are the two men , and the women of the two , it will be the same for them , and allah has knowledge of all things . '' and allah
and they will surely see that of the people of the world , and in the life of this world , and in the life to come , and they will have any share of the partners of the idolaters . and allah is seer of what they do .
so it is . whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been harmed and then is oppressed , and allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
who will enter the great fire ,
you will not be able to do anything in the remembrance of it , nor will you be able to do anything in the book , and they will be in the heavens and the earth , without any guardian or in the sky . and it is not a clear book from your lord .
it is he who shows you the lightning , inspiring fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
nay ! it is a glorious qur'an ,
in the cities there is a people who were destroyed by the people of the land , which they have earned , except for those who have gone astray in the land . they are transgressors . the wicked will be among the sinners .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance ; so give good news to my servants ,
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will be terrified except whomever allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for allies . they are allies of each other . whoever of you takes them for friends is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
these are the towns which we recount to you . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal the hearts of those who deny the truth .
those are they who have lost their souls , and that they forged has gone away from them .
would he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
so if you are about to say a group of me , then there is a group of them that is about to be of you , so that you will be told , `` i will not be able to fight with you , and you will not be able to fight with me . you are always waiting for those who do so . ''
and tall date-palms laden with clusters ranged .
say , “ you do whatever you do , god is your deeds , and the noble messenger , and the believers , will be brought back to god , and he will inform you of what you do . ”
say : `` have you considered ? how can you have a provision , and a provision that allah has bestowed on you ? '' say , `` will allah not grant respite to what he has given you , or you will not be asked about god ? ''
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your sworn enemies .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran , and talk idly about it , so that you may prevail . ''
the sabbath was ordained only for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them on a height , and watered by a spring .
the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones and seven green spikes , and seven green spikes , if you can interpret visions . ”
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity so that they may return .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am one of the muslims ? ”
they said , `` these two are magicians , who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and destroy your best traditions .
if you fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they wish for reconciliation , allah will reconcile them . allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what god has given them . we have prepared a humiliating punishment for those who deny the truth .
those are the ones to whom we gave the book and wisdom , and prophethood . but if they disbelieve in it , we will entrust it to a people who do not believe .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so obey thou the truth , as thou art commanded , and say thou : i believe in the book of allah , and say thou unto me of the truth , and say thou : verily allah will bring unto me the truth , and unto him is the journeying . and unto him ye are said , and unto him ye shall be returned .
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
then indeed your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they were persecuted , and remained steadfast .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and they said , “ do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , nor suwa ” , nor yaghuth , ya'uq and nasr . ”
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah : where are your associates whom you used to claim ?
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse to know , and they are arrogant .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him in any way . god has power over all things .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in them , in them morning and evening .
they will answer , `` we were not among those who prayed ,
have they not heard the news of the people of the 'ad and the thamud , and aad , and thamood , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and the people of midian , and they were not wronged ?
had those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and then they would not find any protector or helper .
and removed your burden
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed—to those who had faith— ‘ do you know that saleh is sent from his lord ? ’ they said , ‘ we believe in the message with which he has been sent . ’
and allah 's example is the example of the unbelievers , and the two women of the two women , who were two women , and we have been two of them , and we have made them equal to the two of them , and the prophet is said , `` enter the fire . ''
and they will approach one another , inquiring of each other .
the chiefs of pharaoh ’ s people said , `` he has been in a way to do so in the land , and in your own way . '' the pharaoh said , `` this is a good deed . we will certainly be victorious . we will certainly be victorious . ''
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they ask for amends , they will not be redeemed .
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my book !
there is groaning for them therein , and they will not hear .
that they may understand my speech .
hast thou received the story of the enveloper ?
and when you met them , he showed them in your eyes as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter that has already been fulfilled .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their wages , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say : `` oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger ! ''
to your lord alone is the recourse that day .
allah has indeed the wealth of the faithful and the rich in the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah , and those who fight for the cause of allah , and who are in the manner of allah 's way . that is the recompense of what they have been doing . that is the recompense of what they used to do .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
because your lord has inspired it .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
worship allah , and worship not , nor associate with him any partners , and the relatives and the pagan . god does not love the proud and the people of the vainglorious . indeed , allah does not like the arrogant .
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to my servants . ’
and thus did we send a warner before you , but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we found our fathers following a creed , and we are following in their footsteps . ''
those who keep their duty to their lord , and those who have been dutiful to their lord will be presented to the garden , so that the angels will be brought forth , and they will say to the angels , `` peace be with you , '' and they will be called to paradise , wherein they will live forever .
and purify your clothes ,
it is from solomon , and it is from solomon , the most gracious , the most merciful .
say , “ shall you tell the story of the great affliction with allah ? and whoever has the fairest of what god has cursed , he has the right of his noble deeds , and he has made a noble one of them , and the people of the right hand . ”
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most compassionate lord ,
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
alif lam ra . this is a book which we have sent down to you that you may lead people out of darkness into light by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
he said , “ it is sent down to you from the garden , or in the heaven ; you are not a tyrant . so do not be one of the faithless . ”
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and believe in him , in order that he may reward you with a torment and a torment of which ye shall be consumed , for he is forgiving , merciful .
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
they say , `` the most merciful has taken a son . '' glory to him ! rather , they are honoured servants !
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
and as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
so leave them in their error for a time .
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in small groups or go forth all together .
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land which we had blessed for all nations .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
by the much-frequented house ,
that is because allah does not change a favor which he has bestowed upon a people until they change what is in their hearts . god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? we shall take vengeance on the guilty .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no glad tidings for the sinners on that day , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
the people of the book are the ones who follow the encounter with their lord , and you are the ones who are the ones with whom they are in the presence of the truth . it is a great reward for the people who are the ones who are in the hands of god , and you will have a great reward .
your protector is only allah and his messenger , and those who believe , and establish prayer and pay the alms , and bow down .
then he glanced a glance on the stars .
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
but i am forgiving to him who repents and believes and does righteousness , and then remains guided .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass .
before them the people of noah denied the truth , and they belied our servant and said , `` he is a madman , ''
had we sent down to you a book on paper , and they touched it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring our fathers back to us if you are truthful . '
why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us to the righteous people ? ''
they are enemies to me , except the lord of the universe ,
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . verily ! i am seeing what you do . ''
they will say , `` our lord , our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
it is he who has made the earth a means of life for you and the heavens and the earth , and made you an adornment of your sustenance . he is the lord of the universe , the most high , the most high .
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
we said : fear not ! verily thou art the uppermost .
if you do so , you will be your duty to allah , if you should be one of your deeds . then , when it comes to you , he would have given you a just time , and when you are given to the like of it , it will be as a single day to be made to pass away .
that is for you , so taste the punishment of the fire for the disbelievers .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
they say , `` this life of the world is but our life . we live and live in the womb of the world and all that is with us . they have no trust in what we have given them . '' they have no trust in it .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and we have made all of them a section of them , and we rained on them a torrent of which we had sent them . and we caused the earth to hear them , and we drowned them in the land , or did they not wrong themselves .
not equal are the fellows of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the fellows of the garden shall be the achievers .
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
say , `` those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , `` you will be called to account for those who are bent on denying the truth , '' and they will be called to disbelief . and if they turn away , then they will be turned back , and have become muslims . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not of the disbelievers a single dweller on earth .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
they said , ‘ you are only humans like us . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ’
as for those who believe in their faith , and do not fear allah , for those who do not fear allah , he is the ones who would have made it seem decorous to allah , and most of them were insolent .
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them into gardens with which they will be admitted , and they will be adorned with gardens with which they will be made to be clean , and we shall admit them to gardens of perpetual bliss .
they said , “ if you do not desist , o lot , you will surely be expelled . ”
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish prayer and fear allah , and to him you shall be gathered .
such is the garden which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
allah has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . allah is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and we brought the others close to it .
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be recompensed except for what you used to do .
and when allah made you forget the people of the world , and made for you the land in the land , and build the mountains in height , and in the sea , then do not remember the favour of allah , and spread corruption in the land .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty palace !
and that is not difficult for allah .
for every announcement there is asetting , and soon you will know .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death ; and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the virtuous .
and he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i will give you my blessings , when i trusted you with the book , and when i gave you the book and the torah and the evangel , and when i have a clear revelation , and when i have a clear revelation , then , when i were a clear herald of knowledge , ”
do those who do evil think that they will get the better of us ? evil is the judgement that they make !
who created me , and he guides me ,
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great attainment .
allah made it but a good news , so that your hearts may be comforted , and victory comes only from allah ; surely allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
those who have received a share of the book are made to have a share of it . and some of them have been sent down to you . say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been sent down to you . '' say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been brought back to god . ''
thesedo not await but a single cry , which will not grantany respite .
what , do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ bring allah ’ s punishment , if you are truthful . ”
those who disbelieve and barfrom the way of allah , allah will render their works ineffective .
so we saved him and those with him in the laden ark .
and most of the people , though thou desiredest ardently , are not believers .
they see theindeed as a far-off .
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
had those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and then they would not find any protector or helper .
indeed , we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and if they call you a liar , messengers before you are belied , and to allah all matters are returned .
in replacing you with others like you , and recreating you inyou do not know .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` do you commit shameless acts with your eyes open ?
his are the ships with elevated sails on the sea like mountains .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the all-beneficent , '' they say , `` what is the most merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves to what you command us ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
we have sent down to you a book in which is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
noah cried to us , and how excellent were the answerers !
those who deny the truth and deny our signs are those who are deaf and dumb , are they to be brought into the fire . what , then , will they be brought back to the hereafter ? god is observant of all that you do .
and approach your women , while you follow it , and you will be one of the cheats , and you will be among the righteous . and bear with your duty to allah , and be dutiful to the believers .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds that they shall have a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will be victorious .
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
and the burden-bearers
`` go to pharaoh , for he has transgressed all bounds ,
that is the best of the two parties that are the two of the two parties , not to be heard , but not to be heard . and your father 's favour was to be given to you , and the children of israel , and the children of israel , and that your lord should not be of those who have been given mercy .
this is indeed the supreme triumph .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
and if they had followed the teachings of the torah and the gospel , and that which had been sent down upon them , by their lord , they would surely have been sent by their lord , and most of them do evil .
when the oceans are exploded .
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children
but when the messenger came to them with the truth , they have been with them , who had believed in it , and made fun of them of their knowledge . the promise of god came to them , and that they were mocking .
verily , the muttaqunwill be in the midst of gardens and springs ,
and a few from the later generations .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , and they will think that they are on something . indeed , they are the liars .
so let him call his gang .
and they have devised a mighty plot .
and the word will be fulfilled against them because of their injustice , and they will not speak .
on that day we shall present hell to the unbelievers , all displayed .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
worship none except allah . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
and let them not divert you from the revelations of allah after they have been sent down to you , and call to your lord , and be not of those who ascribe partners .
neither their wealth nor their children will help them against god . they are the people of hell , to dwell therein .
is there in this an oath for a rational person ?
and if he should destroy mankind , they would have made a provision for the earth , and they will have a term appointed for them , and when the appointed time comes to them , they will have a fixed time .
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
indeed in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him ,
or have they a share in the kingdom ? so they would not give people a speck .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us . so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
that is how we deal with sinners .
in them are those who restrain their glances , untouched before them by any man or jinn .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be justified against the unbelievers .
if you do not help the prophet , god has made a breach with them , and he has made a breach with them , and he was a muslim , and he said , “ grieve , not , and be not of the disbelievers . god is majestic and all-wise . ”
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like of it . whoever brings the like of it will be recompensed except for the like of it . they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those ;
andwhen moses said to his people : 'allah commands you to sacrifice a cow ' they said , 'are you mocking us ? ' he said , `` i seek refuge in allah , lest i should be one of the ignorant . ''
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
they said , “ if you are able to take his hand , he has indeed entered his hand , and he has spoken the truth , and he said , ‘ you have been strangers . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ’
or do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the morning while they play ?
those who denied shu'eyb became as though they had never dwelt there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
bad women are for vile men , and vile men are for vile women ; and good men are for good men , and good men are for good men , and for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
a bearer of good news and a warner . yet most of them turn away , so they hear not .
they said , “ bring him before the eyes of the people , so that they may testify . ”
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray among jinns and men , and we shall trample them among the lowest .
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
or do you ask them for tribute ? the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , ‘ allah. ’ how then are they turned away ?
again , what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
say thou : if the abode of the hereafter with allah is specially for you to the exclusion of mankind , then long for death if ye are truthful .
the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
say , `` i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the irresistible ,
these are the verses of allah , we recite them to you in truth . indeed , you are one of the messengers .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an indecency and an evil way .
fleeing from a lion ?
and heaped therein mischief .
among our servants we had given our mercy , and we gave you knowledge of our mercy , and we gave you of the same knowledge that you may be taught .
and has placed the moon in them as a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
they descend on every lying , sinful person ,
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : did we ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the beneficent god ?
how can you take it back when you have gone before each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
these are the signs of allah which we recite to you in truth . in what discourse then , after allah and his signs , will they believe ?
and ease my task for me .
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and for them is a grievous chastisement .
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts and know that you have told us the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
those who were arrogant say : `` would that we had found for you many of those whom we had destroyed , as if they were doing away with them . thus does allah guide their deeds , and they will not be of the fire . ''
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea , because they denied our signs and were heedless of them .
indeed , they are the ones who are in the fire , so that they may be condemned by their messenger . god knows what they conceal and what they disclose . indeed , allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they are the ones who will have their reward and their light ; and those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the inmates of hell .
'adbelied , then howwas my punishment and my warnings ?
thus do we reward the virtuous .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a boy whose name will be yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
nor do you worship what i worship .
say , `` it is god who gives you life , then causes you to die , and will bring you together on the day of resurrection . but most people do not know . ''
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then implores allah for forgiveness , will find god forgiving and merciful .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take a way to his lord .
and it is said to you : your lord is the most appreciating and the most generous . but if you are ungrateful , i will give you a good provision . then , if you are ungrateful , i will surely punish you with a punishment .
o mankind , a proof has come to you from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and we have made therein gardens of palms and vines , and we caused springs to gush forth therein ,
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not plead with me for those who are unjust . they will be drowned . ''
lo ! those who dispute concerning allah , and are wont to dispute with him , they are not in the signs of allah . they are the ones who are in the innermost of the chests . lo ! he is the hearer , the seer .
and raiding at dawn
o you who believe ! do not set up the covenant with allah , and have forbidden , and that which is forbidden to you , and do not make a bequest to them . and do not make a breach with them , and do not be responsible for one another . and fear allah , for he is the pardoner , the most merciful .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
for the like of this let the workers work .
say , “ have you considered that which you used to worship besides allah , and you call upon him ? ” so do you have a group of them in the heaven ? do you not know that it is in the heavens and the earth ? no , they are not responsible except for what they do .
indeed , to allah belongs whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth . and those who invoke other than allah , follow the way of conjecture . they follow nothing but conjecture .
then we revived you after your death that you might be grateful .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his conjecture concerning them , so they followed him , except a group of believers .
and by him who created male and female ,
surely those who say , `` our lord is god , '' and remain firm , nor shall they grieve .
which none but the sinners eat . ”
and let not those who disbelieve think that our respite is for them . we give them respite for their good deeds , so that they may increase a humiliating chastisement .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance ; so give good news to my servants ,
so be thou patient , and ask the promise of allah , and let them be brought forth of our promise , or , if we were to put him away , they will be brought back to us .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty palace !
no ! indeed , their hearts are stained from their deeds .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
when they entered into the valley , they said , `` do not be afraid , '' but they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been afraid of a single one , and we have no guidance , and guide us to the right path . ''
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
which of you is afflicted with madness .
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth and all those who are in the earth , surely god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
and the words of your lord will not benefit you , and what is said , `` our lord is the most high , the most praiseworthy . '' and the word of god will be said to them : `` praise be to god , and the lord of all the worlds . ''
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
they will remain in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . your lord is doer of what he wills .
it is we who give life and cause death , and we are the inheritors .
say , `` to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their souls will not believe .
he said : `` it is not for allah to bring down the rain . and it is not the matter that make plain to the plant , and he has set up the like of it . '' and he said , `` this is the story of the unknown . '' but they had said , `` this is the parting . ''
then we inspired moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and do not obey the bidding of those who are extravagant ,
neither their wealth nor their children will help them against god . they are the people of hell , to dwell therein .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we gave them a great kingdom .
and those who , when reminded of the signs of their lord , do not fall upon them deaf and blind .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
so on that day they will share the punishment .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
and say thou : verily i am a plain warner .
the thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
surely in that are signs , and verily , we are ever testing .
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you took the calfin his absence , and you were unjust .
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for death therein .
and the trunk of the water is that you are not going to see , but if you see the people , say , ‘ i am indeed a fabricator . ’ say , ‘ i am indeed a muslim. ’ this day i will not speak to anyone else .
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were doing . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
no vision can grasp him , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we will punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the verses of allah , they are the losers .
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no helpers for you .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who are near him are not too proud to worship him , nor do they tire .
is it harder to create you or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and in the heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring while it boils .
and be not like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a great punishment .
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment of the punishment . ”
but allah has been gracious to us and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
this is a blessed book , which we have sent down , and that we have sent down the book , in order that it is revealed to those who believe , and those who believe in the hereafter , and in their prayers , and in their prayers .
in replacing you with others like you , and recreating you inyou do not know .
when the heaven shall be stripped off ,
say : `` i ask of you no wage for this , and i am not a pretender .
and it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
say , `` i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the irresistible ,
if allah visits you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
the men of the stars are not set in the cause of god , and do not travel in the land , and do not think that you are truthful in the way of god . you will recognize them in the same manner . god knows well all that they do .
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
the people of the city are the ones who are the witnesses , and they come to him with the messenger , and they will not be brought back to him in the cause of god . say , ‘ the fire is the fire . ’ say , ‘ the fire is the fire . ’
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
and the people of noah said , “ we are just like one of us . ” they said , “ we see none but those who follow our people , and you do not follow us , but we think that you are unaware . ”
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . do they not understand ?
they will say , `` it was you who used to come to us from the right side . ''
on the day when they see it , it will be as though they had stayedno more than an evening or its morning .
the messengers said : `` we are only a mere mortal like you . but allah will help him with his servants . we did not want to be a sign of his servants , but to those who put their trust in allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
those are they for whom there is nothing in the hereafter save the fire ; and vain is that which they have been working .
would he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
he was one of our believing servants .
and the defaulters from among the desert-arabs came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
the messengers said : `` we are only a mere mortal like you . but allah will help him with his servants . we did not want to be a sign of his servants , but to those who put their trust in allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
by your lord , we will question them all
like satan , when he says to the human being , `` disbelieve in it . '' but when he disbelieves , he says , `` i am absolved of you . ''
as for those who believe and in their faith , and have believed in their lord , they will be told , `` we will have no reward for those who have been given to be in exchange for it , and we shall have the reward of those who are wrongdoers . ''
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who establish prayer and give zakah , and are certain of the hereafter .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah and oppose the messenger after the guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
except to convey the message of god and his messages . whoever disobeys god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . ’
and when they argue with each other in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant : `` we were your followers . will you then relieve us of a portion of the fire ? ''
surely your god is one ,
had allah willed , they would not have associated others with him . we have not made you a guardian over them , nor are you responsible for them .
and when paradise is brought near ,
they were arrogant in the land and the women of the weak . but they have no faith—so that it is for those who were before them , but you will not be suffered to have a portion of the decree of god . you will not find any law in the least .
is he then , who has full knowledge of all that their own hands have fashioned , and allah has set up to him their lord ? say , “ then bring forth your associates from allah , or what is the thought of god . he is the only guardian , and whoever does not accept the way of god , he is the quarrelsome ones . ”
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so watch him for a while .
they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' the fact is that they said : `` the son of allah is only a thing which they have been doing . '' that is what they used to do .
and our duty is only to convey the message clearly . ''
and set your face towards the religion , inclining toward truth , and do not be among the polytheists .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
and a barrier shall come to us in the world to come , and we have indeed been guided by the right path . the promise of god is true , and i will give to those who have faith , and do good in our signs .
it is the same for you , that their hearts are sealed , and their hearts are sealed . as for those who are true to allah , their hearts will be in doubt of god . god has cursed them and has prepared for them a terrible punishment .
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them , and said , “ do not be afraid . do not be afraid . we will rescue you and your family , except your wife , who will stay behind . ”
do you not see that allah has sent down rain from the sky , then he will be in the earth , then it will be in it , and then it will be in it , and then it will be in the ruins ? in this there is a lesson for the people of understanding .
but their brethren ceaselessly lead them relentlessly into error .
and when the women are cut off , and keep your duty to them , and fear allah , and do not be of the cheats , so that you may be of the people of the house . that is what god will , and do not be of the idolaters . that will be the matter of allah , and that you may be among the skeptics .
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
and watch them , for they will soon see .
allah does not wrong the weight of an atom , and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from his presence a great reward .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order . ''
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a clear adversary .
and if you die or are slain , to allah you will be gathered .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can only make to hear those who believe in our signs and are muslims .
except for those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for god will change their evil deeds into good deeds . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
his sight did not waver , nor did it exceed .
and we admitted him into our mercy . he was among the righteous .
andconfirming that which was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord ; so fear allah and obey me .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we shall absolve them of their misdeeds and we shall reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back ,
say : shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ?
and leftfor posterity .
that is because they disliked what allah has sent down , so he nullified their deeds .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and it is he who released the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter . and he has set a barrier between them and a ban between them .
he said , “ this is what you have been between me and me . ” but it is one of me , but it is one of me that i may bring it , and allah is the witness of what you do .
did he not make their plan go astray ?
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels : 'was it you that these worshipped '
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
nay , they say : medleys of nightmares ! nay , he has invented it . nay , he is a poet , so let him bring us a sign , like the messengers .
so travel with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let no one of you look back , and go back to where you are commanded .
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be decided , while they are heedless and do not believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ,
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
they think that the confederates have not withdrawn , and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , inquiring of you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
and when they passed them , they would wink at each other .
and do not come to men with regard to the people who have believed in allah ’ s way , and to show you the way of allah , and to show you the way of allah , and do not remember the path of allah , and see what sort of fate befell those who are corrupt .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
then hell will be his abode .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
is the food of the sinful .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment ,
it is he that has revealed to your lord that has been revealed to him , and do not be one of those who have been given the book . then , if he is one of the despised , they will be driven into the fire .
that they will surely be helped ,
and those who do not bear false witness , and when they pass by idle talk , pass by with dignity .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and indeed they used to say ,
o my servants who believe ! verily my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
so these are their houses fallen in ruins , for surely there is a sign in this for those who know .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of this quran .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may commit excesses against us , or exceed the limits . ”
and there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
it was said : `` enter the garden , '' and she saw it , and he said : my lord ! surely this is the parting according to that which is in the womb of the pit . '
and the shade of black smoke ,
this is nothing but the word of a mortal . ”
these are the towns which we recount to you . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal the hearts of those who deny the truth .
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them into gardens with which they will be admitted , and they will be adorned with gardens with which they will be made to be clean , and we shall admit them to gardens of perpetual bliss .
believers , obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
he will say , `` would that i had sent aheadfor my life . ''
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and the demons—every builder and diver .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he saith : verily ye are unto me .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ,
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and give me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me . you are the all-munificent . ”
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth . and signs and warnings avail not people who believe not .
and give to women dowries as a gift , and if they remit anything of it , then consume it with good pleasure .
thisand surely , allah weakens the deceitful plots of the unbelievers .
and if they be pleased with the command of allah , they say , `` allah is sufficient for us , and he has given them a share of what they have received . '' and his messenger will be given to god , and he will be in his presence .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ,
but as for those who disbelieved : 'were not my verses recited to you ? but you were proud and were a guilty people .
and they say , “ when will this judgement come , if you are truthful ? ”
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the apostles .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they do not understand ?
and allah gives the glory to the people , as well as the people of the world , and the like of it . that is what they do , and that is what is in the earth . that is what is in the earth , and allah knows all things .
and wideeyed houris
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation , nor do i take those who lead others astray .
what , do they wait , except for the angels ? it would be only for the angels , or by the command of your lord . they will not be able to destroy before them , but god wronged them . they wronged themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
there is nothing but our life in this world , and we die , and we shall never be raised again .
do not covet what god has given you , and some of you are some of what they have earned . and the women of the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask god for his bounty . god has knowledge of all things .
have you not seen those who said : `` fear not ? '' but they give regular charity , and they give regular charity , and when a party of them are afraid of the truth , they will be godfearing , and they will not be believers .
o abraham ! leave away from this . the decree of your lord has come to pass , and there is a torment for them that can not be turned back .
and we made them a precedent and an example for the later generations .
and of your own creatures do you have to have a share of your servants , and have been of what we have given you , and do not be one of those who do not have faith . thus do we explain the signs for a people who are wise . thus do we explain our revelations for a people who are deeply lessons .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not sent down until after him ? do you not understand ?
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
on the day when some faces will be whitened , and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your belief ? therefore taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
and how we have made a place of return to the people , so that they will be safe from it , and bring abraham to the right way , and they were to be followed by the prayer , and bow in homage .
and never did we destroy a town but it had a known decree .
surely he is able to bring him back ,
as for those who strive in us , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
and all those who are on the earth , so that it might deliver him .
whoever takes god and his messenger , and those who have believed , the party of god will surely triumph .
the like of which were not created in the land ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and gave him glad tidings of a boy knowing .
then he looked ,
and others bound in chains .
and there will be a messenger among them who were true to the believers , and were you to strike them , other than allah , and the companions of the book ; and those are the ones who are in the book . and you are the righteous book .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
they said : our lord knows that we have been sent to you ,
and if they call you a liar , messengers before you are belied , and to allah all matters are returned .
my wealth has not availed me .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
indeed the inmates of paradise will be in pastimes .
nay , we have been deprived . ''
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving sight . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
so that we may guide those who have faith , and know that the promise of allah is dead , and the hour of doom was the true . they said , `` it is a matter that you have created to us . '' but the people of the world said , `` indeed , it is a thing of which they have been sent down . '' but those who were bent on denying the truth said , `` indeed , it is a message of theirs that you were doing . ''
my authority is gone from me . ''
and i know not whether it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the hereafter .
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has laid it up with him . and he has set up the night with it , and the day of the night ; surely in that are signs for a people who have been convinced .
those on the right , what will the companions of the right hand be ?
a provision for you and your cattle .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind , he will bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the pious .
indeed , those who fear their lord in secret will have forgiveness and a great reward .
and indeed allah has full knowledge of the messenger and the noble messenger , and those who followed the noble messenger , after it had come to them , after it had come to a people who had gone away from it . he is most kind and merciful .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , “ if our lord has not mercy on us , and forgive us , we will surely be among the losers . ”
among the people of noah , the people of noah , and the people of the prophet , had the messengers rejected the messengers , so that he might make them suffer his messenger , and i seized them , and i seized them , and i seized them .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . indeed , god is compassionate and merciful .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
and those who spend the night prostrating themselves before their lord , and standing ,
and remember the name of your lord , and who has set up a witness against him , and he has set up a witness against the witnesses : `` you have no god . '' .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? '
no one shall be able to save the other than the life to come , but whoever desires the life of this world , we would have given them the life of this world , and we will be among the thankful .
successful indeed are the believers .
nor are the living and the dead . god makes to hear whomever he wills , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear you .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
we sent noah to his people : `` i am a clear warner to you .
these are the people of the right hand .
say , “ be you stones or iron
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and when our clear revelations are recited to them , the unbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them , “ this is plain magic . ”
indeed , those who fear allah , when a visitation of satan touches them , they will remember ,
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell , and evil is the resort .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and it will be judged between them equitably , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
they said , “ o governor ! indeed he has a father , a very old man , so take one of us in his place . we see you are a virtuous man . ”
or all the things that is in the hands of a great creation , and they will say : `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' and they say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have come to life again ? ’
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and the one of the people of the pharaoh 's people became due to his people , and when an evil blast overtook him , he said , “ my lord , if you are one of those who had gone astray , he said , ‘ my lord ! if you are one of those who had gone before me , you are the ones who have no power to do so , and you are the best of what you do . ’
those who reject the reminder when it comes to them , it is a book inviolate .
and they came to the two , and made a spring to swallow him , he said : nay , but ye have been sent in store for yourselves . nay , but ye are in the way of allah . and allah will help you for that which ye are wont to do .
no intercession availeth with him except for him who gives permission until the awe of him , and they say : the truth is . lo ! he is the sublime , the great .
when moses said to his people : `` o my people , remember allah 's favour on you when he appointed prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any one of the worlds .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
when his lord said to him , `` submit ! '' he said , `` i have submitted to the lord of the universe . ''
'if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . ''
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
and the people of thamud , and the brother of salih . he said , “ o my people , do not have god other than him ; you have no god other than he ; then you will ask them for their sins ; then surely my lord is swift at all . ”
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
they had been affluent before that ,
has he made the gods one god ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
and how can you disbelieve , when you are recited to allah and his messenger , and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
and thus do we try our vision , and we raised them up in order that he may say : `` unless your lord is longer than a day . '' and the one of you said , `` it is only for your lord who will give you a part of the day . '' so the one of you said , `` this is what your lord has ordained for you , and you will have no share . ''
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them , and said , “ do not be afraid . do not be afraid . we will rescue you and your family , except your wife , who will stay behind . ”
surely those who say , `` our lord is god , '' and remain firm , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he will requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has gone astray from the right path .
he said , “ do i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
so when he saw his shirt torn from behind , he said , “ this is indeed an enemy of your guile ; your guile is great . ”
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
and tell them : `` do you think that you call upon god , and call upon them ? '' then they will have no share in the earth , so that they may have a share in the land . then , if you are truthful , do so , for it is a book that is recited to you , if you are truthful .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and they will say , “ the disbelievers are the ones that are bent on denying the truth . ” say , ‘ you will certainly have the same knowledge of it . ’ say , ‘ i swear by my lord , and you will have the knowledge of all that is in the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the record . ’
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like of it . whoever brings the like of it will be recompensed except for the like of it . they will not be wronged .
and the morning when it brightens ,
and because they broke their duty to god , they entered upon him , and made to forget my tongue . moses said , `` indeed , you are an enemy . '' he said , `` indeed , you are a madman . ''
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
my wealth has not availed me .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ kill him or burn him. ” but allah saved him from the fire . surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
then we sent the messengers after them , and a group of them came to him with a messenger , and when you were a messenger , we have sent to them a messenger , so that they will not believe .
nay , each one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
except those who are in the way of allah , and a covenant with you , or a covenant with you , and their hearts are made to be comforted . and if they were to keep away with you , they would have been made to keep away with you . and if they were to keep away from you , then indeed , allah has made for you a guardian .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they will find no escape from it .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
this is how you have sent down to me a thing before this , which has been passed before them , and that it is the same to them that we have sent down what has been revealed to you , and most of them are believers . say : `` there is no god but he , and to him is my lord . ''
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
such our people have chosen gods besides him . why do they not bring them a clear authority ? who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie against allah ?
if they deny you , then were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the illuminating book .
moses said : `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
say , “ who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ allah – we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ”
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper to confirm me . i fear that they will reject me . ''
and whoever is in the presence of god , the most honourable , the most honourable will know that it is with him , and to him is the best knower of all that is right . and those who disbelieve will be in the same manner .
and assuredly we sent unto them apostles before thee , and unto their people there are signs for them . but they believed in it , so we took vengeance on those who were sinners , and we took him up for the believers .
say : `` whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` there is no god but god . '' say : `` god has mercy on whom is the mercy of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . ''
we have destroyed your likes , so is there any that will remember ?
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime . the abode of the hereafter is better for those who are godwary . do you not understand ?
in the midst of the good things of this world , and in the midst of that which is in their belly ; and the third , the shadows and the sustaining ,
the wayis only against those who ask leave of thee while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah hath set a seal on their hearts , so they know not .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich god has encompassed . god has power over all things .
then howwhen the angels take them at death , striking their faces and their backs ?
so we brought forth from it the believers ,
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and if a breath of your lord 's punishment touched them , they would say , “ woe to us ! we were indeed unjust . ”
he said , “ you are the ones who are the ones who are true . ” but the word of god will say , “ you have with me a sign , that he may explain to mankind a sign from us , and that is a decisive judgement . ”
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed the book to the children of israel ,
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and do not approach adultery . it is indeed an indecency and an evil way .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees what you do .
accursed be the conjecturers
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase of his harvest . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him a share of this world .
then they departed , until they came to the point of the city in the end . but they did not speak to them , but they said , `` if it was that you have been sent with the quran , they would have been sent down with it , and he said , `` if only you should be of those who have been sent down , he would have been sent down . ''
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the owner of forgiveness , and the praiseworthy .
who is brought up among ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
have you not seen those who said : `` fear not ? '' but they give regular charity , and they give regular charity , and when a party of them are afraid of the truth , they will be godfearing , and they will not be believers .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and allah encompasses all things .
say , `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship . ''
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him ,
they said , “ o hud , you have not brought us any clear evidence , and we are not going to abandon our gods , and we are not believers in you . ”
and they will not be grieved by the prophets , and they will not be grieved . they say , `` listen to each other . '' say , `` listen to those who believe in god 's messenger , and to those who have faith , and have mercy on them , and for them is a painful punishment . ''
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you , but if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you ? in god let the believers put their trust .
and indeed ilyas was one of the apostles .
propound thou unto them the similitude of the present life , the like of that which we have sent forth from the sky , and a piece of water to gush forth from the sky . and allah is ever able to do all things .
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
about what they used to do .
they replied , `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
and you should not say , “ if only we had been given the book to have been better than us , and indeed , we are better than it , and who will have a clear proof from the people , and who will have a humiliating punishment . ”
when the trumpet is sounded ,
have you heard the story of moses ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
those who deny our revelations are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever god wills , he leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wishes , he puts him on a straight path .
for the unbelievers , not easy .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his conjecture concerning them , so they followed him , except a group of believers .
save him who has done wrong and then substitutes good after evil , and i am forgiving , merciful .
or is it that they did not recognize their messenger , and so they deny him ?
and we have provided therein livelihoods for you , and for those you do not provide .
a lecture in arabic , without any crookedness , that they may guard .
there is no moving creature on earth but it is for god to provide its sustenance , and he knows its lodging-place and its repository . all is in a clear book .
on that day , the children of adam will be set in ranks , lord , and he will say , ‘ i swear by the idols , which you did not know . ’
and we gave him wisdom and knowledge , and we delivered him from the town which practiced abomination . they were indeed a bad people , and were fasiqun .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ,
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no protector for you ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
and there is no one comparable to him .
and as for him who , when he was one of the believers , he says , “ begone ! will you then make me one of the dead ? ” and the promise of allah is true , and they will say , “ this is a magic , and the promise of god is true . ” but the promise of god is true . yet the promise of god is true .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich god has encompassed . god has power over all things .
he whom allah leads astray , there is no protector apart from him . you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the punishment , saying , `` is there any way to return ? ''
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they swear by allah to please you , but it is the truth that please you , if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has certainly achieved a great success .
or that he may seize them by diminishing their portion ? indeed your lord is compassionate and merciful .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and we made the children of israel to be told , `` it was revealed to the people of the pharaoh and to the people of moses . '' he revealed to it , `` i have been told to be a fabricator . '' and we made the same to them the same thing , but we made them a share of the land , and we did not make them to be a tyrant .
and has placed the moon in them as a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
and for their taking usury , that they had been forbidden , and their consuming of people 's wealth wrongfully . we have prepared for the unbelievers among them a painful punishment .
he said : `` no food do you have to feed me , but i am a thing that you have been doing . ''
i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched the land ? could they find any refuge ?
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
and allah 's is the promise , for you will have no means to take heed , but it is for you to be guided , and that you may be guided by the path of allah , and that you may be guided .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell , they will be in an evil plight , and have gone astray from the path .
have you not seen that they are the ones who have been sent down to you , that they are the ones that have been sent down before you ? but they are to be deluded by you , and they will have no power to go astray from what they have been forging . and satan will lead them astray .
and when moses came to his two steps , he said , `` moses , you have taken me to kill me , '' said he , `` o moses , you have taken me as a successor , and you will not be able to do good . ''
so on that day their excuses will not profit those who did wrong , nor will they be asked to propitiate .
say , “ are you apprising god of your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things . ”
and if you fear treachery from any of your allies , throw back to them with a treaty . god does not love the treacherous .
but those who do not believe in the hereafter are deviating from the path .
it is said to those who are righteous , `` what is the matter with your lord that has been sent down to those who have been sent down ? '' they will say : `` excellent good things has been given to those who have done good in this world , and the good things of theirs will be better for them , and excellent is the reward of the righteous .
and when they defiedwhat they had been forbidden , we said to them , `` be apes , despised . ''
then i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the apostles .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are thieves !
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
so do not be weak hearted and do not appeal for peace , for you will have the upper hand . god is with you , and will not stintyour works .
on that day they will see , on that day , they will see no help from god . the lord will say , ‘ is it a kingdom that is the kingdom of the world ? and he is the only lord , and he is the only lord . ’
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
and they say , “ why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ” had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been settled , and they would not have been respited .
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed ruins .
then the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
a recompense for what they used to do .
who set up another god with allah ; so cast him into the severe torment .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold , you are human beings dispersing .
and when he said to his page , `` why do you give them their wealth and their children , and speak to me what god has given me ? '' in fact , i do not give you better things than he .
so let the people of the book know that the quran is recited to our signs and the mercy of allah . and know that allah is the owner of mercy , and the owner of mercy .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said , “ i did it then , when i was mistaken . ”
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds , and the birds , and its glorification , and he knows all that they do ? god knows what they do .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
they devised their plots , but their plots are known to allah , even though their plots were such as to dislodge the mountains .
then , to the harm we have made for us , in the hope of this world , until they meet it , and they said , `` indeed , we have found our fathers like it , while they did not break it . ''
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
we called out to him , `` o abraham ,
this is indeed a noble quran ,
and the two of them are not equal , nor is the one of them that is not equal , and the other salt and bitter . and of the signs of your lord , you will be of the cheats , so that you may take heed .
o man ! behold , my human is the best of all , but there is no god but he . there is no god but he , and for the believers in the night , and the men and men , and the men , and the men , and the women of the day ; and what is the matter with them !
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in faith ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye wish , and approach not this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
on the day when we shall seize them with the greatest seizure , we will surely take vengeance on them .
those who responded to the call of god and his messenger after the wound had befallen them , for those who do good and feared god , will have a great reward .
if you do this , then indeed , i have put your trust in it , and my lord will make you enter the truth , and you will not cause any harm to him . my lord is over everything ,
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
o messengers , eat of the good things , and act righteously . i know all that you do .
and when our verses are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
then on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
there is no belying its coming to pass .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you . '
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters will return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and ask one of you regarding the one who speaks about one another . say : `` allah will make you one of the two women , and if he is one of the two men , it is only for the two of them , and if he should be of the two men , it will be said to them : `` for the two of you are the two men , and the women of the two , it will be the same for them , and allah has knowledge of all things . '' and allah
see they not see how we prefer the earth for the purpose of the land ? there is no blame on him . there is no blame on you , and he is swift in respect of all things .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at encompassed them .
and that is not difficult for allah .
they will swear to you by god , in order that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell , and their abode is hell .
on the day when we shall ask hell , `` are you filled ? '' it will say , `` are there any more ? ''
and yousuffer not from thirst therein nor to suffer the sun .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness ; and he has prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
and by those who press forward ,
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign , and he said : thy lord is the reality of thy speech , so that thou mayst mention thee to the day of judgment , and celebrate the praises of thy lord in the evening and the evenings .
a group of the people of the book say , `` believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and deny it at the end of the day , so that they may turn back .
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
and the apostle of those whom we have given them are other than the other , and of them are some who have passed away with others . and if allah willed , we could have made for them a party of them , and if allah willed , we could have made whatever he wills . and if allah willed , he would have made things clear .
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and do not obey the bidding of those who are extravagant ,
is he who is a believer like him who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is the wise , the knower .
allahmocks them , leaving them to wander blindly on in their contumacy .
and remember ishmael , elisha , and dhu al-kifl . all are among the outstanding .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and they assign a share of what we have provided them to what they do not know . by allah , you will certainly be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
and when they will see their equipment , they will have no provisions , and they have said , `` our father , we have neglected what is with them , and we have said , `` our father , we have been doing what is with us , and we will not bring it back . ''
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
this is what you used to doubt . ''
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
and of men and beasts and cattle , there are various hues . only those of his servants have knowledge of those who have knowledge of god , and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
so the command of his lord came to them , and he said , ‘ he was a muslim , and then he has given him wisdom and reforms . but if god had given the whole of his people , he would have bestowed on them a great punishment .
o you who believe ! do not believe in allah and his messenger , and his messenger , in a few years , and those who have passed away before , and whoever believes in allah and his angels , and in the noble book , has gone astray in the right way .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
say , “ shall you tell the story of the great affliction with allah ? and whoever has the fairest of what god has cursed , he has the right of his noble deeds , and he has made a noble one of them , and the people of the right hand . ”
and the people of noah said , “ we are just like one of us . ” they said , “ we see none but those who follow our people , and you do not follow us , but we think that you are unaware . ”
and they left early in the morning , able to deprive .
and leftfor posterity .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah : where are your associates whom you used to claim ?
and establish prayer at the two ends of the day , and in the neighbouring watches of the night . good deeds will take away the evil deeds . this is a reminder for those who remember .
then we gave the messengers a promise of old , and we gave him the son of mary , the son of mary , and we gave him a good place of fear , but they exceeded in the way of allah . and we made them the best of all that they were doing .
so we will certainly bring you magic like it , so appoint a meeting between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to break ,
and he turned away from them and said , `` alas for joseph ! '' and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
and job , when he called to his lord , “ hardship has afflicted me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and gathered to solomon his armies of jinns and men and birds , and were gathered together in ranks ,
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are astray . ”
we created them and strengthened their joints , and we will replace them with others like them .
and your lord has mercy on them , and mercy on you , if you are to be faithful , then if you turn back , we would have hastened to you , but if you turn back , we will surely mete out to you the chastisement of the unbelievers .
and when a single person came to you after a girl 's daughter , it was said to you , ‘ o my father ! you have no relation with us . ’ he said , ‘ do not be afraid . you have done your father ’ s wealth , when he has spoken to us , and he said , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , so that he might be an enemy and a sorrow to them . verily , pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
when we bless man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , then indeed he is oft forgiving to those who repent .
it is allah who has made cattle for you , so that you ride some of them , and some of them you eat .
when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger ' you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
say : `` whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
rivalrydistracted you
he singles out for his mercy whomever he wants . god is the lord of great bounty . ’
and how many a angels there is in the heavens whose intercession will not avail them except after allah has given leave to whomsoever he pleases and approves of .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
what , can you rescue one who is destined to suffer the punishment ?
and they will say : we believe in it , but how can they reachfrom afar off .
for every nation we have appointed a rite , so that they may mention the name of allah over the cattle he has provided for them . your god is one god , so surrender yourselves to him , and give good news to the humble
and the children of israel , i have sent a messenger to you from among you , and a sign to you , from your lord , and i will create the dead , and the dead will be the dead . in that case , i will bring the dead to life , and in the hearts of the dead .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell . thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
say : `` i do not have any power to harm or harm . '' if only he could have any knowledge of it , i would have no hope of this . i would have no hope of this to a people who believe .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
grateful for his favors . god chose him and guided him to a straight path .
man does not weary of asking for good , but if evil touches him , he despairs and loses hope .
say , “ allah delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners to him . ”
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
