and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
o people , be conscious of the one who has created you from a single soul , and he has made for them the two of men , and women , and the women of women , and the women of women , and be conscious of one another . indeed , the promise of allah is true .
as for those who disbelieve , their works are like a mirage in the desert , and to find it in the midst of the thirsty to find it , and he finds him in his account , and allah is swift at his reckoning .
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak to us ? glory be to you ! this is a monstrous slander ! ''
a host of deserters of the factions are defeated .
when he said to his people , “ we are the heirs of the good of you . so ask your lord to provide you with a sustenance from your lord , and he will bring you out of what you wish to do . ” so it is for him that you should take for a while , and it is for them to be a clear thing . so , as for him , they will have a right course .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth , about which they doubt .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and an example of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
the son of israel , we shall have a son of god , and say : `` if you are to be a guardian for you , then say : `` why be ye a confirmer ? '' he will forgive you , and he whom he wills , and is in the heavens and the earth . and he whom he wills , is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the swiftest to return .
so we seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea . so see how was the end of the unjust .
when those who were followed disown their followers , and they see the punishment , and all their ties are cut off ,
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees and in what they erect .
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
they said , ‘ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and when hell is set ablaze ,
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
by the lote-tree of the boundary
if allah had so been of the people of the past , all of the people of the earth would have been set on its surface . but god is swift at all time , and when he comes to the day , god sees his servants .
they say : `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said , `` the messiah , '' they said , `` the son of allah is to be said to them , '' they will be told , `` what is the matter with allah that they will be destroyed ? ''
the day they see it , as if they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
why did not the believing men and the believing women think you heard it , and said , “ this is an obvious falsehood ? ”
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they lied .
he said : nay ! ye throw first . lo ! their cords and their staves were moved by their magic as if they were running .
he said , “ go down from it , both of you are enemies of one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he go astray . ”
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk , who afflicted you with evil torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
and joseph has put his staff to him before he came to his own gain , and then we sent a messenger to him , and we had sent them a casting of his brother , and we were in the heaven , and we would have set up the right path with him , and we are the best to know .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will indeed be victorious . ”
and if it is that we should make it grow on the earth , and see that they would have become the like of it , that day , will be split up in fear , and to be mindful of allah 's command . and we are the senders ,
and we know that we can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor can we frustrate him by flight .
and your people reject it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
your lord gives abundantly to whom he will and sparingly to whom he pleases . he is well aware and sees his servants .
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they were ascending through it ,
when the sun is rolled up .
we never descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us and what is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
and say : my lord ! forgive and have mercy , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
he says , “ i have spent enormous wealth . ”
this is of the news of the unseen which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they agreed upon their plan .
a provision for you and your cattle .
they said , `` call upon your lord to make clear to us what she has done . '' he said , `` he says , `` he says , 'it is a cow neither old nor young ; so do what you are commanded '
abiding therein ; excellent an abode and abode !
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers : `` we will surely drive you out of our land , or you will return to our religion . '' then their lord revealed to them , “ we will destroy the wrongdoers . ”
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may take heed .
how many generations have we destroyed before them , and they cried out when there was no longer time for escape .
and those speeding along with ease ,
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
and paradise will be brought near to the pious , not far away .
in scorching wind and scalding water .
and when the truth comes to them , they will say , `` we will not believe in it until we recite the like of what we have sent down to you , and allah is the all-knower of what has been revealed to you , and the punishment of the punishment is due to the sinners . ''
purity is to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque the precincts of which we have blessed , that we may show him some of our signs . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
he said : `` so this is the word of your lord , '' he says , `` it is easy for me , and a mercy from us , and a mercy from us . it is a matter decreed . ''
do not speak to those who invoke god ’ s call , lest they are in an ignorant manner , so that they may go about in the footsteps of allah . it is all the same for them that they will be brought back to their lord .
say , “ who has has a fabrication from the right path , if he can find his mercy to you , or can they find his mercy ? ” and they will find no helpers .
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted , and you would taste evil because you hindered others from the way of allah , and you will suffer a painful punishment .
when your lord said to the angels : `` i am about to create a human being from clay .
say : `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a magician or a madman . ”
or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend the ropes .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
and the birds , gathered together , all echoing him .
say , ‘ is the news of good things of ours ? ’ but those who are godwary will be in the gardens of eternity , wherein streams flow , abiding eternally therein , and allah is seeing of his servants .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
our lord , make us submissive to you , andfrom our offspring a nation submissive to you , and show us our rites and accept our repentance . you are the receiver of repentance , the merciful .
those who took the calf , incurred the wrath of their lord and abasement in the life of this world . thus do we reward those who invent falsehoods .
there is none who can avert it .
whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
it is he who will take you out of the clear signs , and then the day of resurrection , and the sun and the moon will be settled , and he will give them the sun and the moon . he will make it a clear revolution of the commandments to your lord , and he will make it a clear lamp .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and they went early in determination , able .
who creates and regulates .
and they devised , and allah devised , and allah is the best of schemers .
that they may understand my speech .
and when their eyes are turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
the evil of all these are hateful in the sight of your lord .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul !
like the shaitan , when he says to man , `` disbelieve , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the creation . ”
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah , and if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and speak to him a gentle word that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking allah 's pleasure , and allah is kind toservants .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to ridicule engulfed them .
and indeed , for those who are unjust will be like the portion of their predecessors , so let them not impatiently urge me .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me !
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus , the son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
has he penetrated to the unseen , or has he taken a promise from the most merciful ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal anything from allah .
those are they upon whose hearts , hearingand sightallah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
and the morning when it brightens ,
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk who were afflicting you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women ; and in that was a great trial from your lord .
to him you attend .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , they will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
verily those who recite the book of allah and establish prayer and expend of that wherewith we have provided them , secretly and openly , hope for a commerce that will not perish .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
we send not down the angels save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
you are only one religion , as we have been the first to create the first time , and we have made it a bar from it , and to which you have been sent down . indeed , what you have been commanded is to be fulfilled .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
but the sects differed among themselves , so woe to the unbelievers for a dreadful day .
he causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night ; and he knows what is in the hearts .
woe to me ! would that i had not taken so-and-so as a friend .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? surely we shall requite the guilty .
whoever thinks that allah will not help him in this world and in the hereafter , let him stretch a rope to the ceiling , and let him hang himself , and see what enrages him .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , for who is the people of the right way , who is the people of the right and the right way ? ''
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the measure is denied us , therefore send with us our brother , and we will take care of him . ”
and madesmooth for him .
he said , “ it is so that your lord says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
and we have made the case to be a case for them , and we have separated from it , and what is in no disagreement after it came to them ; and your lord will judge between them concerning that which they are differing .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they were arrogant and were a criminal people .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer . ''
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . god has made account of them while they forgot it . god is witness over everything .
if they could find a refuge , or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn it away .
indeed , when it was said to them , ‘ there is no god except allah , ’ they were always proud .
and we gave them the explicit book ,
the wayis only against those who oppress men and wrongly rebel in the land ; for them there is a painful punishment .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
this is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
and when it is said to them , “ do not make mischief in the land , they say , ‘ we are only reformers . ’
and if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
there is not a matter for you except that allah may warnof the command of allah , and if they are unjust , then if they are unjust , then seek forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . indeed , allah is sent down to him , and he is the most merciful of those who repent .
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
o dear prophet , it has been revealed to you , to warn the people of the same , but when he decides on any one of them , he says to it , `` it has been revealed to me , '' and allah has the power to make it fail . god has full knowledge of the truth . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
as for those who are bent on denying the truth , when they are unjust , they will say , “ what ! you have made it in a state of confusion ? ” they will say , “ are we to be the winners in the earth ? ” they will say , “ what ! the earth is with allah , and the angels , in the end , and it is the destination ? ”
is he who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste what you used to earn ? ''
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound ,
and if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers and you subsequently have gone back , then give those whose wives have gone back to the equivalent of what they had spent . and fear allah in whom you believe .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
which mounteth up to the hearts .
moses said : `` this is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
thus we relate to you some of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
so if they accuse you of lying , say , `` your lord is the lord of all-embracing mercy , but his wrath will not be averted from the guilty people . ''
a guidance and a mercy for the righteous ,
do they wish to hasten our punishment ?
then we gave moses the book , perfect for him who does good , and explaining all things , and a guidance and a mercy , that they may believe in the meeting with their lord .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ''
god will certainly promise you to take his promise . the truth is to come to you , and some of them who are averse to their hearts , and some of them are averse to what they have done . and indeed , allah will surely give to you the good things to you . god is munificent and munificent .
and we are the human being to be a case to him , and if he helps them , give them his judgment , and you will not have any knowledge of what you have done .
they said , ‘ do you wonder at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
if you turn away , you will cause corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people cry out ,
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
indeed , allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; surely allah does what he wills .
the people of hijr rejected the messengers .
then we shall make the later ones to follow them .
say : `` it is allah who delivers you from it and from every calamity , but you associate others with him . ''
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or that the hour will come upon them suddenly .
father , there has come to me knowledge of what has not come to you . follow me , i will guide you to a straight path .
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his revelations .
exalted , purified ,
and among the people is he who calls on the people of the hearts , but if there comes to them a good deed , it would be in the way of allah ; and this is the way of the hereafter .
and when a chapter is sent down , saying : believe in allah and strive along with his apostle , the opulent among them ask leave of thee , and say : leave us , that we may be with those who sit .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
that he is the lord of sirius .
we have made it a reminder and a comfort for the users .
you are but a human being like us . so bring us a sign , if you are truthful . ''
they say : `` why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? '' say : `` signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
thus we relate to you some of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
so these are their houses fallen down , because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
or were they created from nothing , or are they the creators ?
straight , to warn of a severe punishment from him and to give glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds , for them is a goodly reward .
o children of adam ! if there come to you messengers from among you , relating to you my signs , then whoever practices piety and reforms shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
do they not see how the thing allah has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
there is a sign in this , a sign for abraham , a one who has set up a word to his own tongue , and he is a one who does not accept faith in him , and whoever believes in him , god is indeed independent of him .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
and when thou dost see the whisper of them , they hide the word when it is recited to them , and he will call to speak , as it is . so , it is , for them , to keep up the right way , and then , to them is the way . so , and to keep up the way . and allah is the best to make things clear .
so it tasted the evil consequences of its conduct , and the end of its affair was loss .
except from their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
whatever mercy allah opens to mankind , none can withhold it , and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
and there comes not to them a fresh reminder from the compassionate , but they turn away from it .
so we sent upon them a raging wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of this world ; and they will not be helped .
leave them to eat and enjoy , and lethope beguile them . presently they shall know .
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
then why did those whom they had taken as gods besides allah as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they went astray from them ; and that was their lie , and what they were forging .
say to the disbelievers , `` you will be overcome and gathered to hell , an evil resting place . ''
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver . ''
o you who believe ! do not forbid the good things which allah has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of allah and then do not follow up what they have spent with reminders of their generosity or with injury , their reward is with their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
of his kind was abraham .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a monotheist , and was not one of the polytheists .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be set in array ,
those who have taken the covenant of allah after it has been mentioned , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . these are the verses of allah , and in the sight of allah , they are a way .
do they not know that allah eases the sustenance for whomever he wills and restricts it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and do not give up your property except the benefit of your property , unless it be the extent of the extent that the extent of which you have been commanded , and do not measure , for it is the same for you , that your lord may tell you what you have done .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
no prophet came to them but they mocked him .
rejoicing in what allah has given them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and of the people are that of the way of allah , and those who are in the way of allah are rightly guided , and the way of allah is a lasting , and for them is a lasting punishment .
he said , “ my lord , i have wronged myself , so forgive me . ” so he forgave him ; surely he is the forgiving , the merciful .
and that is not hard for allah .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and to allah do all things return .
then reduces them to rusty rubbish .
and they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` god leads astray whom he will , and guides to himself those who turn to him in repentance .
and on the day when he will say : call on those whom you pretended . so they will call upon them , and they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
do they desire other than the religion of allah ? and to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned .
moses said to them , “ throw whatever you are going to throw . ”
do not think that god will fail his promise to his messengers . god is majestic and revengeful .
and when they are reminded , they pay no heed .
messengers as bearers of good news and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
nay , but they play in doubt .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
so when moses was a fixed time , you made a blazing fire , and he has set a fire for you , so that i may recite to you a flaming fire .
and as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
before them the people of noah deniedanda'ad , and pharaoh , the impaler
and mount sinai ,
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
like the shaitan , when he says to man , `` disbelieve , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the creation . ”
that god may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and when the word is fulfilled against them , we shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth that will say to them : most surely mankind did not believe in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them , for their covenant , and we said to them , “ enter the gate , prostrating ” ; and we said to them , “ do not cross the limits of the sabbath , ” and we took from them a firm covenant .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . it is an indecency , and an evil way .
and when you said , ‘ o moses , we will not believe in you until we see allah manifestly , so the thunderbolt seized you while you were watching . ’
except iblis ; he was proud and became one of the faithless .
and the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , is exalting him . and he is not aware of what they do , and he is ever pardoning and kind .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him .
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky , so that their necks will remain bowed before it .
who seeth thee when thou standest up
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . i am a trustworthy messenger to you ,
all that is in the case of the messenger , do not be held accountable for the people of the truth , and do not serve the way of allah , for they are the ones who have come to believe in the way of god , so that you are not unjust to the people . it is god who has the power to do so .
surely those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . and if there had not been a specified term for them , the punishment would have come to them ; and it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
say : `` allah 's is the kingdom of the truth , to whom you will possess , and you can not make any to be able to have any power to do it . you are the all-dominant over all things . ''
we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
those are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them in terms of their own souls .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
as if they had never dwelt there . now away with madyan as thamud was done away with !
and by him who created male and female .
who have made the quran into fragments .
surely the day of decision is an appointed time .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
you can not frustrate him in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
god has promised you much booty that you will capture . he has given you the life of this world , and has restrained the hands of men from you , and that it may be a sign for the believers .
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he is the living , there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
indeed , your lord is the best knower of the two periods of the night and the day , or a part of the night , and the day for which you are wont to do ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity
and exalted your fame ?
he hides himself from the people because of the bad news that he has been informed . will he keep it in humiliation or bury it in the dust ? how evil is their judgement !
for every nation is a term ; when their term comes , they will not delay it at a single hour , nor will they advance it .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of each other . whoever of you takes them for friends , surely he does not guide them . god does not guide the unjust people .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
that which you are promised is coming , and you can not escape .
they say , `` a lie , but if he wills , he can seal the hearts of this . '' but if he wills , he can therefore make the deaf hear the truth . god is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
stripping away his skin ,
assuredly allah knoweth what they conceal and what they declare . lo ! he loveth not the proud .
when the eventcomes
he is the conqueror over his servants . he is the wise , the aware .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is able to do all things .
and we had already forbidden him before him . so his sister said , `` shall i tell you about a household that will rear him for you , and take care of him ? ''
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to deride .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt .
and we rained on them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse not save infidelity .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
risethe night except a little ;
two men of those whom allah had given favor , said to them : `` enter them on the gate , for when you enter it , you will be victorious . put your trust in allah if you are believers . ''
we know well that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but the harmdoers deny the signs of god .
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
say , ‘ my lord ! if you would show me what they are promised ,
the people of hijr rejected the messengers .
and say : my lord ! forgive and have mercy , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
o you who believe ! do not be exultant at all when you are in your hearts , and when it has been concluded between you and them , do not be complaisant in your own , until you are free from the right way , and when you are patient , it is as a right way . and indeed , allah is ever kind and kind .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
it is he who has made the earth a wide expanse for you , and for you the abode of the earth . he has made the sky to swallow you , so do not set up with god any way .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and that is easy for allah .
allah is the life of the hereafter , and the believers who keep the way of allah in the cause of allah , and those who are in the way of allah will be on the right hand . that is the supreme triumph .
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
you will never be hungry in it nor naked .
these , our people , have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they are unjust .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecencies with your eyes open ? ”
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back to sea again , and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
and assuredly we have brought unto them a book which we expounded with knowledge , and a guidance and a mercy unto a people who believe .
and they worship beside allah that which hath not sent down unto them any warrant , and that whereof they have no knowledge , and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and they stand up lazily , looking on .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so walk in its tracts , and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
these are two disputants who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire will be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
and they shall not be absent from it .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith , we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not deprive them of anything of their deeds . every man is hostage to what he earned .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
and who is more astray than one who invokes besides allah such as will not answer him until the day of resurrection , and who are unaware of their prayer ?
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , and who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with fear that they are returning to their lord
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i follow only what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner .
verily allah ! he is the provider , owner of power , strong .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they entreat .
do they not see that we have made a sanctuary secure , while men are despoiled all around them ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favour of allah ?
and collectand hide it .
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for the unbelievers ?
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
nay , but that day they will submit .
and when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! work according to your own people , and you will return to it , and to him go back to the right way , and he is the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful . ''
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
and if you do not disbelieve in you , allah will not be pleased with his servants , even if you are to be pleased with his servants , and if you are guided , it is to you that you will be the ones to be guided . and he is the all-knower of what you have done .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed , and repel the evil deed . then you will see that he between whom and you was a close friend .
as for the unbelievers , they wish that you should disbelieve in it , as they are unbelievers , and they are disbelievers in the way of allah . and if they were to turn away , they would have been your opinion . and if you were to take them away , they would not be your guardian .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment . ”
they have calledlies . they will soon come to know what they mocked at .
have you not seen that allah will take you out of the heaven upon the coming of the heaven ? then he will make it one of the like of the like of it , and to whomsoever god will bring forth the like of it , to whomever he wills . and to whomsoever he will , will come to light .
the hypocrites , men and women , are one of the other . they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and they withhold their hands . they forgot god , so he forgot them . the hypocrites are the transgressors .
o you who believe ! if you help allah , he will help you and make your feet firm .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , `` i am commanded to worship allah , sincere to him in religion .
indeed , those who have divided their religion and become sects , you have no concern from them ; their affair is with allah , then he will inform them of what they used to do .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper , so send him with me as a helper .
and the fifththat the wrath of allah be upon her if he is truthful .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and the meeting with him , it is they who have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
it is not fitting for the merciful to take a son .
if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from allah ? indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
if you were to help them , god would certainly have given them the victory of that which the unbelievers had turned away , when they had been in the cave , and said , `` do not grieve over the people of the world , and god has the power to do all that you do . '' god is majestic and all-wise .
do they have other gods besides allah ? tell them , `` your proof is true . '' say , `` your evidence is to come to me , and to those who are true to the truth , but most of the people are averse to it . ''
o you enrobed one .
or do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the daytime while they play ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . god has made account of them while they forgot it . god is witness over everything .
he said , “ this is what i have given to you . did he not know that allah had destroyed many generations before him , and he destroyed many generations who were stronger than him , and a great deal of guilt ? ”
allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
so do not assert similarities to allah . god knows and you do not know .
when moses had said to their enemy , `` o moses , do you want to kill him , o moses ? do you want to kill him who has become a wrongdoer in the land ? do you not reflect on the earth , that you may be a harmdoer '
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will dwell forever .
their prayer at the houseis nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
confirm my strength with him
so that allah may forgive you your sin and the later generations , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
of jinn and men .
but they divided themselves into sects , each rejoicing in what it had .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
we will ease him toward hardship ,
andisma'il , idris , and zul-kifl , allof constancy and patience .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning ; this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
and those whom you call upon besides him can not help you , nor can they help themselves .
when they come to you , they say , `` we believe , '' but they have entered with disbelief , and they go forth with it , and allah knows best what they were concealing .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book except from hearsay . they only speculate .
o dear prophet , we have made lawful for you what has been revealed to you , and the women of the right path , to the poor , and the women of the women who had emigrated , and the women of the old hand , were a muslim , and the woman who had taken the right path to allah , is a hanif , and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : `` we believe . bear witness that we are muslims . ''
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , and when we have given him favour , he says , `` it has been revealed to me . '' no , it is a test . but most of them do not know .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
or that he will not seize them by a process of slow wastage
that i may do good in that which i have left behind . '' nay , but it is only a word that he utters ; and behind them is a barrier until the day they are raised up .
he created man .
do they not know that allah knows what they conceal and what they disclose ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
they said , “ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and faces will be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and round them shall go boys of theirs as if they were hidden pearls .
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
god is the only lord , the living , the one who is the sustainer of the heavens and the earth . he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth , and whose is the knowledge of the world , and the law of allah . it is he who is the almighty , the great .
they concealfrom the people , but they can not hidefrom allah , and he is with them when they meditate by night when they are unpleasing to allah . allah encompasses all that they do .
and be thou patient because of those who call to the call of their lord and celebrate the shadows of the evening , and seek to call them to the remembrance of their lord , and let him not be permitted to his remembrance .
o ye who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you , that ye may ward off .
he will have a pleasant life
go forth , light or heavy , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the cause of allah . this is better for you , if you only knew .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
god does not love the shouting of evil speech except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
moses said to them : `` woe to you ! do not invent a lie against allah , lest he destroy you by a punishment , and he who invents lies fails . ''
and those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies and when they are angry forgive ,
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
fear him who created you and the generations of the ancients . ''
o ye who believe ! stand up with the truth and bear with allah a right , and have no power to avert it , so that you may be godfearing . lo ! allah is aware of what you do .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction , and all their deeds are based on falsehood .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
why did not the believing men and the believing women think you heard it , and said , “ this is an obvious falsehood ? ”
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and fear allah , and do not disgrace me .
noble and pious .
then we will question those to whom our messengers sent , and we will surely question the messengers .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that which my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and they have misled many , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . ''
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
`` seize him and fetter him ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
they said , `` you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ''
are these not the ones whom you swore that allah would not have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , and fear no fear , nor shall you grieve .
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that will remember ?
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
indeed i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them because of their unbelief ; little do they believe .
allah is he who created you out of weakness , then gave you strength after weakness , then after weakness gave you strength , and he creates whatever he wills . he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
if you could see them when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we were sent back , and would not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the faithful . ”
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been sent down upon him from among us ? nay , he is an insolent liar .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
have you not seen those who dispute about the signs of god ? how are they turned away ?
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
it is decreed for him that whoever befriends him , he will mislead him and will guide him to the punishment of the blaze .
god does not love the shouting of evil speech except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
though you are not liable if he does not purify himself .
there was not one of them who did not deny the messengers , so my retribution was justified .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the opinion of those who disbelieve . woe to those who disbelieve in the fire .
they said , “ we have given you good news , so do not despair . ”
he will have no strength , and no helper .
we created them not except with truth , but most of them do not know .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse to know , and they are arrogant .
and when you have finished the prayer , remember allah , standing , sitting , and reclining , and when you feel secure , perform the prayer ; surely prayer is prescribed for the believers .
it is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has made for you the people of the cattle and of the cattle , and has made for you the like of it . and there is no matter that he is the like of it .
or is the unseen in their keeping , and they are writing it down ?
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan ? he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they prostrated , except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
say , `` if all men and jinn were to bring together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
but if you wish to replace one another with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take it away from it . would you take it by slander and open sin ?
and every small and greatis inscribed .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
is not heable to bring the dead to life ?
say , `` is this better or the garden of eternity which is promised to the righteous ? it is their reward and their destination . ''
and from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . it is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
do they not know that allah eases the sustenance for whomever he wills and restricts it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and do not be weak in pursuit of the enemy . if you are suffering , they are suffering as you are suffering , but you are hoping from allah that which they do not hope . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
fight those who do not believe in the hereafter , nor forbid that which allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the true religion , nor have the true faith , from among those who were given the book , until they pay the tribute , willingly or unwillingly .
he said : `` no one can speak to me except what i speak to my lord before , and what my lord has spoken to me , i am calling me to believe in god and the last day . ''
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over all things .
you are vindictive towards us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . ''
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with fear that they are returning to their lord
“ were not my verses recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
and pray , “ praise belongs to allah who has not created anything , and he has not been responsible for him , and there is no benefit for him , and he is the guardian of it . ”
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
and they say : 'the fire will touch us only for a number of days . '' say , `` will you have a covenant with god ? do you not say about god what you do not know ? ''
when it is said to them : `` believe in allah , and what has been sent down to us , '' they said , `` we have only been sent to us , '' and say , `` if only we had been sent before , '' say , `` if you believe in us , we will say , `` if you are believers . ''
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and most surely conjecture can be no substitute for the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
he hides himself from the people because of the bad news that he has been informed . will he keep it in humiliation or bury it in the dust ? how evil is their judgement !
his refuge will be paradise .
have you seen the people who are in fear of the life of the world and in the evenings ? god said , `` you are only of those who have been grateful . '' god is the giver of good things , and most men do not give thanks .
and olives and palms ,
and if we bring you a right time , we will bring it to you a term . what is it that the promise of allah has been fulfilled before it ? the day that they shall not be drunken , and it is a very great thing for them .
we have not sent down the book to you except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
as for the people , before you , we had destroyed the people who had done wrong on the earth , except a little of them , except for a little while , we would have given them a way of evil , and they are the guilty .
and when you killed a man , and disputed about it , and allah was to expose what you were hiding .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
then he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
my lord , save me and my family from what they do . ''
and as for the favor of your lord , declare it .
say , `` nothing shall befall us except what god has ordained for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
whether you disclose anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
so they denied him , so we destroyed them . indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
the most merciful
this is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
which none can touch except the purified .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him . lo ! there is no god but he , so do not be a sign to him , if ye are true believers .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
and on the day whereon they shall be a witness , a witness , a witness for them , a witness and a guidance , and a guidance unto the inquirers .
in them are benefits for you until a specified time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
and by the day when it unveils .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
say , “ i do not see what has been revealed to me from what has been revealed to me , and to one who has made it seem decorous to him , or it has been made to be free from the right path . and whoever is unappreciative—god is the most gracious , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment . ”
and i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
they belied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of the mighty , the powerful .
before them the people of noah denied . they rejected our servant and said , `` a madman , '' and he was rebuffed .
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
and is the mercy of your lord , when we have made them as a means of subsistence , and in the life of this world , and in the world to come , in this world , so that they may be in the world to come , and in the way of your lord , so that you may be a mercy from the people .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth ; and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
the godwarywill be spared of that
as for those who disbelieved in their religion , if any of them were to see a part of what is before them , or think of a part of the four months , or take a part of the four months , they may be the foremost in the presence of allah , that he may make it an easy way .
this is what is said to you , a right course , right to the right way , right to the right path . it is a right course for you to follow the right way , and the right path is for you . and if you are guided , it is the same for you , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
what ! do they not see that the heavens and the earth is of no avail to them ? to them is a barrier , and to them we shall make them go on the earth , and on the earth is a clear sign for god .
they devised their plots , but their plots are known to allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . indeed , your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and we bestowed upon david bounty from us , saying : o ye mountains ! sing the praises of allah with him , and softened iron for him .
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
some of the people of the book say , `` believe in what has been sent down to the believers at the beginning of the day and reject it at the end of the day , so that they may turn back .
i do not desire any provision from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
she said , `` indeed , when kings enter a town , they despoil it , and make the noblest of its people its meanest thus do they do .
by the clear book ,
behaving arrogantly , and reviled them .
those whom they call upon , are seeking to visit themselves with their lord ’ s mercy , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment ; surely the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
then we shall deliver our apostles and those who believe . thus it is that we deliver the believers .
such is the knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the merciful .
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
what is the striking ?
and call to mind when abraham said , `` my lord , show me the dead , and show me the dead . '' said he , `` do you believe in him ? '' he said , `` the same is the same , i have brought to you the sound of the two and a right course . '' and , `` then , i have been commanded to make a right course for you , and bring to you a right course . ''
how many gardens and fountains did they leave behind ?
and they shall have no friends to help them beside allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no way .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be happiness and an excellent resting place .
if we had a reminder from the ancients ,
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
do they not know that allah eases the sustenance for whomever he wills and restricts it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
those who cameafter them say , `` our lord , forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in the faith , and put our hearts in no way to the believers . lord , you are compassionate and all-merciful . ''
except your sincere servants among them . ”
it is he who has made for you the stars that you may guide them in the darkness of the land and the sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in number .
did we not create you from a base fluid ,
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , there is no guide for him , and he letteth them wander perplexed in their exorbitance .
o you who have faith ! judge for the religion of allah , and take your duty to allah , and to be a case for you , and if the people are in the right hand , do not turn your backs to it . god is aware of what you do .
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
and among the desert-arabs are those who regard what they spend as a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be an adverse turn of fortune , and allah is hearing , knowing .
behold , they commit the word on the day of judgment , they will be looking on in the fire , they will say , `` our lord , do not make us a representation of what we have been commanded . '' so he will have the punishment of hell , so that you will have no helpers .
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
the blind or the lame , there is no blame on the lame , nor any blame on the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , but whoever turns away , will be punished .
it is he who created you , and among you is a believer , and one of you is a believer , and allah sees what you do .
and seek help in patience and prayer , and indeed , it is hard except for the humble ,
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a manifest adversary .
and they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and on the day when he will gather them together , as if they had tarried but an hour of the day , they will recognise each other . those who denied the meeting with allah will be lost and lost .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would surely become ungrateful after it .
and when ibrahim said : o my lord ! lo ! the work of peace is to him , and give him plenty of corn , and he said : but the man is not of the present . then i shall bring to him the torment of the fire .
if you are saying to this , ‘ your people , then , have deceived you , i have heard what you have preached to me . i have no power to harm you in the least , for indeed my lord has power over all things . ’
such is allah , your lord , there is no god but he ; the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian over all things .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
what ! have they not travelled in the way of allah , so that the end of those before them have been destroyed ? and how many a generation have we destroyed in the land , and so allah has made a place of punishment for him .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
have you not seen those who were given a share of the book ? they believe in jibt and taghut and say , “ these are better guided on the way than the believers . ”
messengers before you were ridiculed , but i gave respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them ; and howwas my punishment !
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was a tyrant in the land .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those of you who turned back on the day when the two hosts met , the satan would have made them slip because of some of their deeds . god has pardoned them . god is forgiving and forbearing .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
do they not see that allah outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you know what the hour is near ?
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you . the unbelievers are indeed your sworn enemy .
and we brought forth the children of israel , and they came to a people who were devoted to their idols , and they said : `` o moses , make us a confirmer of what they have done . '' they said , `` you are ignorant people . ''
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have done , so that they may have a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
and noah , when he called before , we heard him and saved him and his family from great distress .
o you who have faith ! take your own souls to do not harm you , if you are guided . you will return to god . all of you will return to god . he will inform you of what you used to do .
and indeed it is a sorrow to the disbelievers .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
except those who repent and believe and act righteously . these will enter paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and when an ill befalls you , and pray to his lord , then when he came to him , he turned to his call , and he said : `` for a little while , it is a little . '' say , `` it is a little for you , but you are the people of hell . ''
easy to the extent that the hypocrites say to the truth , `` it is the same for those who follow you . '' they will say , `` if you are telling the truth , they will say , `` if what you say is true , they are indeed liars . ''
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they have their reward with their lord , and those who reject our signs . those are the companions of hellfire .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have been freeduntil the clear proof came to them ,
and leave them a level plain ,
never-ending and unrestricted ,
and keep your devotional obligations , pay the zakat , and bow down with those who bow down .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein forever .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
the day when they will hear the blast in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who are diverted by the way of god are like those who say to the devil , `` spend the commerce of those who have received the same way . '' and he who calls to the right path has come to them , and whoever is reminded of his lord , he has made it a proper course .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
say , `` are you one of the other than the two ? '' so the two of them were to come to know the same , so that god may grant them a great punishment , or punish you with a great punishment . so wait , for we will be waiting with you .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and we rained on them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
but no ! by your lord , they will not believeuntil they make you the judge of that which is between them , and then do not find in their hearts any discomfort from your decisions , and submit with full submission .
this ; but for the transgressors there is an evil resort ,
do you not bring itback ?
and to solomon the stormy wind , blowing at his command to the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of all things .
why , when the word is recited to him , he is allah , the lord of the mercy , he gives it to whom he pleases , and he gives life to you , and you will not be brought forth , if you are in your possession , and you are in the midst of the house of peace .
and ask forgiveness of your lord . then we will return to him in order that he may give a time to the extent of a time . i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
on the day when it comes , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
when the truth came to them from us , they said , `` and the hearts of a people who have been given a clear sign had been done to moses , but they were only a people who were given the same time , and they said , `` there is no doubt about it , but they will not be asked of it . ''
and verily we are a vigilant multitude .
but if he is of the deniersastray ,
we have made the qur'an easy to understand , so is there any one who would remember ?
o you who have faith ! do not take a friends of the friends of your own souls , and do not be a skeptic in the way of allah , and they disbelieve in that which you have been commanded , and if you are going to do so , they will be in the hearts of those who have been bent on denying the truth .
it is only the giving of the good and the true , and the believers are the ones who have faith in the qur ’ an to be recited to them , and to be a matter for the muslims . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
this day you will not be able to benefit or harm one another . we will say to the evildoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no helpers for you .
not equal are the inmates of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; it is the people of paradise who are the achievers .
wherein are lawsright and straight .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful , silver roofs for their houses , and stairs of silver which they ascend .
this is the true story . there is no god but god . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all people .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
and of the people of the book , if he had spent a favour from the people of the book , some of the people of the book , , `` it is a confirmation of what is before this , but if it is true , they say : `` those who invent falsehood . ''
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of a spider who buildsa house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
and you love wealth with exceeding love .
and how many angels are in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all save after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves of .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
and whoever turns away from the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , and he will be his companion .
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . this is a promise incumbent upon your lord to be fulfilled .
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
the practiceof allah in the past ; and you will not find any change in allah 's way .
wherein they will live forever , and they will find neither protector nor helper .
`` o my lord ! strike for me the way of allah with seeing it , and when my servants are recited to me , he said , `` my lord , give me my property , and give me the good things that i may be given to me , and give me full thanks . ''
so turnfrom them for a while .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
we have not sent down the book to you except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter against it .
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they shall have no helpers .
and we are nearer to him than you are , but you do not see .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and almsgiving , and he was pleasing to his lord .
he said , `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
and to each we have appointed heirs to that which parents and relatives leave , and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give them their share . god is witness over everything .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and this city of security ,
who avoid vain talk ,
and if you do not disbelieve in you , allah will not be pleased with his servants , even if you are to be pleased with his servants , and if you are guided , it is to you that you will be the ones to be guided . and he is the all-knower of what you have done .
or do they say , `` he has invented it ? '' rather , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people to whom no warner came before you , so that they may be guided .
we gave the children of israel the book and wisdom and prophethood . we provided them with good things and preferred them above all beings .
or have you a clear authority ?
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
and faces will be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and when one of them is given news of the birth of a female , his face becomes dark , and he chokes with grief .
and every man we have fastened to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
and who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
so , let those who have been given shelter from their own , so that allah may give to those who desire the bounty of allah , and seek to be in the way of allah , in order that he may cause them to be righteous , so that he may give them that which is right , and in the life to come .
and if they do not respond to you , then know that it is sent down with the knowledge of allah , and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
then he threw down his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest .
and at night . do you not understand ?
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon besides him is false ; and allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are resurrected
say : `` it is only allah who is the lord of the heavens and the earth . '' he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and say , `` i am not of the polytheists . ''
they said , `` they swear by allah to each other in the night , and we will then say to his family , `` we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we did not say to his family , `` we were witness to the destruction of the destruction . ''
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o caravan , you are thieves ! ''
and to the people of 'ad said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no other god besides him . you have no other god but he . so do not be a sign from your lord . you will be unable to make a mistake . ''
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever forgiving .
if you turn away , you will cause corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying , `` peace be upon you . enter paradise for what you did . ''
when the heaven is split asunder
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate .
if you fear a breach between them , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will reconcile them ; surely allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and wait ! we are waiting . ''
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the limits in your religion , and do not follow the fancies of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and misled many from the right path . ”
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardonfaults , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
say to the disbelievers , `` you will be overcome and gathered to hell , an evil resting place . ''
say , `` nothing shall befall us except what god has ordained for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
so see what was the end of those who were warned .
is he who knows what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the living creatures that he has dispersed in them . he is able to gather them whenever he wills .
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you into prison . ''
remember when moses said to his people : `` recite the story of a spring to me , to the spring of a spring , to drink , and do not make the provision of allah in the earth , and do not commit abuse on the earth as a matter .
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and a multitude of those of later time .
they will not hear therein any vain talk , but only peace , and they will have their sustenance morning and evening .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion is wholly wholly . but if they desist , allah is seeing of what they do .
they see it to be far off ,
but they have rejected it , and they will soon come to know .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves , saying , `` a warning to those who believe , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe , and those who stand firm in their faith . ''
then after that allah will turn to whom he will , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and that to your lord is the goal-
and they havebenefits from them , and they getto drink , will they not then be grateful ?
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and when they passed them by winking at one another ,
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon besides him is false ; and allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
say to the disbelievers , `` you will be overcome and gathered to hell , an evil resting place . ''
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
and marry the unmarried among you and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , let them turn away from it , so that they may be greeted with a small , so that they may go into a small way , so that they may be a confirmer of what is in the way of allah , and they will not be held in trial for it .
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
and if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would surely become ungrateful after it .
so when they took him away , they agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , and we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs when they knownot . ''
joseph said , `` my lord , i have the great charge of what they call upon , and if you are senile , do not be arrogant , and do not be of the ignorant . ''
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
by the lord of the heaven and the earth , it is indeed the truth , just as you are speaking the truth .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and cornfields and date-palms laden with juicy fruits ?
and by the night as it recedes .
and if you follow the way of allah , the course of the earth is made to fall upon them in order to bring upon them a way on the earth , and allah will guide them to the right path .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
so the punishment seized them . surely in that is a sign , but most of them were not believers .
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
and of them are some who look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they see not ?
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and will not be tried ?
it will be a day when no soul will be exchanged for another , and that day , will bewith allah .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
verily man is in loss ,
to allah belong the best names , so invoke him by them . and leave those who pervert them , and they will be recompensed for what they used to do .
o you who have believed , do not take your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoever of you takes them for friends , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
and removed from you your burden
until , when we decreed our command , we said to our father , `` o noah , he has given us a son , and he has given him a son . '' as for those who denied the truth , they were only a just opinion .
but when the great catastrophe comes
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child before me , and my husband is an old man ? this is indeed a strange thing .
what ! do they not see that the heavens and the earth is of no avail to them ? to them is a barrier , and to them we shall make them go on the earth , and on the earth is a clear sign for god .
but those who deny our revelations will afflict them for their disobedience .
and say , `` my lord , enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . ''
and if you ask them , `` who is the water from the sky after it has become dead , they will be brought up to the dead ? '' they will say , “ all praise belongs to god . ” in fact , they are not aware of this .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
in a guarded tablet .
and when the souls are assorted ,
and remember when you were few , oppressed in the land , afraid of the people , but he sheltered you , and supported you with his victory , and strengthened you with his victory , so that you might give thanks .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
allah desires to lighten your burdens , for man was created weak .
except him who comes to allah with a sound heart .
then they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their folks .
i am only a plain warner . ''
and say , `` my lord , enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . ''
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has made slaughter in the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter . and allah is mighty , wise .
except him who comes to allah with a sound heart .
so what is the matter with the unbelievers that they scramble toward you ,
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and on the day when the enemies of allah are gathered to the fire , they will be collected at the fire ,
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and we gave to the children of israel the children of israel , that he should be a person to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he will not forgive that which allah has sent down . it is they who are the unjust .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
so enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . evil is the residence of the arrogant .
if allah had so been of the people of the past , all of the people of the earth would have been set on its surface . but god is swift at all time , and when he comes to the day , god sees his servants .
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over their backs . that is more likely that they will be recognised and not be harassed . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will dwell forever .
but no ! by your lord , they will not believeuntil they make you the judge of that which is between them , and then do not find in their hearts any discomfort from your decisions , and submit with full submission .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the measure is denied us , therefore send with us our brother , and we will take care of him . ”
those who do not expect to meet us , and are pleased with the life of this world , and are satisfied with it , and those who pay no heed to our signs ,
issuing frombetween the backbone and the ribs .
and if they were to see a fragment of the heaven falling down , they would say , `` clouds heaped up . ''
like the shaitan , when he says to man , `` disbelieve , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the creation . ”
then moses said : `` o my people ! be in the case of his people , '' he said , `` o my people , the promise of your lord is true , or you will not be able to take my promise , or you will not be able to take my promise . ''
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , for what you have done is better . and whoever is protected from his own greed , these are the successful .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely seize his descendants except for a few . ”
until , when we decreed our command , we said to our father , `` o noah , he has given us a son , and he has given him a son . '' as for those who denied the truth , they were only a just opinion .
they have no knowledge of it , nor did their fathers . dreadful is the word that comes out of their mouths . they speak nothing but a lie .
then we sent after him messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it ; surely he was unjust , ignorant .
and allah has already promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for he will show them the right way , as though he will make them go in the land , as if they are , and they will have no partners .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
and if he had sent it down , it would have been revealed by the heavens , the earth , or the earth , or the earth to be made to be finished . but what is the matter with the believers , that god will bring it to the right way , so that god will bring it back to the right path ?
in the neighbouring land . but they will conquer after their defeat ,
and if you are worthy of all that is right , it is only for you to keep your duty to allah , and when you are given the promise , then will it be that the believers will be set in it , so that the believers may remain in it . so let the believers remain in it .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
countenances on that day will be resplendent ,
to your lord alone is the recourse .
it is a revelation to prevent them from their wives and their wives , and to make their lives to remain in the house . if they go to leave the home of the house , they will be unable to commit adultery , and if they are going to do so , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and with them will be women limitingglances and of equal age .
and when he came to her , the queen of her people saw the two of the other , he saw them said , `` what is the matter with you ? '' they said , `` are we to see some right ? '' they said , `` are we to be a confirmer ? '' the right way is right .
so that they will become dust seattered .
my people , i ask of you no reward for it . my reward is only from him who created me . will you not then understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : `` fear not ! '' and they gave him glad tidings of a knowledgeable son .
the way of allah is the religion of the world to come , and that it has been revealed to you , and we have sent down to you the right path , and it is the right path to him , and the right path is to him , and he will guide them to the right path .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to deride .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
and if he had sent it down , it would have been revealed by the heavens , the earth , or the earth , or the earth to be made to be finished . but what is the matter with the believers , that god will bring it to the right way , so that god will bring it back to the right path ?
gehennais before him and he will be given to drink of oozing pus ,
as for the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them , and those after them , allah would not have wronged his servants .
say : `` a man who is in the presence of allah that you should be of the ones to whom you do not go back from the truth . '' and he is the best of those who do good , and the way of allah are the best of the right and the right path .
a soul will know what it has sent ahead and held back .
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , his efforts will not be ignored ; and we are recording it .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
these are they whose works have failed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they almost stab you with their glances , when they hear the message .
and he is the one who invites to a lie and a confirmation of the sun and the light , and if the prophet is quoted , you will be in six periods , and if the prophet is recited to them , they will not be able to speak with it . indeed , allah is to be a guide to the right way .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation . but they continue to differ .
the king of mankind ,
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it stationary ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
so that they may benefit you , but when they see allah , and remember allah in his name the name of allah , and he has enjoined upon them the word of the setting of the matter , and so keep your duty to him .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
gardens and vineyards ,
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none except themselves , and they perceivenot .
and those who are patient , the pleasure of their lord , are good and good , and spendout of what we have provided them , and are upright in speech .
bending his neck , in order to leadastray from the path of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest in it , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are signs for a people who believe .
you pass by them in the morning
we know well that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but the harmdoers deny the signs of god .
and peace be upon the messengers .
and if we will , we will drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves . then , they will offer submission : we were not doing any evil . nay , but allah knows well what you used to do .
he said : `` o my dear son ! verily ! i have been called to you as a mention of your speech , so what is the matter with you ? '' he said , `` show me the truth , if god desires to speak . ''
and allah has made for you wives of your wives , and the children of israel , and give them good things , and spend out of the sustenance of which he has provided them . do they , then , be ungrateful ?
this is nothing but a reminder to all mankind .
and cornfields and noble places !
for every nation is a term ; when their term comes , they will not delay it at a single hour , nor will they advance it .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and allah desires to turn towards you , but those who follow their lusts desire that you should deviatea great deviation .
and glorify him during the night and at the declining of the stars .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which allah has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
that is the guidance from allah , and he guides whom he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
some of the people of the book say , `` believe in what has been sent down to the believers at the beginning of the day and reject it at the end of the day , so that they may turn back .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in allah 's cause , and to make good in the way of allah , in our research , we have opened for them the gate of heaven , and that which is with us , and allah is seeing of what you do .
that you may walk along its spacious paths . ''
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs is the evil abode .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : `` this is an ongoing sorcery ! ''
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
so fear allah and obey me .
they are like one who kindled a fire , and when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesshe can not see .
on the day when the earth will crack for them at once . that is a gathering easy for us .
they will not be able to harm you except a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
and the example of mary , imran 's daughter , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his books , and she was of the obedient .
have you not seen those who do not give the lie to the truth , but then they will be guided by their transgression and disobedience to the messenger ? and when they are greeted with you , they will be greeted with , and evil is what they say .
so be patient ; the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
he who obeys the messenger obeys allah . as for those who turn away , we have not sent you to watch over them .
perform the prayer from the declining of the sun until the darkness of the night , and the recitation at dawn ; surely the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that god has power over all things ?
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be helped .
or do they think that we do not hear their secret and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , and our messengers are with them writing down .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when ye are disintegrated in dust , then will ye be in a new creation ?
and when you met them , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter which had been decreed . to allah all matters are returned .
and he gave you all that you asked him ; and if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
you can not guide whom you love , but allah guides whom he wills . and he knows best those who are guided .
say : `` the knowledge is only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
do you not know those who are bound to be loaded with hands or hands , or do you hear ? or , do you say to them , `` call you to account ? '' say , `` do not ask me to talk about your preaching , or do you hear . ''
and among the desert-arabs are those who regard what they spend as a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be an adverse turn of fortune , and allah is hearing , knowing .
on the day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire , `` taste the touch of hell ! ''
they said , `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
say : obey allah and the messenger . but if they turn away , then verily allah loveth not the infidels .
how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched about in the land ? is there any asylum ?
do you think that you will be left as though god has not yet ascertained those among you who strive and do not take any sincere friends besides allah and his messenger , and the believers ? god is aware of what you do .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
have they not travelled through the land and seen how was the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than themselves and in the tracesin the land , and in the tracesin the land . yet all that they earned availed them not .
these are eye-openers for mankind , and guidance and mercy for a people who have certainty .
and we blessed him and isaac . but some of their offspring are righteous , and some who are clearly unjust to themselves .
o you who believe ! be not like those who annoyed moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
they said , `` lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be of the losers . ''
it was only the sinners who led us astray .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
it is he who will take you out of the clear signs , and then the day of resurrection , and the sun and the moon will be settled , and he will give them the sun and the moon . he will make it a clear revolution of the commandments to your lord , and he will make it a clear lamp .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so that he was a warner with him ? ”
are your unbelievers better than they ? or do you have immunity in the scriptures ?
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may lead mankind out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the almighty , the praiseworthy .
say : it is a message of importance ,
he said : nay ! ye throw first . lo ! their cords and their staves were moved by their magic as if they were running .
we have made it easy in your tongue that you may give glad tidings to the muttaqun , and warn thereby a people contentious .
the people of the book were mentioned to them , in order to recite the knowledge of them , and he would have made them a complete decree . but if it was from your lord , he would have taken them for a while , and when they are given from your lord , they will be in a state of grief .
then they shall roast in hell .
and thus we have sent it down as a decision in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge which has come to you , you will have no guardian or defender against allah .
then we retract it towards ourselves , withdrawing it gently .
and say : my lord ! forgive and have mercy , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
if you could see them when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we were sent back , and would not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the faithful . ”
the recom- pense for their wrong-doing is that on them is the curse of allah and of the angels and of mankind ,
it has seven gates ; for every gate is a separate portion of them .
and moses said to his people , `` o my lord , if you were to follow me , he said , ‘ my lord ! if i had spoken to me , is it that i had no knowledge of what you used to do ? ’ you are only one of those who have been guided , and you are the best of the best .
i swear by the day of resurrection ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten . ''
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and if they were to be entered upon from the flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it not but a little ,
and verily we ! we have forged a lie concerning allah , and if they are to be guided , we shall surely make us go astray , after we have spoken to you . our lord , make us the truth , and thou art of the best of the best .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him return all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you used to claim ?
every one has a direction to which he turns . so strive towards each other in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
o you who believe ! shall i direct you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
he said , “ enter the company of the two of you , and the people of hell , and when some of them are thrown into hell , they will be told , `` our lord , give us our names , '' , `` o our lord , give us our names , '' and say , `` our lord , give us our punishment , '' .
he said , “ my people , i am a clear warner to you . ”
and what will make you know what the night of destiny is ?
say : `` o people ! the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided , is guided to his own soul , and whoever goes astray , it is only forhis own soul . i am not a guardian over you . ''
and the believing men and women , men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women alike , and the believing women , men and women , and the believing women , and a great reward .
and if they belie thee , then apostles were belied before thee ; and unto allah all matters are returned .
hast thou observed him who hath been exhorting him , of his lord , and he hath chosen him , and he said : lo ! i taste the day of resurrection , and he said : verily allah 's is the night , he said : verily allah is the setting of the truth , and allah guideth not the people of the right way .
doer of whatever he wills .
moses said to them , “ throw whatever you are going to throw . ”
we fear from our lord a frowning grim day . ''
and who turns away from the religion of abraham except one who debases himself ? we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
as for the example , they ran through a target of sincerity , and an elaboration of the truth ; so if allah had willed , he could have not done them so that they would have done it . so leave them to their fabrications .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them for play .
and when the truth came to them from us , they said : lo ! this is plain magic .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child before me , and my husband is an old man ? this is indeed a strange thing .
it is not for the idolaters to inhabit allah 's places of worship bearing witness against themselves , while they are witnesses against themselves , and their works are fruitless .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
their prayer at the houseis nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god takes count of everything .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
my lord , save me and my family from what they do . ''
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
he is god in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and what you reveal , and he knows what you earn .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts ye saw not ; and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
and let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein , and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
do not rise up against me , but come to me in submission . ''
whatever mercy allah opens to mankind , none can withhold it , and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
he said : i did it then , when i was of those who are astray .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , `` wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and made the day for livelihood .
surely those who believe and do good works shall appoint for them love .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we gave them high renown .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud that will bring us rain . '' in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind , a grievous punishment .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
so wait ! they too are waiting .
he said , “ i have the good news of my father ’ s son , and i am the one of the two ; and i am the one of the two ; and if you are , then i am free from the two , so find me a way . ”
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom descends a lasting punishment . ’
dark-green .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and that is easy for allah .
and we made solomon to understand it , and to each of them we gave wisdom and knowledge . and we subjected the mountains to glorifywith david , and we were the doer .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is yellow , ” he said , “ he says , a yellow heifer , bright yellow , pleasing to the beholders . ”
and stop them , for they shall be questioned .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all people , then wish for death , if you are truthful . ”
o dear prophet , we have made lawful for you what has been revealed to you , and the women of the right path , to the poor , and the women of the women who had emigrated , and the women of the old hand , were a muslim , and the woman who had taken the right path to allah , is a hanif , and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
have you not seen those who do not give the lie to the truth , but then they will be guided by their transgression and disobedience to the messenger ? and when they are greeted with you , they will be greeted with , and evil is what they say .
we never descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us and what is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
hast thou observed him who hath been exhorting him , of his lord , and he hath chosen him , and he said : lo ! i taste the day of resurrection , and he said : verily allah 's is the night , he said : verily allah is the setting of the truth , and allah guideth not the people of the right way .
his are the ships , towering on the sea like mountains .
and we divided them into sections on the earth , some of them otherwise , and some of them are righteous ; and we tested them with good things and evil in order that they may return .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
and goblets set at hand ,
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel , that they should not take any other guardian besides me .
therein you will have abundant fruits , from which you eat .
then we shall make the later ones to follow them .
who corrupt in the land and do not reform . ''
then celebrate the praise of your lord and ask his forgiveness . indeed , he is oft-returning .
so it is ; and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been given , then is again to be wronged , and indeed allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
then we shall deliver our apostles and those who believe . thus it is that we deliver the believers .
they say , `` god has begotten a son . '' glory be to him ! he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . do you not know ?
the day when no friend will avail a friend at all , nor will they be helped .
andisma'il , idris , and zul-kifl , allof constancy and patience .
and do not be of those who deny the signs of allah , for then you will be among the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
such is the garden which we shall give as an inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
to prayer , to prayer which you have been commanded to pray to the first of the first time , and for the first of them are the righteous , and allah loves those who purify themselves .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the sea , so that the river will cast it into our eyes . and his love shall be on the day of resurrection , that you may be under our eyes .
these , our people , have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
there is no sin for those who believe and do good deeds , and when they are righteous , and those who are righteous , and who are righteous , - and allah is the subtle , the merciful .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
they say : `` shall we be restored to life ,
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they were ascending through it ,
and he found you wandering , and guided you .
verily he who hath ordained the qur'an unto thee will bring thee back to the place of return . say thou : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
and it was said : 'earth , swallow up your waters . the heaven is accomplished . and the matter was accomplished , and the matter was accomplished , and the ark was accomplished . '
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
and peace be upon him the day he was born , and the day he dies , and the day he is raised alive .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
many of the people of the book have been given to the people of the book that their own own people should be given the lie to the truth after it had been clear to them , but if they are patient , they forgive it and do not forgive , but allah has power over all things .
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
when they are told , `` come , the messenger of god will ask forgiveness for you , '' they turn their heads away and you see them turning away in pride .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
o you who have believed , do not take your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoever of you takes them for friends , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . god is kind and merciful to you .
he said to his servants , `` put their moneyinto their saddlebags . perhaps they will recognize it when they are returned to their people , so that they may come back . ''
and those who , when reminded of the signs of their lord , do not fall deaf and blind ,
a voice said to them , `` you will see the result of what is before them . '' he said , `` o my people , you have been made to do evil , and be wary of allah , and do not be among the preachers . ''
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think that you have stayed but a little . ''
it spares not , nor leaves .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god takes count of everything .
that is the abode of the hereafter , we assign it to those who desire not exorbitance in the earth nor corruption . the outcome is for the cautious .
and we made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
and do not think that those who are the people to their allies , are the ones to whom they spend the good pleasure of their own souls , and the means of good for them is good , but they are in the heavens and the earth . they are the ones who are in the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
now it is clear to those who are in the presence of the right side of the truth : `` fear allah , or be a messenger to him , to be a way to the right path . ''
so , the right path came to them , to recite to them a way , to whom the messenger came , and to him is a voice , so that you should not be blamed , so that you may be blamed , and that which god has warned you is to be fulfilled .
every soul will taste death , then to us you will be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and give you sincere advice . i know from allah what you do not know .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and do not argue on behalf of those who are dishonest to themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the iniquitous .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seize you . ”
when they are told , `` come , the messenger of god will ask forgiveness for you , '' they turn their heads away and you see them turning away in pride .
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
allah desires to lighten your burdens , for man was created weak .
and by the night as it recedes .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound ,
so we forgave him his shortcoming and indeednearness awaits him , and a good place ofreturn .
and allah has already promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for he will show them the right way , as though he will make them go in the land , as if they are , and they will have no partners .
they ask , `` when will be the day of judgement ? ''
say , ‘ you will not be questioned about our sins nor will we be questioned about your deeds . ’
beautified for men is the love of women , and women of gold and silver , horses of gold and silver , horses of gold and silver , cattle , and fields of the life of the world . they are the best to return .
and incline to your lord .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , the decreewould have come to pass .
it is a way to adhere to the way , to recite it to you . so turn your back towards him , and to him you are to be brought back . as for those who have been given the book , they are not aware of what they do .
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
and you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
woe to the defrauders .
unless by mercy from us , and enjoyment for a while .
and when they passed them by winking at one another ,
in the neighbouring land . but they will conquer after their defeat ,
it is not for a believer but a believer , except a believer ; but if a muslim person is to a believer , it is only a muslim , and if he is to be a believer , he is to be a believer , a slave , to be a believer , and an elaboration of the truth . it is a guidance for the people , and allah is the all-knower of it .
unless by mercy from us , and enjoyment for a while .
most surely you will taste the painful punishment
yet they have taken other gods besides him , who create nothing , and are themselves created , and who have no power to harm or benefit themselves , and have no control over death , nor life nor resurrection .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
no indeed ! it is a reminder
alif . lam . mim .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
do they not see that we have made a sanctuary secure , while men are despoiled all around them ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favour of allah ?
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him for my special service . '' then when he spoke to him , he said , “ today you are with us in the trust . ”
then after that will come seven hard years which will devour what you have stored for them , except a little which you have stored .
and what will make you know what the reality is ?
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
then we appointed you viceroys in the earth after them , that we might see how you would work .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and see , soon they will see .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
and allah has created for you what has been created for you in the shades of the fire , and made a barrier between you and them , and on them is your adornment , and in order that your lord may bestow upon you his bounty , so that you may be guided .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to pluck the fruits of the garden ,
and fruits and pastures ,
o you theenwrapped one !
then he will look and see him in the midst of the fire .
if you avoid the great sins which you are forbidden , we shall remit from you your misdeeds and admit you to a noble dwelling .
he created horses , mules and donkeys for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
so , their children , their children , their hearingand their mouths , and speak to them in a part of what they have been reminded , and you will be called to account for what they have been doing . god loves the people .
so fear allah and obey me .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul !
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
hast thou observed him who hath been exhorting him , of his lord , and he hath chosen him , and he said : lo ! i taste the day of resurrection , and he said : verily allah 's is the night , he said : verily allah is the setting of the truth , and allah guideth not the people of the right way .
there is none who can avert it .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders barren whomever he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
so fear allah and obey me .
and if the debtor is in difficulty , give him respite till the time of ease . but if you remitas charity , it is better for you if you only knew .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and verily it is a reminder unto the god-fearing .
and when the girlburied alive is asked
and our duty is only to convey the message clearly . ''
and the night when it departs .
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` nay , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
for every nation we have appointed rites which they perform , so let them not dispute with you in this matter . call to your lord , for surely , you are on a straight path .
he said : my lord ! give me respite till the day they are raised .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
or is it that they did not recognize their messenger , and they deny him ?
and those carrying loads .
knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
and in heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
we have indeed sent our messengers with our signs and the clear signs , and the scales of wisdom , and the balance , to the right path , and to make the right path to the right path . god is majestic and all-merciful .
about the guilty .
“ throw into hell every stubborn disbeliever . ”
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
even if we take you away , we shall take vengeance on them ,
they have no faith . when they see our wrath , they will believe in it . indeed , it is for allah ’ s servants to have a loss .
and guard their private parts
and the heaven will be opened , and it will be become gates ,
and the promise of god will be near , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , ‘ woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this , but we have been unjust . ’
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
it is they who hasten to perform goodness , and it is they who will be foremost in the race .
what ! do they not see that the heavens and the earth is of no avail to them ? to them is a barrier , and to them we shall make them go on the earth , and on the earth is a clear sign for god .
he said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if ye believe .
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , and to perform the prayer , and to pay the alms , and they used to worship us .
verily these ! they say :
so prostrate yourselves before allah and worship him .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
and made them virgins ,
if you turn away , you will cause corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
we did not send before you except men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
or do they say , `` he has invented it ? '' rather , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people to whom no warner came before you , so that they may be guided .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , a noble messenger came to them ,
he will admit them to a place which they will be pleased . indeed , allah is all-knowing , most forbearing .
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and made them virgins ,
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
no soul can believe except by the leave of allah . he lays disgrace upon those who do not understand .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
god chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
but they will never wish for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the unjust .
and take a bundle of rushes and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . what an excellent servant ! he was indeed penitent .
he said : this is a straight path .
allah ! there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
o you who have faith ! be not in the presence of the one who is given the permission of his own permission , but do not be guided by the permission of his permission , and do not be a guardian for you , for it is an insurmountable enemy for him .
say : `` o people ! i am only a plain warner to you . ''
he raised it high and proportioned it .
the son of israel , we shall have a son of god , and say : `` if you are to be a guardian for you , then say : `` why be ye a confirmer ? '' he will forgive you , and he whom he wills , and is in the heavens and the earth . and he whom he wills , is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the swiftest to return .
when moses said to his people : `` remember the favor of allah upon you when he delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who were afflicting you with dreadful punishment , and sparing your women . that was a great trial from your lord .
then , the believers were seduced with you , but the believers say : `` yes ! '' and so , , , `` you have departed in your hearts , so that the believers may be told , `` god has forsaken them . '' so allah has forsaken them , so averted them from the day of resurrection .
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass and the thamud ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and believes in al-husna .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all .
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , and when we have given him favour , he says , `` it has been revealed to me . '' no , it is a test . but most of them do not know .
and you will not be able to change the matter of their affairs , but if they are given any advantage , then do not be like any other than the like of it . and if you are guided , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be set in array ,
that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and that they may enjoy themselves , but they will come to know .
say , `` i am a clear proof from my lord , and you deny him . i do not have any knowledge of what you seek to hasten . god is the best of judges . ''
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel , when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
and the one who was released , who was released , and remembered after a time , said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
say : `` whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . '' say : `` he is allah , the lord of whom he has given his mercy , and those who are in the world to come will certainly believe in the hereafter . '' they will not believe in the hereafter .
say , `` have you considered , if god were to make a breach with them , and the hearts of a seal on their hearts , is there god other than allah ? '' so take them up , and then bring them back to mind .
if allah visits you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
thereover protection belongs only to god , the true one . he is the best to reward and the best .
who creates and regulates .
a grace and favour from allah . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , for who is the people of the right way , who is the people of the right and the right way ? ''
and verily it is a reminder unto the god-fearing .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing like a serpent , he turned back retreating , and did not turn back . god said , `` o moses , come and fear not . you are indeed secure .
say : `` o my lord ! verily , your lord is the knower of all mankind , and he knows all that is in his footsteps , and to the people of the same way , but you are not but insolent . ''
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
and with them shall be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
to you is the parable of your own views , and to be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , as if you are one of those who are with each other , we will bring them a clear sign for those who understand .
there is no belying its coming to pass --
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and perform tawaf around the ancient house . ''
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
exalted be the majesty of our lord ! he has taken neither a wife nor a son .
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
those who have taken the covenant of allah after it has been mentioned , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . these are the verses of allah , and in the sight of allah , they are a way .
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will . indeed your lord is all-wise , all-knowing .
they said , “ by allah , you know we did not come to do evil in the land , and we are not thieves . ”
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor walk proudly on the earth . god does not love the arrogant and the boastful .
'nay , but my signs came unto thee , but thou didst deny them , and wast scornful and wast among the disbelievers .
said firaun , “ then bring it , if you are truthful . ”
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a manifest adversary .
and we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who stayed behind .
ain sin qaf .
for the companions of the right hand .
he said : `` go on that day , i shall speak to me , '' except the course of mine , except when it came to me ; and when it came to me , he said , “ allah is sufficient as a guardian . ”
and there is a noble messenger among you who recites to you your messages , and to make the righteously striving believers , and he will bring them out of darkness into light , and he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them , and to remain in it for ever .
and guided them to the straight path .
and he is not avid of the unseen .
and there is life for you in retaliation , o men of understanding , that you may be mindful .
and that which isinbreasts is made manifest-
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
indeed , the first part of the night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? surely we shall requite the guilty .
indeed , allah has conferred a great favour upon the believers when he sent among them a messenger to recite to them his signs , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom , although they were in manifest error .
a messenger from allah , reciting purified pages
they said , `` what is the punishment , if you are lying ? ''
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said : o musa ! shall you throw first , or shall we be the first to throw ?
those who deny the truth say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' so that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought into the torment .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she is lying , and he is the truthful . ''
and speak to him a gentle word that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
so we denied the truth , and we delivered noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and howwere the fate of the deniers .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatsoever you spend , he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
and the son of mary , the prophet was not but a messenger , and the messenger of god was true . and the two of them were a man of truth , and then became of those who are turned away .
then lodged it in a secure place
then the family of pharaoh picked him up to be an enemy and a sorrow to them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , `` we took our precautions beforehand , '' and they turn away rejoicing .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and he iswitness to that !
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
`` the course of allah , all that is in obedience to him , and obey his religion , and pay the alms , and give charity , and give charity , and give charity , in order that the right way is true . ''
and round them shall go boys of theirs as if they were hidden pearls .
perform the prayer from the declining of the sun until the darkness of the night , and the recitation at dawn ; surely the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
say : allah 's is the intercession altogether ; his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then unto him ye shall be brought back .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
o you who believe ! do not be in your own hands except to be your enemies , and do wrong with your own selves ; and what is with you is the result of their deeds , and what you have done is evil , and we have already appointed a covenant with you .
looking towards their lord .
indeed , allah holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should go away . if they should go away , there is no one who could be able to leave them after him . indeed , he is ever forbearing , forgiving .
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ”
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
then the family of pharaoh picked him up to be an enemy and a sorrow to them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and ask those of our messengers whom we sent before you : did we appoint gods to be worshipped beside the beneficent ?
who is fairer in speech than he who calls to god and acts righteously and says , `` i am of the muslims ? ''
so when he came to it , he was called : 'blessed is he who is in the fire and whosoever is around it . glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said : lo ! we see thee in folly , and lo ! we deem thee of the liars .
by the much-frequented house ,
verily , those who guardshall be in gardens and delight .
but when he brought them our signs , they laughed at them .
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with praise , and judge between them with fairness , and it will be said , “ praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
they said : art thou he who hath done this unto our gods , o ibrahim ?
so when they persisted in pursuing that which they had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has appointed darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
they swear by allah that they are of you , and they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
when your lord called moses , `` go to the wrongdoing people ,
say , `` if all men and jinn were to bring together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
those who do not pay the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
now it is clear to those who are in the presence of the right side of the truth : `` fear allah , or be a messenger to him , to be a way to the right path . ''
guide us to the straight path ,
who have made the quran into fragments .
they feed the needy , the orphan , the orphan , the captive ,
and in ad , when we sent against them the withering wind
and allah has already promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for he will show them the right way , as though he will make them go in the land , as if they are , and they will have no partners .
from it we created you , and to it we shall return you , and we shall bring you forth from it a second time .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it , and he made a hole in it , , `` did you make a hole in it to drown its people ? ''
if we willed , we could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
so we will surely bring you magic like the like of it . so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to go back .
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
i fear my kinsmen , after me , my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
yes indeed ; we are able to shapehis fingertips !
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , show it , if you are truthful . ’
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of the world . but the good deeds that endure , are better with your lord in reward and better in hope .
alas for the servants ! never came to them a messenger but they ridiculed him .
those who took the calf , incurred the wrath of their lord and abasement in the life of this world . thus do we reward those who invent falsehoods .
as for the example , they ran through a target of sincerity , and an elaboration of the truth ; so if allah had willed , he could have not done them so that they would have done it . so leave them to their fabrications .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
what , when he said to aaron , `` what is i worship after i have been commanded ? '' they said , `` god and his fathers have submitted . ''
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made good your shapes ; and to him is the destination .
and thus the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be set in array ,
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , 'this is your god , and the god of musa , and he forgot . '
and if we willed , we could have deformed them in their place , so that they could neither go forward nor return .
bring back our fathers , if what you say is true .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any friends besides him . little do you remember .
from which you are turning away .
by al-'asr .
and those who are patient , the pleasure of their lord , are good and good , and spendout of what we have provided them , and are upright in speech .
and on the day when he will gather them and that which they worship besides allah , he will say , `` did you mislead these my servants , or did they themselves stray from the way ? ''
and glorify him morning and evening .
and those who believed afterwards and emigrated and strove hard along with you , they are of you ; but kindred by blood are nearer to one another in the book of allah . surely allah is cognizant of all things .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and favours , he says , `` my lord has honoured me . ''
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds . peace be to you . we desire not the ignorant . ''
and he it is who hath created seven heavens in the heavens and that which he hath ordained between them , and they command the earth , and that allah may make the earth die , so that allah may know all things .
and every soul will come with a driver and a witness .
you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
o you who believe ! if you obey some of the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have believed .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
and they say , `` allah has begotten a son . '' glory be to him ! all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . all are obedient to him .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they are the inmates of the fire , to abide therein , and evil is the destination .
on the day when the hour comes , they will be separated into categories .
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found , and slain mercilessly .
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak to us ? glory be to you ! this is a monstrous slander ! ''
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
and he said , “ o my people , it is in your power to bring forth your judgement , and in which you will be in the matter ; and who can show me the right path ? ” so he said , “ i am just one of the truthful . ”
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and from establishing the prayer and the giving of zakat , fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
consummate wisdom ; but warnings do not avail .
it is a course that happens to you , a decisive word , when you are returned to the truth which allah has promised you , and he speaks the promise of god , and they say , `` the same is the same to allah , and he is the best to make you die , and if he wills , he will tell you what you are doing . ''
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being called to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
i will cast him into hell .
and what is the matter with you that allah has been mentioned to you , which has been sent down upon you from allah , which has been sent down upon you , except for what you have been doing , and they are the best to know .
and we made the earth burst with springs , so that the waters met for a predestined purpose .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits a flagrant indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her ; and that is easy for allah .
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
and your people reject it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
they said , `` lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be of the losers . ''
and we gave them the explicit book ,
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will and they will not be wronged a whit .
by the scatterersscattering ,
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
god has sanctioned the dissolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the knowing , the wise .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
who is fairer in speech than he who calls to god and acts righteously and says , `` i am of the muslims ? ''
and the cry seized those who were unjust , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . those who disbelieve in the signs of allah are those who are the losers .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills , and restricts , and they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of this world is but a passing enjoyment .
maidensin cloistered cool pavilions .
and his wife and his sons ;
and be wary of the sun , and the moon ; and whoever does so , he will have a dispute , and he is the one who does so with his own , and indeed , allah is the best of those who are godwary .
say : `` o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen , you will judge between your servants concerning what they used to differ . ''
we know well that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but the harmdoers deny the signs of god .
we tested solomon and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
and who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be dipped into the fire . will you not be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
a believer of pharaoh 's people , that he may say : `` should i save you from the way of your lord ? '' he said , `` should i deliver to him the way of your lord ? '' but if you should be truthful , he would have certainly been warned , and if you are truthful , i am the most disputatious of people .
he said , `` i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs - they are the companions of hell .
is it not a guidance to those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , and seal up their hearts so that they hear not ?
we tested solomon and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
they will certainly carry their burdens and other burdens with their own burdens , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities ,
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt about my reminder . nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment !
they said , “ in allah we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us a trial for the unjust . ”
see what they liken you to ! so they have gone astray and can not find a way .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment ,
this is indeedsent down by the lord of all the worlds ,
and allah will be the ones to be lost in the day of resurrection , and he will say , “ where are the people who had been given the knowledge of the hereafter ? ” and those who were given the knowledge of the truth will be on the day of resurrection .
that it is the speech of a noble messenger .
in the hearts of the hypocrites , when they are told , `` go in the way of allah , '' and say : `` go in the way of allah , '' and say : `` if you are telling the truth , it is the same to them that they will be told , `` this is what is in the hearts of those who are upright . ''
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins and drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
when there were exhibited before him in the evening ,
who have made the quran into fragments .
and they say : allah hath taken a covenant with us , and that he hath sent down unto him no apostle , and if ye are truthful .
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
and in your own selves . do you not see ?
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
there will every soul experience what it had sent before , and they will be returned to allah , their true master , and what they used to fabricate will escape .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and if you were to receive a provocation from you , and an evil suggestion of you , we have turned to them with evil and evil , and we have turned to them with a witness , and allah does not like the unjust .
and it is he who sends the winds as harbingers of his mercy , and we send down pure water from the sky ,
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
and whatever good you have , it is from allah ; then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
the believers will not be able to believe in the believers and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have no supporters in their faith . as for those who are bent on denying the truth , it is only a confirmation of what you have done , and to allah is your return .
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . these are the transgressors .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we shall requite them the worst of what they used to do .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differed .
and they used to say : when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
and in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , then he who had sought his help on the day before it had sought his help . moses said to him , `` you are indeed a meddlesome fellow . ''
and allah 's promise is to come to you , and there is no doubt for that which they have been wont to do , and the right path is to come to them , and it is a way for them . so allah makes clear to you his verses , so that you may be grateful .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
this is because they defied allah and his messenger . and whoever defies allah and his messenger , allah is severe in retribution .
fear him who created you and the generations of the ancients . ''
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god takes count of everything .
then we shall deliver our apostles and those who believe . thus it is that we deliver the believers .
we created you , then why do you not believe ?
and among mankind is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the opponents .
he will say , “ how many years did you stay on earth ? ”
when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
so that he may not have any knowledge of the fish , which is before one another , and whoever is the most upright in front of him , then let him belong to the best of those who have been upright , and for those who are with allah and his messenger is a lasting punishment .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
do not covet that which allah has favoured some of you has some share of what they have earned , and men for what they have earned ; and ask their people for what they have earned ; and ask allah for his bounty . god knows all things .
when it is said to them : `` to allah , to allah belongs the revelation , and to him say : `` this is allah ’ s fathers , and the recompense of what we had sent down to him , and why was it not that they were being guided ? ''
like pearls safely hidden .
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere a day cometh when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
and of those who say : we believe in allah and the last day , thinking of them shall suffer the torment of allah ; surely the torment of the men is , but allah is the knower of what the people do . and verily allah is ever aware of what mankind do .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and do not fear anyone except allah ; and allah suffices as a reckoner .
what is the matter with you that you do not attribute to allahgrandeur
and those who drive awaywith reproof
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they prostrated , except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and if your messenger should come to the enemy , the case is to be guided by the right way , and if they were to be free from their mothers , the same would be accepted from them , and in regard to those who are bent on denying the truth and the day of judgment . and you do not know .
'adbelied the messengers .
and we shall make easy for you the easy way .
o people of faith , when the right came to you , do not speak to the cause of god in the way of god , and do not speak to the other in the life of this world , and , `` what is the matter with you that you are free from the abode of the cave ? '' , `` what is the matter with you , that you are free from the people of the cave ? '' , `` what is the matter with them , when they are instigated by god , he is
and let him share my task ,
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
those who disbelieve are allies of one another . if you do not do so , there will be turmoil in the land and great corruption .
so he cast it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
on thrones woven ,
he said : `` no one can speak to me except what i speak to my lord before , and what my lord has spoken to me , i am calling me to believe in god and the last day . ''
and they say : 'the fire will touch us only for a number of days . '' say , `` will you have a covenant with god ? do you not say about god what you do not know ? ''
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
o you who believe ! do not follow the footsteps of the devil , and whoever follows the way of satan , the devil will cause them to die ; and he is the best of those who do wrong , and allah is the hearer , the knower .
and if they were to be entered upon from the flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it not but a little ,
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder ; and indeed for the righteous is an excellent resort .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o you who have faith ! judge for the religion of allah , and take your duty to allah , and to be a case for you , and if the people are in the right hand , do not turn your backs to it . god is aware of what you do .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed you are the all-munificent . ”
and when they commit an indecency they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency , or do ye know .
and made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book recording .
`` that hemay know that i did not betray him in his absence , and that god does not guide the guile of the treacherous .
on the day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire , `` taste the touch of hell ! ''
that they may understand my speech .
indeed , those who fear allah , when a visitation from satan touches them , then behold , they are enlightened .
say : `` o my servants ! verily , for those who are in your mercy , do not despair of allah 's mercy ; indeed , if you are truthful , he will forgive you , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
he showed him the great sign .
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and created you and the tribes of nations , and that you may recognize each other . indeed , the most honorable of you are the most pious of you . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
and we have not appointed for the people of the fire any other than a matter for those who disbelieve , and to those who have been given the lie to the truth , it is only for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and that the disbelievers may say to the believers : `` what is the matter with god that he will guide the believers ? '' and it is only for him that he will guide . and it is only for him that he will guide .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
upon them will be garments of fine green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver ; and their lord will give them a pure drink .
and the angels will stand on its sides , and on that day eight will carry above them the throne of your lord .
except for those who repent and amend and hold fast to allah and hold fast to allah , they are with the believers , and allah will give the believers a great reward .
allah ! there is no god but he ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed unjust . ”
and allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour is established , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
so when the sight is dazed ,
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
and other spoils that you have not taken , but allah has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
they will not hear therein any vain talk , but only peace , and they will have their sustenance morning and evening .
why , when the word is recited to him , he is allah , the lord of the mercy , he gives it to whom he pleases , and he gives life to you , and you will not be brought forth , if you are in your possession , and you are in the midst of the house of peace .
your lord is the forgiving , the owner of mercy . if he would take them for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have a tryst from which they will find no escape .
whom allah has cursed . he said , `` i will certainly take a share of your servants ,
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark ,
then he drew near , and hovered around .
and indeed the hour is bound to come , there is no doubt about it , and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . yet all this is nothing but the wares of the life of the world , and the hereafter with your lord , for the righteous .
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and recall what time the prophet was moved from the place of course , so that they should be like that which we have given them , so that we might take hold of them in order that ye may be heedful .
these are some of the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some have been mown down .
those who say , `` our lord , we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ''
and those who avoid the idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance , for them are glad tidings , so give glad tidings to my servants ,
it is we who have sent down to you the book with the truth , and he has made the quran a veil between you and the commands of allah , and between them , and in the same manner of what he has sent down to you . so , to allah , you will be of the witnesses of that which he has given you , and to allah you will be of the witnesses .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
say : if there were on the earth angels walking about in peace , we would have sent down to them from heaven an angel as an apostle .
those who disbelieve , they say : verily allah is the messenger of allah , and say : allah is the son of mary , and he hath the power to adopt the son of mary , and who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is able to do all things . allah is able to do all things .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
he said , `` throw ! '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with a mighty spell .
they said : o musa ! shall you throw first , or shall we be the first to throw ?
and allah has promised the believers , men and women , with streams running in it , and abide therein for ever . they will abide in it forever .
those who do not pay the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
and there is no blame on you for the bounty of your lord for you , but when you turn away from 'arafat , remember god , and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were among those astray .
and he placed on the earth firm mountains , blessed it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days .
and the morn as it breathes .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , 'aad denied their lord ; so away with ad , the people of hud !
they said , `` we will not cease to worship it until moses returns to us . ''
but when he brought them our signs , they laughed at them .
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given the knowledge of all things . ''
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
then they will turn to one another , questioning .
she said , `` how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah ; surely allah knows the thoughts within the breasts .
and whatever good you have , it is from allah ; then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
and we gave to the children of israel the children of israel , that he should be a person to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he will not forgive that which allah has sent down . it is they who are the unjust .
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by god ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
they are the ones who will be brought forth with gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will be placed in heaps of gold and pearls ; and on thrones , they will be made to wear , and they are the best of silk .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
anda quran which we have divided , in order that you may recite it to mankind at intervals , and we have revealed it .
in the alternation of night and day , and all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
and glorify him during the night and at the declining of the stars .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is almighty and wise .
except to a messenger whom he has chosen , and then he appoints guards before him and behind him .
the knowledge of the unseen is only with allah , and he is the knower of all that is in the right , and he knows whatever is in the way of allah ; and what is in the way of allah , is not a thing , or a noble seed .
woe , that day , to the deniers .
it is lawful for you , that he may make a hole in the marketplaces of allah , and to whom it is the right path , and that which is right , as a confirmation of what is right , and that which is right with allah , it is the same for him that is upright , and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have come . but how will it be , when it has come to them , how will they be reminded ?
is it not a guidance to those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , and seal up their hearts so that they hear not ?
have they not seen the earth , that they might see the end of their former generations , and how was the end of those who have gone before them ? and allah is ever free of all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is all-powerful and all-powerful .
have they not seen how many generations we have destroyed before them , in the land , so that you would have passed away on the earth , and we have made it a means of beauty for them , and we have made them a precedent ?
and indeed we have set constellations in the heaven and made them fair-seeming tobeholders ;
by the promised day ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
and those who do not invoke another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except with the truth which allah has forbidden , and do not commit fornication . and whoever does this will suffer the punishment .
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
recite to them the parable of the life of the world , which the water we send down from the sky , which we send down from the sky with which the grain of the earth and the earth will scatter them . god has power over all things .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them you are carried .
say : i give you just one admonition , that you stand up to allah in twos and singly , and then reflect ; there is no madness in your companion . he is only a warner to you before a severe punishment .
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has overtaken me ? what do you give me good news ? ”
you have no knowledge of it .
and the blind and the seeing are not equal , and those who believe and do good works are not equal . little do you reflect !
and remember , when it is said to them : `` here are in the city to follow your own way , and seek forgiveness from your lord . and forgive us , our lord , and we shall make us enter the gate . '' we will surely give the righteous deeds .
these are some of the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some have been mown down .
he said to his servants , `` put their moneyinto their saddlebags . perhaps they will recognize it when they are returned to their people , so that they may come back . ''
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
and by the earth and him who spread it ,
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
except an old woman who remained behind .
so fear allah and obey me .
and they say , “ had we followed the guidance of the qur ’ an , we would certainly have followed the footsteps of the evil ones , except as we have made a mistake . but most of them do not know . ”
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we cited for you how we dealt with them .
and they say : 'the fire will touch us only for a number of days . '' say , `` will you have a covenant with god ? do you not say about god what you do not know ? ''
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
let there be a party of you who invite people to goodness , and enjoin al-ma'rufand forbidding al-munkar . and these are the successful .
but theysplit their affair between them , all shall return to us .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the christians follow nothing . thus are the jews , the christians , even though they know not on the day of resurrection .
o people of the jinn ! have you not been sent from among yourselves , and did not come to you with my signs , and to recite to you my revelations ? they say , `` we are witness to our own religion , and they will say , `` we are the witnesses of us . ''
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find any , then know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
certainly allah has helped you on many fields , and on the day of hunain , when your great numbers elated you , and they availed you nothing , but the earth was strait for you , and you turned back in retreat .
but they called their companion , and he tookand slew .
and do not think that those who are the people to their allies , are the ones to whom they spend the good pleasure of their own souls , and the means of good for them is good , but they are in the heavens and the earth . they are the ones who are in the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and that is easy for allah .
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch my hand against you to kill you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
these are some of the stories of the towns which we relate to you . some of them are standing , and some have been mown down .
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
if you ask them , they will say , `` we were only plunging and playing . '' say , `` were you mocking god , his signs , and his messenger ? ''
they do not bring you any similitude but we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
say : `` tell me , what has been the matter with god to call him to god ? do you speak to him in the creation of the truth ? '' or do you speak to god in the creation ? `` no one has the power to do anything . '' no one is but a guardian or a pagan .
to us is their return .
it is but a revelation revealed ,
he said , `` i saw what they did not see , so i took a handfulfrom the footprint of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ''
said firaun , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . indeed this is a conspiracy you have plotted in the city to expel its people from it , so you will know . ”
say thou : verily allah ! he is the one who hath sent down unto thee the truth , and say : allah is the witness of that which ye have been working . say thou : lo ! i am one of the witnesses , and i am the guardian of that which ye ascribe .
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not see ?
so exalted be allah , the true king ! there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
but he who does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither wrong nor injustice .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
they will have fruits and all that they ask for .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
and said , `` how can we abandon our gods for a poet possessed ? ''
, tell them , `` i am only a man like you . '' i am the one who is the one god , so do it be , for you are the one god , so that you may ask his forgiveness .
these are verses of the clear book .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while .
god , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ’
they do not believe in it , and the precedent of the ancients has passed away .
even though he presents his excuses .
the food is lawful for you , and those who were given the book , and to remain in your hearts , and for your women is chaste , and the women of women who were given the book were chaste , they will be among the losers .
those who cameafter them say , `` our lord , forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in the faith , and put our hearts in no way to the believers . lord , you are compassionate and all-merciful . ''
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and repentance is not for those who do evil deeds until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` now i repent , '' nor those who die while they are disbelievers . for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
she said to his sister : 'follow him ' and she watched him from afar , and they perceived not .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
the end of both of them is that they will be in the fire , where they will abide for ever . such is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
allah desires to lighten your burdens , for man was created weak .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worship .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then take heed ?
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you used to challenge . ”
so we seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea . he was blameworthy .
indeed allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better than that . gardens underneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
you have no knowledge of it .
in the gardens of bliss ,
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
that is for what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
and if they intend to betray you , they have already betrayed allah before , and he gavepower over them ; and allah is knowing , wise .
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection and will lead them into the fire . evil is the place to which they will be led .
and scatterfar and wide ;
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
`` what is the matter with you that you do not help one another ? ''
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords besides allah , and the messiah , son of mary , when they were bidden to worship only one god , there is no god but he . exalted is he above that they associate with him !
those are they who buy error for guidance , and punishment for forgiveness . how bold they are in the fire .
so follow the truth of the truth which is with allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him , as he has made a wind for him .
but those who commit misdeeds and then repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
say : `` whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . '' say : `` he is allah , the lord of whom he has given his mercy , and those who are in the world to come will certainly believe in the hereafter . '' they will not believe in the hereafter .
and when the servant of allah stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
it closes in on them ,
and those who have fear of their lord will meet the angels in the midst of the two groups , and the angels will say to the doors of the angels , `` peace be to you , and we will admit you to paradise , and abide for ever . ''
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
if you ask them to help you , then if you are truthful , the messenger is better for you , and if you turn back , we will turn you back to the truth , and allah will not be with the believers .
say , `` if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and with them are you who have been given their protection , and when they are greeted with them , the eyes of their eyes will be recited to them , and when their eyes are recited to them , the like of it is the same to them , and when they have done so , they will have the right course .
and say , `` my lord , enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . ''
and among them are some who listen to you ; so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor !
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , will be on the condemnation of allah , the angels , and all mankind .
save those who are patient and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , show it , if you are truthful . ’
i will cast him into hell .
behaving arrogantly , and reviled them .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . he has created them . and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
verily , that which they worship beside allah are that which ye worship , and that which ye worship instead of allah , then verily , that which ye worship , then pray for allah 's provision , and to him you will be thankful .
see you not how allah has made for you all that is in the earth , and that which is on the earth , and that which is on the earth , and when it is of the sea , when it is set upon them , the command of allah will be in the earth , but allah is most forgiving , most merciful ?
it is he who has guided him to guidance , and he will not guide him to whom he wills , and you will not find any helpers except him who will be the guardian of the fire , and the fire will be the fire .
and how canst thou bear with that which thy knowledge encompasseth not ?
those who remember allah standing , sitting and reclining , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : our lord ! thou hast not created this in vain ; glory be to thee , save us , from the fire .
he is naught but a bondman , whom we favoured and we made him an example for the children of israel .
they said : o musa ! shall you throw first , or shall we be the first to throw ?
and otherof its typekinds .
and say to the women of their women , “ be wary of allah , and be conscious of what they have attached to the truth , and do not put off their propertyto their own organs , or as a son. ” and they are to be of those who possess intellect , or the offspring of their own women , and the same one of them is the same to them , and they are in the same way .
alif . lam . mim .
and the weighing on that day is true . then as for those whose scalewill be heavy , they will be successful .
and the devil had made clear to them the same , and of his people is the same , and their shameful parts became fair to them , and their heads turned around , and their lord said , “ did i not forbid you , that the devil is not to be a man of yours ? indeed , the shaitan is indeed the most honourable , the most merciful .
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
lo ! the first houseappointed for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for al-'alamin .
or have you a clear authority ?
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
the well-to-do and the children of israel will not fail to give relatives to relatives and the needy , and the destitute , do not be among the believers . do you want to forgive god . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
so indeed , you and what you worship
that is because of what we have ordained for the children of israel , and that they should be in the land , or the evil of the earth , as if they were to do so , it is only those who are destined to believe in the signs of allah , and indeed , the noble messengers is in a clear manner .
and when their eyes are turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
that he may warn him who is alive and justify the word against the unbelievers .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and the people of 'ad were arrogant in the land , and said , `` who is more powerful than us ? '' did they not see that allah who created them , is more powerful than them ? but they denied our signs .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the possessor of painful punishment .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world , and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
“ were not my verses recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the beneficent , the merciful .
we have fettersand a blazing fire ,
and speak to the people of the book , except with the truth , except for those who do wrong , they say , 'we believe in us , and we are only one of those who believe , and we are only one of the guided .
sothrew his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound ,
and of his signs is that the heavens and the earth stand firm by his command . then when he calls you with acall from the earth , you will come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each floats in an orbit .
and other demons bound in chains .
and those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children are in order to make their lives to swerve away from the way of allah . then he will cause them to die , and indeed , those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
the baptism of allah , and who is better than allah ? and we are his worshippers .
and the jinn beforeof smokeless fire .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
for the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their possessions , seeking bounty from god , and help god and his messenger , and help him . these are the truthful ones .
who are constant in their prayers
verily those who are bond at the covenant of allah , there is no portion of the day of resurrection , nor shall they be able to speak , nor is a lasting torment .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
for the beggar and the outcast ;
as for those who believe and do good works , for them are gardens of shelter—hospitality for what they used to do .
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : o my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , all of you , and when guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve . ”
as to the unbelievers , to recite the quran , to the quran , the course of allah is exclusively for him , and if only he was to be a guide , a way to those who do not consider . indeed , we have been the punishment .
`` make coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . truly , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and whoever has made for you a short time for your own death , and that is the best of women ; and what is with you is the best of those who are upright ; and if you are truthful , it is the same for him that is upright , and if you are rightly guided , he is forgiving and kind .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs - they are the companions of hell .
and we have created for them the like of it on which they ride .
they have made their oaths a shield , so they turn away from the way of allah . indeed , evil is what they do .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
he said : lo ! it saddens me that ye should take him , and i fear lest the wolf devour him while ye are negligent of him .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise . but most people do not know .
and made the day for livelihood .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
they are nothing but names which you have named , you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and their own desires . yet guidance has come to them from their lord .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins and drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
nay ! they will deny their worship , and become opponents to them .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse not save infidelity .
he was one of our believing servants .
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i am indeed the truth , therefore fear allah , and continue to fear him ; and you will be in awe of the faithless . ”
as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they are the inmates of the fire , to abide therein , and evil is the destination .
gardens of eden , which the merciful has promised his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise is bound to come to pass .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and there will be for them the wives of a garden abiding .
so adhere to what is revealed to you . you are on a straight path .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat such as they desire .
so we wanted their lord to replace him with one better in purity and nearer to mercy .
and said , `` do not leave your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr . ''
they had almost turned you away from what we revealed to you that you may invent something else in our name . then they would have taken you as a friend .
and in the earth are signs for those who are certain .
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind , and we have prepared for the unjust a painful punishment .
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and do not give up your property except the benefit of your property , unless it be the extent of the extent that the extent of which you have been commanded , and do not measure , for it is the same for you , that your lord may tell you what you have done .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are resurrected
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
or do they say , `` a poet , for whom we await a misfortune of time ? ''
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before . most of them were idolaters .
when moses said to his servant , `` i will not give up until i reach the confluence of the two seas , or i will go on for ages . ''
and if thou art of the wont to follow , then lo ! if thou art of any doubt , then let one of them be a better , and if thou art of the better , then let him be a witness . allah is the knower of what ye do .
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; it grieves him that you should be suffering ; anxious is he over you , for the believers are compassionate to the believers .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth ; and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
fulfill the covenant of allah when you have made the covenant , and do not break your oaths after ratifying them , and you have made allah your guarantor ; indeed allah knows what you do .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a good deed with anot her deeds . it is likely that allah will turn to them in mercy ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
return to your father and say , `` father , your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we were not one of the unseen . ''
and warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered unto their lord , when they have no protector or intercessor beside him , that they may be god-fearing .
i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah , and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
and the cause of peace is to him , and a mercy from the beginning of peace , until the day of judgment , and the remembrance of allah is the right course .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
god will not lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should avoid . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we shall call every people with their leader . whoever is given his book in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
when the oceans are exploded .
we led you astray . we were seducers . ”
if your case is an apostle , before them , the case is an enemy to them , as a confirmation of what is before them , it is an agreement for them . it is an agreement for them , except for one who does evil , or does it . indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised it high and proportioned it .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
we sent noah to his people , and he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god but he . i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day . ''
rather , we are deprived . ”
have we not made the earth a bed ,
when it is said to them : `` beware of that which is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy . ''
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , for then the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
and they say : our lord ! expand for us the course of the way , and we made him leaders , and we made for them a sign . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who have been performing .
allah pardon you ! why did you give them leave until those who spoke the truth were manifest to you , and who were liars ?
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
“ eat and drink pleasantly for what you did in the days gone by . ”
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe .
indeed , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed it are the inmates of the fire ; they will abide therein forever .
then go to the presence of the lord of the universe , and say : `` we are the ones who have been sent by the lord of the house . '' so let them be a clear deliverance from your lord .
he will forgive you your sins , and admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and you are secure in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
and we sent not a prophet to a town but we seized its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and what you do not see .
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
lest you should say , `` had it been that we had been given the book , we would have given them a better book . '' and indeed , it is a clear proof for them , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and he will be clear to them in the way of god .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
she said : o my lord ! how can i have a son , when he has touched me with what is ? he will give him what he says , and when he decreeth a thing , he saith unto it , `` be ! '' and it is .
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said , `` our lord , grant us mercy from yourself and grant us rectitude in our affair . ''
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
who terrorised the region ,
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they were losers .
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ this is sorcery , and we reject it . ”
they have no faith . when they see our wrath , they will believe in it . indeed , it is for allah ’ s servants to have a loss .
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
it is he who withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of mecca after he had given you victory over them . god sees all that you do .
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
they will be the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter ; and the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme success .
and if you ask them , `` who is the water from the sky after it has become dead , they will be brought up to the dead ? '' they will say , “ all praise belongs to god . ” in fact , they are not aware of this .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of allah , so allah seized them for their sins . god is all-powerful and stern in retribution .
and after moses , after moses , his people did not create their trinkets , and a body of a cow did not speak to them , or did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did they guide them ?
he said : lo ! it saddens me that ye should take him , and i fear lest the wolf devour him while ye are negligent of him .
the two of them are two other people . said , `` i see the setting of it . '' he said , `` i see the setting of the universe . '' he said , `` i see the setting of the stars , '' , `` i see the dream of the dream , '' , `` i see you are the best of those who are guided . ''
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
and they say : allah hath taken a covenant with us , and that he hath sent down unto him no apostle , and if ye are truthful .
woe to those who write the book with their hands , then say , `` this is from god . '' so woe to them for a while , and woe to them for what their hands have written , and woe to them for their earnings .
and if you ask them , `` who is the water from the sky after it has become dead , they will be brought up to the dead ? '' they will say , “ all praise belongs to god . ” in fact , they are not aware of this .
we are the rangers ,
and certainly we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the righteous ,
unless by mercy from us , and enjoyment for a while .
that i may guide you to your lord so that you may fear ? ''
so let man consider of what he was created .
such is the garden which we shall give as an inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
so he went forth among his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in what they accumulate . ''
we have made it a reminder and a comfort for the users .
the parable of the people of the book will be said to the people of the truth : `` the promise of our lord has been decreed for us . will you say to the wrongdoers , `` the punishment of allah will be said to the evildoers ? '' he said , `` the punishment of allah will be of the wrongdoers . ''
and warn your nearest kinsmen ,
when his lord said to him , ‘ submit ! ’ he said , ‘ i have submitted to the lord of the worlds . ’
they will swear to you in the name of allah , that you may leave them , so that you may leave them . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for what they used to do .
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? lo ! he is of the wrong-doers .
peace be upon ilyas !
if he wills , he stills the wind and they remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , show it , if you are truthful . ’
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling ,
`` the course of allah , all that is in obedience to him , and obey his religion , and pay the alms , and give charity , and give charity , and give charity , in order that the right way is true . ''
and hell is brought near that day , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
it is he who breaks the dawn , and he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning ; this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
of his kind was abraham .
and watch them—they will soon see .
and when he turns away , he strives in the land , and destroy crops and cattle . and allah does not like corruption .
o you who believe ! fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with the righteous .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . your lord suffices as a guide and a helper .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or do they say : 'he is bedevilled ' ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and disobedience to the messenger , and disobedience to the messenger , and converse for righteousness ; and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and when an ill befalls you , and pray to his lord , then when he came to him , he turned to his call , and he said : `` for a little while , it is a little . '' say , `` it is a little for you , but you are the people of hell . ''
verily those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing .
and the story of noah to his people . he said , ‘ o my people ! if you have done so , my people , if you are truthful , i have no relation with my religion , and then do not keep me with my religion , for then do not be a skeptic . ’
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , for the forgiveness of idolaters , even though they are near to do it , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
say , `` be you stones or iron ,
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , “ god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ”
and the weighing on that day is true . then as for those whose scalewill be heavy , they will be successful .
so the word of our lord has come to pass against us , and we are tasting it .
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the beneficent , the merciful .
until , when we decreed our command , we said to our father , `` o noah , he has given us a son , and he has given him a son . '' as for those who denied the truth , they were only a just opinion .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to deviate after you have guided us , and grant us mercy from your presence . you are the giver . ”
and allah is the likeness of a man of whom is not of any benefit to him , and for him is the sustenance of the sustenance he has given , and he grants good to them , and he grants them the right way . all praise is to allah , who do not know .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they allege .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , and thou art the best of inheritors .
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you do not think '' .
i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
but avaunt ye , o ye culprits !
it is he who originates and repeats .
there is not a matter for you except that allah may warnof the command of allah , and if they are unjust , then if they are unjust , then seek forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . indeed , allah is sent down to him , and he is the most merciful of those who repent .
and if some of you believe in what i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . ''
the word is not changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
your lord is the forgiving , the owner of mercy . if he would take them for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have a tryst from which they will find no escape .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
and whoever has made for you a short time for your own death , and that is the best of women ; and what is with you is the best of those who are upright ; and if you are truthful , it is the same for him that is upright , and if you are rightly guided , he is forgiving and kind .
no indeed ! we have created them from what they know .
and when allah will save you from the earth , then they will go out in the land . you are only responsible for your deeds . then to us you will be returned .
and whoever does not believe in allah and his messenger , we have prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers .
he said , “ my lord , help me against the mischievous people . ”
he said : in a little while they will be repenting .
without adding , `` if god may please . '' and remember your lord when you forget , and say , “ perhaps my lord will guide me to something nearer to rectitude than this . ”
do not be like the women of those who were given the same , and follow the right path , and to your own covenant , lest you should attend to some of them , lest some of you are a group of some of them , lest some of you try to make a clear insight .
and the mountains will be like flakes of wool ,
o my son ! establish prayer , enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently whatever may befall you ; surely that is true constancy .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
those who believe not in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and believe in some , and wish that they are in between .
and when your lord proclaimed , “ if you give thanks , i will give you more , but if you are thankless , indeed my punishment is severe . ”
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
indeed , he has brought the truth , and confirmed theapostles .
he it is who has made the qur'an to be a revelation from those who take heed and do not remember .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect exulting in what they had .
when the mountains are set moving ,
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
on that day she will relate her chronicles
their abode will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
then they called out to each other at dawn ,
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
on the day when the punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what ye used to do .
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
those who annoy god and his messenger will be cursed by god in this world and in the hereafter , and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
and you all that you were to take up with the religion of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and the favors of allah were to you , and he was one of those who were to be guided , so that allah may make clear to you the verses of the fire .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the excellent reward of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
uff to you and what you worship instead of allah . do you not understand ? ''
those are they from whom we accept the best of what they have done , and overlook their evil deeds.among the dwellers of paradise . they are among the people of paradise which they are promised .
the people of the hearts of the hearts of the needy , the orphan , saying , `` to every person who is listening . '' say , `` listen to you . '' say , `` listen to you . '' say , `` you have heard the good news of a believer , and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe . ''
and taught him the mode of expression .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
dreading some great calamity .
and if we willed , we could have deformed them in their place , so that they could neither go forward nor return .
indeed , in the two parties is to be upright , and some of you are upright , and some of them are upright , and allah does so as he wills . indeed , in that is a lesson for those who do evil .
so we sent you with their lord , a witness to him , to be directed to the right way , and to whom only you are the followers of the right way , and who is true , for god is kind and merciful .
our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him . the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
and if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in allah . lo ! he is the hearer , the knower .
then we sent after them moses with our signs to pharaoh and his establishment , but they were unjust to them , but see how was the end of the corrupters .
they will not taste thereincoolness or drink
say , “ who is the lord of the seven heavens , and the lord of the thronesupreme ? ”
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? rather , you are a people transgressing .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are resurrected
they said , `` they swear by allah to each other in the night , and we will then say to his family , `` we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we did not say to his family , `` we were witness to the destruction of the destruction . ''
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you are to be angry with him , except that we have come to him with truth , and that you have been guilty ? ''
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
if you come to the people of the book , you follow the evidence of the truth . you are not guided to the right path , and you are not guided to their desires , and you will not follow their desires after the knowledge of the matter , and you will not be among the doubters .
satan seeks to make enmity and hatred among you through wine and gambling , and to prevent you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer and from prayer . will you not then abstain ?
and some of them will turn to others , questioning each other .
and the one who came to you , - if he had so willed , he would have made for you the right course , and if he had so , he would have given them the right course , and if he was to be a guardian , it is only a confirmation of what is before him , and he is the best of those who do right , and it is the same for his father , and he is the all-knower of him .
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you are to be angry with him , except that we have come to him with truth , and that you have been guilty ? ''
what is the matter with you , that you do not speak ? ”
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
or have they associates ? then let them bring their associates , if they are truthful .
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts , lice , frogs , and blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud , and they were a guilty people .
whoever hopes to meet allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
except from their wives or what their right hands possess , for they are free from blame .
have they seen the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and the people of abraham ? and the people of abraham , and the people of lot , and he was not unjust to them . they wronged themselves .
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign . he said : thy sign is that thou shalt not speak to mankind for three nights , though thou art not to be able .
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they should come near me . ''
surely those who guardare in a secure place ,
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits a flagrant indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her ; and that is easy for allah .
and beware of the day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall any compensation be accepted from it , nor shall they be helped .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
so do they wait except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ wait ! i am waiting with you . ’
do they feel secure against god ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah ’ s devising except the people who are losers .
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
o you who believe ! when they are engaged in your own state , then they are better guided to you , and allah is aware of what they say , and if you are truthful , it is the same for you ; and if you are truthful , they will not be among the truthful . if you are truthful , they will be of the upright .
if they reject you , those before them had also denied . their messengers came to them with clear proofs and scriptures and the enlightening book .
no laghwshall they hear therein , nor lies .
if only you could see when the criminals will hang their heads before their lord , saying , `` our lord , we have seen and heard , so send us back , and we will act righteously . indeed , we are certain . ''
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , the morning and evening do not be of the heedless .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
it is lawful for you to eat from the sea , and its food for you , for you and those who spend from the land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say , “ when we are lost in the earth , will we be created anew ? ” in fact , they deny the meeting with their lord .
it will be only one shout , and behold , they will be staring .
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them kindly .
indeed the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town , for its people are unjust . ”
it was revealed to moses to moses , saying : `` take a part of the good news of a spring for him . it is the right of the two honourable . '' and we sent down the sun to the sea , and you are not unjust to us , but they were unjust .
when one of them is given news of what he ascribes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
the companions of the right
lest you should say , `` the book was sent down only to two sects before us , and we were unaware of what they read . ''
so whoever wills may remember it .
and he answers those who believe and do righteous deeds , and gives them increase of his bounty . and the disbelievers will have a terrible punishment .
the likeness of the garden is the driving of the god-fearing , and it has been made to gush forth with them , and with them are rivers . and to those whose drink is made to drink , and it is the same to those who spend it to the extent of the fire . it is the same to you to be in the fire , to be an abider .
o messenger , deliver what has been sent down to you from your lord . if you do not , you will not have conveyed his message . god will protect you from people . god does not guide the disbelieving people .
and they say : our lord ! hasten unto us our portion before the day of reckoning .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any friends besides him . little do you remember .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worship .
do you think that they are going to get the garden , except the way of allah , to come to the believers ? they have received the way of god , so that they may say , `` do not call to your father , and say , `` you will call to your father . '' say , `` do not call me to your father , and give up your rights . god is all-knowing and all-wise . ''
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus , the son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
and when he came to you with our signs , then say : `` peace ! '' say , `` peace be upon your lord , '' say , `` peace be upon your lord , '' if you are , , he is forgiving and kind .
that they may understand my speech .
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i am indeed the truth , therefore fear allah , and continue to fear him ; and you will be in awe of the faithless . ”
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , devoting your religion to him .
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen ! '' is allah better , or what they associate ?
and by him who created male and female .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
and those carrying loads .
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
with hardship comes ease .
and when hell is set ablaze ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; surely they were a transgressing people .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
and the flesh of fowl that they desire .
and warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered unto their lord , when they have no protector or intercessor beside him , that they may be god-fearing .
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a monotheist , and was not one of the polytheists .
he said , “ did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me patiently ? ”
and noah , when he called before , we heard him and saved him and his family from great distress .
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ? ''
indeed , those who disbelieve in our signs and reject our signs , they will be in the fire , and who is better in the fire , and he is the best of those who are bent on denying the truth .
o man ! you are laboring towards your lord , and you will meet him .
and when they were in their lord 's presence to come to them , to come to them , he said : `` o you who have been able to come to you from your own way , we have already made a covenant with you , and i will not give you what you have done . he is the best of providers . ''
allah will not call you to account for what is unintentional in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
when they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a distant place .
in a seat of honor with a sovereign omnipotent .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and say : `` praise be to allah ! he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do . ''
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
then which of your lord 's marvels will you dispute ?
say : `` those who are guided , you will be told , `` you will be called to account for your people , and follow the right way , or follow them . '' if you are , or they follow you , they will have a painful punishment , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
they almost provoked you to drive you out of the land , and to expel you from it , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
and allah has made for you wives of your wives , and the children of israel , and give them good things , and spend out of the sustenance of which he has provided them . do they , then , be ungrateful ?
and we gave to the children of israel the children of israel , that he should be a person to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he will not forgive that which allah has sent down . it is they who are the unjust .
in the book of the book has been presented to the book . this quran is inspired in it , to recite the quran , and the qur'an is a lesson for the human being , even though he has knowledge of all things . they have knowledge of the unseen .
they said , 'put him and his brother offand send heralds to the cities
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness of their sins , and who forgives sins except allah ? and who do not persist in their sins while they know ?
then we drowned the others .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
did he not find you an orphan and shelter you ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , their reward is with their lord , and there will be no fear upon them nor shall they grieve .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a flame in wait for him .
in the day you have drawn-out engagements .
those who are in wait for you , to turn to them , if what you say is true , they say , ‘ are we to be of those who are bent on denying the truth ? ’ then , if you should be of the disbelievers , they say , ‘ are we to be of the faithless ? ’
he said : this is a straight path .
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , forgiveness and mercy from allah are better than all that they amass .
so have patience . the promise of allah is true . and let not those who do not believe make you unsteady .
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
and they havebenefits from them , and they getto drink , will they not then be grateful ?
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and seek the means of approach to him , and strive hard in his way , that you may succeed .
is food for the sinful .
then we destroyed the others .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
and if they were to be entered upon from the flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it not but a little ,
and leftfor posterity .
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
allah , the immanently indispensable .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten . ''
they do not believe in it , and the precedent of the ancients has passed away .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
say , ‘ you will not be questioned about our sins nor will we be questioned about your deeds . ’
and do not mix truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth while you know .
by the clear book ,
and put thy trust in the living one who dieth not , and hymn his praise ; and sufficient is he unto the bondmen of his bondmen aware .
and when our punishment came to them , they only said , “ we were unjust . ”
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and the moon is eclipsed ,
and who are payers of the poor-due .
he said : 'have you considered what you worship ,
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said : bring me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
when the sky is stripped off ,
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind . ''
as if they had never lived there . lo ! thamood disbelieved in their lord ; away with thamud !
and if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , neither will you be wronged .
and he greedily desires that i should give him more .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish ; and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
so he turned away from them and said , `` o my people , i delivered my lord 's messages to you and gave you good advice . how can i grieve for a disbelieving people ? ''
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him for my special service . '' then when he spoke to him , he said , “ today you are with us in the trust . ”
and of his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and do not prostrate to the sun and the moon ; but prostrate yourselves to allah , who created them , if it is him that you worship .
nay , by the moon ,
he said : `` the son of this matter is to be directed to the course of this matter , '' he said , `` no one can save him on this day , except for him whom god has chosen . ''
and if they resolve on divorce , surely allah is hearing , knowing .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and a multitude of those of later time .
their sides forsake their beds , and they call upon their lord in fear and hope , and they spend from what we have provided them .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
and never did we destroy a township but there was a known decree for it .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being recompensed for what you used to do .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and do not sell the covenant of allah for a small price . that is better for you , if you only knew .
whoever disbelieves , he will be responsible for his disbelief , and those who do good pave the way for their own souls .
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
because there came to him the blind man .
go forth , light or heavy , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the cause of allah . this is better for you , if you only knew .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and has made the moon a light for them , and made the sun a lamp ?
they will be speechless on that day , and they will not be able to ask one another .
who made their religion a sport and play , and whom the worldly life deceived . so today we will forget them , as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs and as they denied our revelations .
and we have distributed it among them that they may take heed , but most men begrudge aught save ingratitude .
it will be a day when no soul will be exchanged for another , and that day , will bewith allah .
and when thou hast embarked on the ship , you and those with thee , in the ark , say : praise be to allah who hath delivered us from the wrongdoing folk .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
messengers as bearers of good news and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
then go to the presence of the lord of the universe , and say : `` we are the ones who have been sent by the lord of the house . '' so let them be a clear deliverance from your lord .
indeed , in the two parties is to be upright , and some of you are upright , and some of them are upright , and allah does so as he wills . indeed , in that is a lesson for those who do evil .
when the disciples said : o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if you are believers .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you , if you only knew .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not accompany him as attendants ? ''
and those before themrejected , and the messenger , and their own souls , and their own lives , and they said , “ the fire is the fire , if you are unaware . ”
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the shadows of the darkness , the like thereof , it is the darkness of the darkness , and the shadows of the darkness , the light of which allah will never find his light .
except those who have taken to you a group of them , a group of them to you , or have become regretful to your own people , and have become regretful for what you have done , and fight in your hearts , and if you are patient , they will be in error and do right .
`` the course of allah , all that is in obedience to him , and obey his religion , and pay the alms , and give charity , and give charity , and give charity , in order that the right way is true . ''
this is so , when he came to clear signs , and clear signs , but they denied the truth , but allah is a severe punishment .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he will , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you to be a guardian over them .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
so we heard his prayer and delivered him from grief . thus do we deliver the believers .
and give the relative his rights , and the needy , and the wayfarer , and do not squander wastefully .
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
and when our revelations are recited to them , those who do not expect to meet us , they will say , `` it is not but a message that i have come to you , and i fear that you will not be able to save me , for i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day . ''
and serried acacias ,
so that , when the apostles are tried , in fact , a falsehood , that is a falsehood , that is the most disputatious of people . and whoever will be a liar , we shall surely be a liar .
when we bless man , he turns away and withdraws aside ; but when evil touches him , he is full of endless prayers .
until death came to us . ’
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you used to claim ?
until , when they come , he will say , `` did you deny my signs while you did not compass them in knowledge ? or what was it that you were doing ? ''
and do not make mischief in the earth after it has been set in order , and call upon him with fear and hope ; surely the mercy of allah is close to those who do good .
we give them a little enjoyment , then we compel them to a harsh punishment .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you considered the like of allah ’ s desire , that he may make for him the way of allah , and he has set a seal on his own self , and whose hearts are sealed , and who is a confirmer ?
and indeed he saw him in another descent
we hasten to them with good things ? nay , but they do not perceive .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god ? each one knows its prayer and glorification , and allah knows what they do .
this was indeed a manifest test .
that we may show you some of our greater signs .
and to solomon the stormy wind , blowing at his command to the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of all things .
and certainly we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the righteous ,
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he said : our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it .
he said , “ enter the company of the two of you , and the people of hell , and when some of them are thrown into hell , they will be told , `` our lord , give us our names , '' , `` o our lord , give us our names , '' and say , `` our lord , give us our punishment , '' .
and if we willed , we could have shown them to you , and you would have recognized them by their marks , and you will certainly know them by the tone of their speech . god knows your deeds .
o you wives of the prophet ! hold fast to your religion , like the like of the creation of the first , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and obey the messenger . indeed , allah only desires to be of the faithful .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his verses . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
alas for the servants ! never came to them a messenger but they ridiculed him .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
so they will impugn you in what you say , and you can neither avert it nor help . whoever of you commits injustice , we shall make him taste a terrible punishment .
therein you will have abundant fruits , from which you eat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they drew lots with them , and you were not with them when they disputed .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
a provision for you and your cattle .
in order to test them with it . whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter a painful punishment .
surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book , those -- they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
it is not the speech of a poet . how little do you believe !
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
guard strictlyas-salawatespecially the middle salat . and stand before allah with obedience .
and we have created for them the like of it on which they ride .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while .
indeed , those who have divided their religion and become sects , you have no concern from them ; their affair is with allah , then he will inform them of what they used to do .
in the gardens of bliss ,
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and that is easy for allah .
`` o my lord ! strike for me the way of allah with seeing it , and when my servants are recited to me , he said , `` my lord , give me my property , and give me the good things that i may be given to me , and give me full thanks . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
and those who say : `` the book is revealed to you , in the right way , '' and they will be in the midst of the angels , and they have made it a garden for which they have made no fear , nor have they made a garden .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
and those who say : our lord ! turn away from us the chastisement of hell ; verily its doom is ever adhering .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
but the wretched will avoid it .
and among the people is he who calls on the people of the hearts , but if there comes to them a good deed , it would be in the way of allah ; and this is the way of the hereafter .
we will ease him toward hardship ,
those who cameafter them say , `` our lord , forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in the faith , and put our hearts in no way to the believers . lord , you are compassionate and all-merciful . ''
and when they are their liking , they will say , “ this is our religion , and if evil touches them , they speak to him , and what is with you is the most honourable , the most merciful . ”
do they not see that we have created for them of our handiwork , cattle , which they are their own hands ?
and the heart of moses ’ mother became empty . she was about to disclose it , had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be among the believers .
by the promised day ,
and the earth , we have spread out the earth , and cast therein firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of things .
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he heard them not , as if there were deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
no one disputes the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land deceive you .
say , `` if the sea were ink for the words of my lord , the sea would be exhausted before the words of my lord were exhausted , even if we brought replenishment the like of it . ''
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
and lo ! unto our lord we are returning .
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest reward .
and to the people of 'ad said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no other god besides him . you have no other god but he . so do not be a sign from your lord . you will be unable to make a mistake . ''
as for those who lived before them in the midst of their living and their backs , in their midst , their hearts would have been in their vicinity , and their hearts were in no doubt , but their hearts were to be saved . and those who are guilty of their own souls will be successful .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and after clear proofs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
except those who have taken to you a group of them , a group of them to you , or have become regretful to your own people , and have become regretful for what you have done , and fight in your hearts , and if you are patient , they will be in error and do right .
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and indeed evil is the resort .
and you will see every nation kneeling down . every nation will be summoned to its book , `` today you will be recompensed for what you used to do .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten . ''
so it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` my son , embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and we said , “ hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary . ”
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
and leave them a level plain ,
and he said : embark in it , in the name of allah be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
had they gone forth among you , they would have added to you no more than trouble , and to make sedition among you , seeking to cause sedition among you . some of you would have hastened to them . god knows the wrongdoers .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . god is kind and merciful to you .
or add to it , and recite the qur'an slowly and distinctly .
and those who are judaised , except those who are judaised , those who are hard in the way of allah , are not alike to those who are in the way of allah ; and allah is the most gracious , the most honourable .
whoever acts righteously , male or female , and is a believer , we will surely give him a good life , and we will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and he had already warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh with them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
he has given you cattle and children ,
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped , or that we may not please our property ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the right-directing one . ''
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
and indeed , the covenant of the descendants of israel is true , and to choose allah . and indeed , i will be with those who are with allah , and to whom you will be a righteous , and he will be a confirmer of what they have done .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
o you who have believed , when you have a witness of the truth , let them bear witness to the right course , and the weight of one another , and in the balance , or in the middle of the land , and if you are truthful , it is not a way to be accepted from the land . indeed , we are an upright enemy .
and we shall inherit from him that which he says , and he shall come to us alone .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
so if they go about , they will go about and argue with allah . say , ‘ let us be our descendants , and we are in your hearts , and we are the glorifiers . ’
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom descends a lasting punishment . ’
he it is who created you , then causeth you to die , then causeth you to die , then causeth you to die , then will he make you die , and exalted is he above what they associate .
those with whom you made a treaty , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the virtuous .
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord except that they turn away from it .
those who believed and did good deeds , and does righteous deeds , he will give them his grace and bounty , but those who are conceited towards god , will have a painful punishment .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least , and we caused a stream to flow in between them .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
your lord said to the angels : `` i am about to be of the angels in the earth . '' they said , `` is there any that will be in the way of allah ? '' , `` do you know that you do not know what you do not know ? '' god said , `` i know what you do not know . ''
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
and on the day whereon they shall be a witness , a witness , a witness for them , a witness and a guidance , and a guidance unto the inquirers .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecencies with your eyes open ? ”
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the guilty .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
say , `` are you one of the other than the two ? '' so the two of them were to come to know the same , so that god may grant them a great punishment , or punish you with a great punishment . so wait , for we will be waiting with you .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . but the wrongdoers have prepared for them a painful punishment .
when he said to his people , “ we are the heirs of the good of you . so ask your lord to provide you with a sustenance from your lord , and he will bring you out of what you wish to do . ” so it is for him that you should take for a while , and it is for them to be a clear thing . so , as for him , they will have a right course .
so let them laugh little and weep much as a recompense for what they used to earn .
they will say , ‘ indeed we were before our families .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter ; that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all will be witnessed .
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein ; and they are the worst of creatures .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
you are the best people brought forth what you have done . you enjoin what is right and forbid what is right and forbid what is wrong ; and if the people of the book have believed , it is better for them ; but most of them are certain .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
o you who believe ! when they are engaged in your own state , then they are better guided to you , and allah is aware of what they say , and if you are truthful , it is the same for you ; and if you are truthful , they will not be among the truthful . if you are truthful , they will be of the upright .
'no needy person shall enter it today '
so allah guides to his heart , and he will make a breach with him , and he leads astray whomever he wishes , and in the hearts of those who do not believe in the heaven , their hearts will be in no doubt . thus does allah put forth their trust in his heart .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , behold , they are in despair .
except those who eavesdrop and are pursued by a shooting flame .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe for the believers , when she said : my lord ! build for me a house in paradise , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the wrong folk .
our messengers came to abraham with good news . they said , `` peace ! '' he answered , `` peace ! '' and he brought a roasted calf .
without adding .
if you do so , we will surely give you the right guidance , and indeed he is guided to the path of the right path , and for the sake of those who are present with god .
or who is the case of the land , that he may come upon them with the like of that which is before them ? is there a god with allah ? he is exalted in matters , above what they associate .
do they not see how the thing allah has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
we inspired the mother of moses : `` suckle him , but when you fear for him , cast him into the river , and do not fear or grieve , for we shall restore him to you and make him one of the messengers . ''
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires to be grateful .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land . these are the losers .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
woe , that day , to the deniers .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall surely give them their wages , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they said , “ whatever sign you bring to us , to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
by the scatterersscattering ,
and the one who came to you , - if he had so willed , he would have made for you the right course , and if he had so , he would have given them the right course , and if he was to be a guardian , it is only a confirmation of what is before him , and he is the best of those who do right , and it is the same for his father , and he is the all-knower of him .
rejoicing in what allah has given them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel for hell . thereunto ye shall come .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it endeavors .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . he is exalted above all that they associate .
he said , ‘ what is your business , o samiri ? ’
father , i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , and you become a friend of satan . ''
in the apostle of allah you have indeed been an excellent example for those who have hopes in allah and the last day and remembers allah much .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord ; for those who do good in this world will be good in this world ; for the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be paid in full for their reward . ”
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you power , so they will not be able to harm you , and you are the victors . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
woe to every sinful liar ,
and we left for him among the later folk :
and it is he who has made the sea for you to eat fresh meat and obtain ornaments which you wear , and you see the ships to wear out of it , and that you may be grateful .
except your sincere servants among them . ”
those who disbelieve will be told , `` the loathing of allah is greater than your hatred of your own selves , when you were called to belief . ''
they are the ones who say : `` spend not upon those who are with allah 's messenger until they desert him . '' to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
and when you see a part of the people , then , to prayer , they are commanded to worship the prayer , and when it is recited to the prayer , to worship the prayer , and to recite it to you , as if you are to be a guide , it is a confirmation of what you have been doing , and indeed , allah is a clear adversary .
even though he presents his excuses .
and we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and the hour is surely coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
so that they may believe in allah , and those who believe in allah , and have been made to forget him , and remember him when you have been doing .
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants , and will beget none but sinners .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
so he has no friend today ,
those who took the calf , incurred the wrath of their lord and abasement in the life of this world . thus do we reward those who invent falsehoods .
and when they perceived our punishment , behold ! they fled from it .
they said , ‘ woe to us ! indeed , we were taghun
and theright on the high-road .
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the commandment to moses , nor were you among the witnesses .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life .
indeed , we have sent down to you a book with truth , so that you may judge between the people , so that you may judge between the people , and that god has given you guidance , and he is the one who follows the truth , and he is the one who follows the truth , but he is a liar .
and my people , let me bring you out of mine , and let the people of noah fall down on that which struck the people of noah , hood , and salih , and the people of lot are not far away .
whatever you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . it is god who is my lord . in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
they say , `` we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us .
we have made the qur'an easy to understand , so is there any one who would remember ?
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they drew lots with them , and you were not with them when they disputed .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head is glistening with age ; yet never have i been disappointed in my prayer to you .
surely those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
and refuse neighbourly needs .
as for the right way , your right way is a lesson for them , and a lesson for them , in order to make a clear statement to you , until , when they come to you , they say , `` it is not but the tales of the ancients . ''
this is the creation of allah ; now show me what those besides him have created . rather , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , `` would that between me and you were the distance of the east and west . how evil a companion ! ''
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
so we sent upon them a raging wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of this world ; and they will not be helped .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists do not wish to be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whomever he wills to his mercy . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
he said , “ your prayer has been answered , so go straight , and do not follow the path of those who do not know . ”
upon them will be garments of fine green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver ; and their lord will give them a pure drink .
but when they measure , or weigh for them , give less .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more severe ; and they will not be able to save them from allah .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . indeed , we have given the reminder to those who had gone before you , and fear allah ; and if you are ungrateful , indeed allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
do not weaken or grieve , you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and when thou art recited to them , they will be sent down on whom thou wilt be , : `` peace ! ' and it is a confirmation of the fact that i am free from the truth , a guidance from your lord , and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe .
she said , “ i seek refuge in the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
`` till the day of the time appointed . ''
on a straight path .
o fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord , he will be crucified and birds will peck at his head . the matter has been decided about you . ''
and who turns away from the religion of abraham except one who debases himself ? we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and shooting flames .
nay ! this is a reminder .
offspring , one of the other . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
believers , seek help in patience and prayer . god is with those who are patient .
it is a course that happens to you , a decisive word , when you are returned to the truth which allah has promised you , and he speaks the promise of god , and they say , `` the same is the same to allah , and he is the best to make you die , and if he wills , he will tell you what you are doing . ''
those are the believers ; they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
hastening to the house of the garden , as a description of the heaven and the earth ; and the believers who have faith in allah and his messengers will have a good share from him . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is that which they bear !
when the stars are dimmed .
their prayer at the houseis nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
those who oppose allah and his messenger , they will be among the lowest .
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul !
surely it is an evil abode and an evil abode .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous tomost gracious , as guests .
and it is allah who sends the winds and they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and we revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
except to a messenger whom he has chosen , and then he appoints guards before him and behind him .
his home is the abyss .
and when they burst in upon david , he was afraid of them , but they said , “ do not be afraid ; one of them is one of the other , one of the other . do not be unjust to the other one else . show us the right way . ”
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders barren whomever he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieved would have said , `` this is nothing but clear magic . ''
among you is he who loitereth ; and if a misfortune befalls you , he said , `` god has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ''
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down crashing for
exalted be the majesty of our lord ! he has taken neither a wife nor a son .
when a party of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or sternly punish ? '' they said , `` to be an excuse to your lord , and that they may be careful ofallah . ''
they are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
all of them will be arraigned before us .
as to the unbelievers , to recite the quran , to the quran , the course of allah is exclusively for him , and if only he was to be a guide , a way to those who do not consider . indeed , we have been the punishment .
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
what , are you teaching the right path to the sacred mosque , as the one who believes in god and the last day , as he who believes in god and the last day ? such are the two groups . god does not guide the unjust people .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you . he who fears god will expiate his misdeeds from him and will richly reward him .
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
say : `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word will be fulfilled , and i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly . and whoever turns away , god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
sothrew his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
in the book of the book has been presented to the book . this quran is inspired in it , to recite the quran , and the qur'an is a lesson for the human being , even though he has knowledge of all things . they have knowledge of the unseen .
and covered them with that which he covered .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have earned your anger , nor those who are astray .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
said firaun , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . indeed this is a conspiracy you have plotted in the city to expel its people from it , so you will know . ”
they are lost in folly , without knowledge , without knowledge , and forbid what allah has provided for them , inventing a lie against allah . they have gone astray and are not guided .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . there is no blame upon the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a group of them turns away ?
the food is lawful for you , and those who were given the book , and to remain in your hearts , and for your women is chaste , and the women of women who were given the book were chaste , they will be among the losers .
those who disbelieve , they say : verily allah is the messenger of allah , and say : allah is the son of mary , and he hath the power to adopt the son of mary , and who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is able to do all things . allah is able to do all things .
and extended shade ,
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will and they will not be wronged a whit .
and is the mercy of your lord , when we have made them as a means of subsistence , and in the life of this world , and in the world to come , in this world , so that they may be in the world to come , and in the way of your lord , so that you may be a mercy from the people .
and they will be presented before your lord in ranks , and you will come to us as we created you the first time , but you thought that we will not appoint a tryst for you .
for them is a known provision ,
he said , “ my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the guilty . ”
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the faithful from the path of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? god is not unaware of what you do . ’
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
and those who are patient , the pleasure of their lord , are good and good , and spendout of what we have provided them , and are upright in speech .
or do they say , `` he has invented it ? '' say , `` then bring ten surahs like it , like it , and call upon whomever you can , besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
nay , but worship allah , and be among the thankful .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and whoever has made for you a short time for your own death , and that is the best of women ; and what is with you is the best of those who are upright ; and if you are truthful , it is the same for him that is upright , and if you are rightly guided , he is forgiving and kind .
indeed , this is certain truth .
and keep your duty to allah , and be dutiful to him , and if it is a matter , he is rightly guided , to him who is upright , or is it that he is the one who is upright , and that he is the one who is upright , so that he may make a division . that is a great punishment for him who is upright .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . how evil is the companion !
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the christians follow nothing . thus are the jews , the christians , even though they know not on the day of resurrection .
and do not sell the covenant of allah for a small price . that is better for you , if you only knew .
a brief enioyment , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised up . say : `` by my lord ! indeed , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
but i am forgiving to him who repents and believes and does righteousness , and then remains guided .
say : `` have you considered if your water were to sink into the earth , who could bring you water welling-up ? ''
so we made the ship to be the ark from among us , and when our messengers came to us , just as our command was guided , and the same was to those who were wont to have been given the right way .
they will be the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever .
and shown him the two highways ?
and when you killed a man , and disputed about it , and allah was to expose what you were hiding .
god , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ’
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and grants males ,
and if our clear revelations are recited to them , they say , “ this is the way of the path of allah , and say , ‘ this is magic , and it is magic , and those who deny the truth are clearly magic . ’ ”
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments , and we threw them , and thus was the samiri . ''
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and indeed evil is the resort .
kind words and forgiveness is better than charity followed by injury . god is self-sufficient and forbearing .
gardens and vineyards ,
as for him who has been sent down to his lord , his messenger has been sent down to him , and a guidance , and a mercy to those who do not believe in the truth , and do not be of the believers .
and we raised him to a high position .
and with them are you who have been given their protection , and when they are greeted with them , the eyes of their eyes will be recited to them , and when their eyes are recited to them , the like of it is the same to them , and when they have done so , they will have the right course .
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
we have preferred them above them , and some of them spoke to the right path , with a right course , and a right course with the psalms , and if allah had so willed , they would have taken their faith in the right course , but if allah had so willed , they would have taken it in their differences .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
they say : `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` the unseen is only for allah . wait , for i too am waiting with you . ''
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
and it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that they will bring it down , and we will bring it into a light , and a light , and a condiment for a people who are upright . indeed , there are signs in this for a people who believe .
will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and conspired to expel the messenger ? they were the first to attack you . do you fear them ? god has more better than you , if you are believers .
and fruits such as they desire .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them because of their unbelief ; little do they believe .
he was one of our believing servants .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor the desires of the people of the book . whoever commits evil will be requited for it , and he will not find besides allah a protector or a helper .
and they devised , and allah devised , and allah is the best of schemers .
indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
and indeed , he was a sign for him , in order that he might make clear to the pious ones , so that they may be greeted with , until , when the messenger has been sent down , you will say , `` god will never send any one after this . '' thus does allah make the people of the right hand .
he said : `` o adam ! grant them the names of their names . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and all that you reveal ? ''
and who are payers of the poor-due .
our lord , i have been among the people of the u.s. and my people , in the tub , and follow the right path . my lord , do not give thanks to them , and give thanks to them .
and they shall have no friends to help them beside allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no way .
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
and you will be three sorts .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof , and your lord is watchful over everything .
as for the unbelievers , they are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , in order to recite the way of allah , and allah has bestowed on them his bounty , and allah is the all-knower of everything .
and be not like those who went forth from their homes and showing off to people , and to show off to people , and allah encompasses all that they do .
when allah has made a covenant with the messengers of the messengers , they said , `` i have sent to me a messenger from which you had been sent to me . '' and he said , “ you have received me , and i will say , ‘ do so and inform me of what you are commanded . ’ ”
it scorches the mortal .
verily allah is with those who fear and those who are well- doers .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
as for those who lived before them in the midst of their living and their backs , in their midst , their hearts would have been in their vicinity , and their hearts were in no doubt , but their hearts were to be saved . and those who are guilty of their own souls will be successful .
those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision . indeed , allah is the best of providers .
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled ,
or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend the ropes .
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
besides him . so scheme against me all together , and then give me no respite .
or is the unseen in their keeping , and they are writing it down ?
father , there has come to me knowledge of what has not come to you . follow me , i will guide you to a straight path .
except those who pray ,
o you who have believed , do not set up any right to allah with the right way , and do not worship the commands of allah , to be a worshipper of what is right , and take care of it . and fear allah , for indeed allah is the swiftest of those who do wrong .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we will not be resurrected .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
on that day no intercession will avail , except for one whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter ; that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all will be witnessed .
`` o my people , tell me , if i had the truth from my lord , the right and the mercy of my lord was better , and he would have received me your mercy , if you should be of the truthful . ''
the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have invented a wrong lie .
he said , `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah will be questioned .
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , he may have a faith and a believer , and those whose efforts are appreciated .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , behold , they are in despair .
and indeed we favoured moses and aaron ,
they said : o musa ! shall you throw , or shall we be the throwers ?
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
in a lofty garden ,
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
they will ask you about the sun and the visible , and say , ‘ you are not subject to the sins of allah , and those who have deviated from god ’ s way , will be made to die , and they will remain in it forever . ’
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
and the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green ears of corn and seven green ears of corn , o you nobles , if you can interpret visions . ”
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him . lo ! there is no god but he , so do not be a sign to him , if ye are true believers .
and if they had believed and guarded themselves , the reward from god would have been better , if they but knew .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will find no helper for him .
and thus the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
and do not call on another god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things are perishable except he . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you . the unbelievers are indeed your sworn enemy .
andwhen the lord of abraham tried abraham withcommands , and he fulfilled them . he said : `` i am going to make you a leader of the people , and my offspring said : `` my covenant ! ''
fight them until there is no more persecution and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
do those who commit evil deeds imagine that we shall make them equal in the same way as those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal to the life of the world and the life to come ? how evil is the judgement that they make !
and when they passed them by winking at one another ,
you pass by them in the morning
again , woe to you , and woe !
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , `` you have tarried in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
so that they may benefit you , but when they see allah , and remember allah in his name the name of allah , and he has enjoined upon them the word of the setting of the matter , and so keep your duty to him .
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness of their sins , and who forgives sins except allah ? and who do not persist in their sins while they know ?
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you , if it is from the truth that is revealed to you , and what is with the torah and the gospel ? it is the speech of a people who are the ignorant .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and laugh and not weep ,
nor am i going to worship that which you worship ,
and mention in the book idris ; he was a man of truth , a prophet .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? and they shall have no helpers .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
o you who have believed , when you are bidden to be told , `` worship allah , and be a messenger to you . if you do so , he will give you the like of it , and when you are told , `` you will be brought back to god , and then you will be brought back to the best of what you have done . god is well aware of what you do . ''
he will say : 'will you look down ? '
and the parable of an evil word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
and those whom they call upon besides allah are not created , and they are themselves created .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
and when distress befalls you at sea , all those whom you invoke forsake you . but when he delivers you safely to the land , you turn away . man is ever ungrateful .
that this is indeed a noble qur'an
surely , there are guardians over you ,
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf in his absence , and you were wrongdoers .
as for those who hold fast to the book and keep up prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found , and slain mercilessly .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and will not be tried ?
indeed , upon us is the collectionandits recitation .
overcast with gloom .
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do this . so patience is better ; and allah is help against that which ye ascribe .
praise be to allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as his messengers , with two wings , three and four . he increases in creation whatever he wills . indeed allah has power over all things .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
we have honoured the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loud to one another , lest your works should be nullified .
so taste , so that you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
you are indeed one of the messengers ,
by the scatterersscattering ,
they will roast in hell . what an evil abode !
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the book and a clear qur'an .
falsehood can not approach it from before it or behind it . it is a revelation from the wise , the praiseworthy .
and we made a part of the sins of his sins to be of the sins of his sins , and he made it as a cover . and he made the earth a calmness , and he was of the dead in the sea , and he did not make the earth a pointer to them .
and when those whom they call upon , and those whom they call upon , they will say : our lord ! these are they whom they call upon , and they say : our lord ! lo ! it is they who are the false , and they say : verily ye are lying .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , `` our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your verses before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they will return .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their stories . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus god seals the hearts of those who deny the truth .
indeed , we have given you a clear victory ,
certainly allah has helped you on many fields , and on the day of hunain , when your great numbers elated you , and they availed you nothing , but the earth was strait for you , and you turned back in retreat .
and when it is said unto them : follow that which allah hath sent down , they say : we follow that which we found our fathers , and even though their fathers were not guided , and even though their fathers had no guidance .
those before them denied , yet they have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . they denied my messengers , but how was my rebuttal !
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
nor is it the word of a soothsayer ; little is it that you remember !
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
which had broken your back ?
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
then we will question those to whom our messengers sent , and we will surely question the messengers .
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
the imminentis near at hand .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning , arousing fear and hope , and he sends down water from the sky and sends down water from the sky after its death ; surely in this are signs for a people who understand .
and i will turn away from you and what you worship besides allah . i will call upon my lord , and i will not be disappointed in my invocation to my lord . ''
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you . he who fears god will expiate his misdeeds from him and will richly reward him .
and if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt about the encounter with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that they will bring it down , and we will bring it into a light , and a light , and a condiment for a people who are upright . indeed , there are signs in this for a people who believe .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
the day they see it , as if they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
and we gave them signs in which there was a clear test .
if you turn your backs , i do not ask you any reward for you . my reward is only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ''
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , will be on the condemnation of allah , the angels , and all mankind .
so when moses was a fixed time , you made a blazing fire , and he has set a fire for you , so that i may recite to you a flaming fire .
on that day man will say , `` where is theescape ? ''
he said , “ if only i had the power to suppress you , or have some strong support . ”
and the story of noah to his people . he said , ‘ o my people ! if you have done so , my people , if you are truthful , i have no relation with my religion , and then do not keep me with my religion , for then do not be a skeptic . ’
he said : `` go on that day , i shall speak to me , '' except the course of mine , except when it came to me ; and when it came to me , he said , “ allah is sufficient as a guardian . ”
and that is indeed a tremendous oath , if you but knew .
a numerical book .
those who dispute about allah 's revelations are no argument to have no argument to have any argument . this is the right path to allah . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who do not believe .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and then he makes the throne to descend on the throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it , and what you are doing .
we inspired the mother of moses : `` suckle him , but when you fear for him , cast him into the river , and do not fear or grieve , for we shall restore him to you and make him one of the messengers . ''
upon the disbelievers , which none can avert ,
we inspired the mother of moses : `` suckle him , but when you fear for him , cast him into the river , and do not fear or grieve , for we shall restore him to you and make him one of the messengers . ''
they made for him whatever he wished , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and basins like reservoirs , and basins like a little . give thanks , o house of david ! but few of my servants are grateful .
lest a soul should say : alas for me ! verily i was of the scoffers , that i was of those who scoffed .
these are the salawat from their lord , and mercy , and those are the guided .
and confers no favor upon anyone for reward
joseph , turn away from this , and you will ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed of the sinners . ''
who bar others from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
the king said , `` bring him to me . '' but when the king ’ s envoy came to joseph , he said : `` go back to your lord , and ask him who cut their hands . my lord knows very well their guile . ''
when it sees them from afar , they will hear its raging and roaring .
so do not assert similarities to allah . god knows and you do not know .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
you will see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression and devouring unlawful earnings . indeed what they do is evil .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
and we left hisfor posterity .
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were dead , and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will cause you to die , then to him you will be returned ?
so it is ; and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been given , then is again to be wronged , and indeed allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
`` o my people , tell me , if i were to follow the religion of my lord , the right path was from my lord , and to be devoted to it . what , do you turn away from this way ? ''
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
this is a reminder ; so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be blackened . and it will be said , `` this is what you used to call for . ''
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , just as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and it is mixed with tasneem .
it is a way to adhere to the way , to recite it to you . so turn your back towards him , and to him you are to be brought back . as for those who have been given the book , they are not aware of what they do .
and noah , when he called before , we heard him and saved him and his family from great distress .
they said , `` what is the punishment , if you are lying ? ''
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful , silver roofs for their houses , and stairs of silver which they ascend .
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will certainly say : `` allah . '' how then are they perverted ?
surely the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity
and whoever is a voice to be guided , to warn a portion of the book , he will see it for a good deed ; and allah is watchful over all things .
wherein they will live forever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
when the heaven is split asunder
so we took vengeance on them . both are on a clear roadway .
stirring up therebydust ,
he said : even if i brought you something manifest ?
and whatever alms ye expend or vow ye vow , allah knoweth it ; and the wrong-doers shall have no helpers .
answer your lord before there comes a day from god that will not be turned back from allah , on that day you will have no refuge , nor will you have any denial .
and he who is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him who has created the heavens and the earth , and he has created it , and he has created it , and has created it in a variety of various colors .
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they shall have no helpers .
so be patient . indeed , the promise of allah is true . whether we show you some of what we have promised them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
and in the alternation of night and day , and the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the changing of the winds , are signs for people who understand .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest in it , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are signs for a people who believe .
and had we not confirmed you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
who is it that will be a host for you to help you , besides the all-beneficent ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
and those who accuse their wives , but have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them is four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
those who have taken the covenant of allah after it has been mentioned , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . these are the verses of allah , and in the sight of allah , they are a way .
overcast with gloom .
the response of the believers , when they are called to god and his messenger , that he may judge between them , is only that they say : we hear and we obey . these are the successful .
nay ! if you knew with positive knowledge
and we never sent a warner to a town but the affluent among them said : `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
and they have a charge against me , so i fear they will kill me . ”
and he greedily desires that i should give him more .
so taste it , and for the disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
but as for him who came to you striving ,
and we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and the hour is surely coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and when thou dost see the whisper of them , they hide the word when it is recited to them , and he will call to speak , as it is . so , it is , for them , to keep up the right way , and then , to them is the way . so , and to keep up the way . and allah is the best to make things clear .
obey allah and obey the messenger ; but if you turn away , then the duty of our messenger is only to conveyplainly .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . they will all abide therein .
he said , “ yes , and you will be of those brought near . ”
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
in a seat of honor with a sovereign omnipotent .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah is aware of the unjust .
if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from allah ? indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise to allah and because they lied .
the building which they have built will never cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
they will not be able to harm you except a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
who fears the all-beneficent in secret and comes with a penitent heart .
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a monotheist , and was not one of the polytheists .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women , and good men are for good women , and good men are for good women . these are forgiveness and generous provision .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
and by the earth and him who spread it ,
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
he said , `` do you know what you did to joseph and his brother in your ignorance ? ''
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
those who had gone before this had said , `` woe to us ! '' and said , `` woe to us ! '' and allah increases and determines the sustenance of whomever he wants . and the disbelievers will not be able to make the earth to succeed .
the messengers told them : `` we are only like you , but allah guides whom you will . we have not been able to make our own servants but the believers . ''
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
a messenger from allah , reciting purified pages
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
and assuredly we created you , then we shaped you , then we said unto the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they fell prostrate , except iblis who was not of those who fell prostrate .
indeed , we have sent down to you a book with truth , so that you may judge between the people , so that you may judge between the people , and that god has given you guidance , and he is the one who follows the truth , and he is the one who follows the truth , but he is a liar .
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would hold them back for fear of spending , and man is ever niggardly . ''
to prayer , to prayer which you have been commanded to pray to the first of the first time , and for the first of them are the righteous , and allah loves those who purify themselves .
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
straight , to warn of a severe punishment from him and to give glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds , for them is a goodly reward .
i worship not that which ye worship ,
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
saying : `` o dear prophet ! be on the day of judgment when the hearts of those who are bent on denying the truth and the hearts of their hearts , and when the hearts of those who are bent on denying the truth will have no guardian or helper . ''
the messengers were also rejected before you , and they were wont to deny the truth , so that they might have no power to help them , so that they may come to us with the signs of allah , and assuredly there is a sign in that for allah ,
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . the messenger is only to communicate in clear terms .
and do not make your hand tiedto your neck , nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach , so that you become blameworthy and destitute .
and the thunder proclaims his praise , and the angels , in awe of him . and he sends the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he wills while they dispute about allah ; and he is mighty in prowess .
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
and they say , `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
as a hospitality from one oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
say : `` to whom belongs the earth and whosoever is in it , if you know ? ''
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
and in the morning it was as though it had been reaped .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
and lot believed in him , and said , “ i will migrate to my lord ; indeed he is the almighty , the wise . ”
surely what you are promised shall come to pass .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
and we had not given them scriptures which they could study , nor sent to them before thee any warner .
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
indeed , the way of allah is only for allah , and those who have taken apart from him other than him , those who have chosen other than him , say , `` we are only one of those who have taken to themselves other than allah . indeed , allah is the guardian of the arrogant . ''
we have createdof special creation .
their eyes will be humbled , and humiliation will cover them , and they were invited to prostrate themselves while they were sound .
he will speak to people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
do you not bring itback ?
indeed , we have to strike them for all the creatures , who is reminded of the creation , so that i may adhere to the truth , so that i may adhere to my mercy , and so was my disapproval .
but what is the life of the world and the present , and and and aaron , and and aaron , and from the children of israel , and from the children of israel , it is the same for them , and they will be brought back to the life of this world , and the life of the world to come is very fair , and the life of the world to come .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
so we will surely bring you magic like the like of it . so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to go back .
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
and the promise of god will be near , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , ‘ woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this , but we have been unjust . ’
they said : do not be afraid ; we give you glad tidings of a boy endowed with knowledge .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
he will speak to people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like an old shrivelled palm-leaf .
moses said , `` if i ask you about anything after this , do not keep me with me . you will have an excuse . ''
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would hold them back for fear of spending , and man is ever niggardly . ''
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
say , `` who provides for you from the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` god . '' say , `` it is god ; either we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ''
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . how little do you believe !
so wait patiently for the command of your lord , and do not obey any sinner or disbeliever .
and we know that some of you will deny .
what , do you consider any one of them to be a judge , while he has received the book , which has been revealed to you ? so it is , you will not be among the truthful .
it is a matter that is decreed for the cause of allah , which is in the way of allah , and the day of resurrection , to him will be the rest , and they are the ones to whom they will have a lie , and they will come to know .
`` this is no other than a thing . '' it will not be accepted from him , and he will speak to him , and say : `` do that which we are commanded , and obey the messenger , ''
he said : i did it then , when i was of those who are astray .
“ proceed to what you used to deny . ”
and the roasting in hell .
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
god originates creation , then reproduces it , then to him you will be returned .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and when our revelations are recited to them , those who are recited to our signs , are filled with pride , and the sight of those who are bent on denying our revelations are the ones who are bent on denying our revelations . say , `` is the one who do evil in the way of our signs ? '' , `` what is the matter with those who are bent on denying the truth ? '' and what is the matter with those who are faithless ,
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given the knowledge of all things . ''
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and if thou art of the wont to follow , then lo ! if thou art of any doubt , then let one of them be a better , and if thou art of the better , then let him be a witness . allah is the knower of what ye do .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
and solidified the mountains .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and tenderness from us and purity , and he was devout ,
on the day when you see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will be suckled by her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's punishment is severe .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ the truth is only for the disbelievers ; and they will not be blamed . ”
even if we take you away , we shall take vengeance on them ,
then winnow them thoroughly ,
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and after clear proofs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust .
and those who , when reminded of the signs of their lord , do not fall deaf and blind ,
we have sent down the qur'an to you in portions .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had smitten them . for those who do good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
say , “ if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship . ”
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
and when the messengers are collected at the appointed time ,
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you till a stated term . when it comes to the appointed time , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
so be patient , and be patient , and do not be a skeptic . when the day of judgment is just , just as a confirmation of the matter , it is just a confirmation of the truth .
for those who do good is goodness and more ; and neither darkness nor ignominy will cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , and they will remain in it .
and you make its denial your livelihood ?
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and my people , let me bring you out of mine , and let the people of noah fall down on that which struck the people of noah , hood , and salih , and the people of lot are not far away .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
they say , `` when will this promise come to pass , if you are truthful ? ''
those who believe , and have emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with god ; and it is they who are the triumphant .
and if it is that we should make it grow on the earth , and see that they would have become the like of it , that day , will be split up in fear , and to be mindful of allah 's command . and we are the senders ,
that we may show you some of our greater signs .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
on thrones , facing one another .
when jesus came with clear signs , he said , `` i have come to you with wisdom , and to make clear to you some of the matters about which you differ . so fear allah and obey me .
we relate to you their story with truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and beware of the day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall any compensation be accepted from it , nor shall they be helped .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
we have made all that is on the earth as an adornment for it so that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
and assuredly we created you , then we shaped you , then we said unto the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they fell prostrate , except iblis who was not of those who fell prostrate .
and verily it is a guidance and a mercy unto the believers .
those to whom we have given the book recite it as it ought to be read , they believe in it ; and whoever disbelieves in it , it is those who are the losers .
this is indeed the supreme triumph .
and when they said , “ o people of yathrib , there is no doubt about you , but others will go away from it , and others will say , ‘ our houses are exposed and our houses , but they are not in front of it . ’
again , be accursed , how he plotted !
well-pleased with their striving ,
have you not seen those who dispute about the signs of god ? how are they turned away ?
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , will be on the condemnation of allah , the angels , and all mankind .
but teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
except those who pray ,
by the mount ;
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give the people a speck .
and as for him who was born , and the believers , and they say , `` woe to you ! '' will you , then , say to him , `` what is the matter with you ? '' , `` what is the matter with you that you are to be a confirmer of it ? '' and the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . but the promise of allah is true .
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
the book has been revealed to you , when you have been called to disbelieve in it , and allah has been oblivious of the unbelievers . indeed , the hypocrites are indeed one of the disbelievers .
and the dwellers in the woodto
where then are you going ?
have we not made for him two eyes ?
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling ,
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
and if our clear revelations are recited to them , they say , “ this is the way of the path of allah , and say , ‘ this is magic , and it is magic , and those who deny the truth are clearly magic . ’ ”
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
or add to it , and recite the qur'an slowly and distinctly .
we have made the qur'an easy to understand , so is there any one who would remember ?
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
and those who dispute about our signs may know that they have no asylum .
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in a known measure .
he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . allah may bring them all to me . he is the knowing , the wise .
and they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ the truth is only for the disbelievers ; and they will not be blamed . ”
it was revealed to moses to moses , saying : `` take a part of the good news of a spring for him . it is the right of the two honourable . '' and we sent down the sun to the sea , and you are not unjust to us , but they were unjust .
they are those that are allah 's grace , and zakariya , and the children of ibrahim , and the seed of abraham , the upright , and when the signs of abraham came to them .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings an evil deed will only be recompensed for what they used to do .
lo ! the first houseappointed for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for al-'alamin .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . god is kind and merciful to you .
those before them plotted , but allah struck their structures from the foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
it has seven gates ; for every gate is a separate portion of them .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
say : `` do you teach god about your religion , while allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
so i swear by what you see
and if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , neither will you be wronged .
so that they may not worship allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
they are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and if only he had been among the two sayings , it was only a man of his own people , saying , `` indeed , we are a witness to our own people , and if you are truthful , we will surely be among the truthful . '' but if you are truthful , we will be among the truthful .
and do not think that those who are the people to their allies , are the ones to whom they spend the good pleasure of their own souls , and the means of good for them is good , but they are in the heavens and the earth . they are the ones who are in the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
god will certainly promise you to take his promise . the truth is to come to you , and some of them who are averse to their hearts , and some of them are averse to what they have done . and indeed , allah will surely give to you the good things to you . god is munificent and munificent .
and we have not sent you but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
'stamp thy foot ! here is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . god spoke to moses directly .
and the twain shall be told , 'go to the calf , his shirt 's hands , and the two of them are told , `` what is the matter with him ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with him that is a great punishment ? ''
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
on the day when the trumpet is blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
so wait ! they too are waiting .
do those who commit evil deeds imagine that we shall make them equal in the same way as those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal to the life of the world and the life to come ? how evil is the judgement that they make !
recite the course of allah , or a man who is a jew , or a christian . it is not a way to be accepted from the audience , and it is not a matter to be accepted from them . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
and the thunder proclaims his praise , and the angels , in awe of him . and he sends the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he wills while they dispute about allah ; and he is mighty in prowess .
and pharaoh led his people astray , he did not guide them .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do , and on the day when you will return to him , and he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of all things .
why then , if you are not indebted ,
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
god has decreed : `` i will surely prevail . i and my messengers will certainly prevail . ''
surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book , those -- they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
you will die , and they will die .
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth in truth , and the day when the truth is true , and the day when it is proclaimed , and the day the trumpet is blown , and he is the wise , the aware .
and there are a people in which you desire to go forth from among you , and people who are better guided in it , and when they are guided , it is only a right way , and if they are guided , it is they who are in error manifest .
he said , “ it is forbidden to them for forty years ; they will wander aimlessly in the land . so do not grieve over the disobedient people . ”
then he eased the way for him .
then he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
ask the city where we were and the caravan in which we came . we are truthful . ”
they will say : `` the day of judgment is the same , '' say : `` yes , '' say , `` yes , '' say , `` yes , '' say , `` yes , and my lord is the knower of the heavens and the earth , '' and even though it is the matter of all things .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
havingbranches .
and we have made the case to be a case for them , and we have separated from it , and what is in no disagreement after it came to them ; and your lord will judge between them concerning that which they are differing .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
it is a course that happens to you , a decisive word , when you are returned to the truth which allah has promised you , and he speaks the promise of god , and they say , `` the same is the same to allah , and he is the best to make you die , and if he wills , he will tell you what you are doing . ''
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves , saying , `` a warning to those who believe , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe , and those who stand firm in their faith . ''
this is their entertainment on the day of requital .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i convey unto you that wherewith i have been sent . but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
and unto 'aad we sent their brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were of the righteous .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
thus , and we made other people inherit them .
when the disciples said : o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if you are believers .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , “ god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ”
as provision for the servants , and with it we revive a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and those whom they used to invoke before will forsake them , and they will realize that they have no asylum .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
when it sees them from afar , they will hear its raging and roaring .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to dwell therein forever . this is the great success .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
and allah has made a clear book for the sun and the moon , and the alternation of the night and the day , and to recite it to the commands of allah , the means of truth is due to the people . and he has created the verses for a people who are guided .
beholdest thou ? if we let them enjoy for years ,
and those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever allah wills , he leaves astray , and whomever he wills he puts astray a straight path .
and we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o ye who believe ! stand up with the truth and bear with allah a right , and have no power to avert it , so that you may be godfearing . lo ! allah is aware of what you do .
and when they burst in upon david , he was afraid of them , but they said , “ do not be afraid ; one of them is one of the other , one of the other . do not be unjust to the other one else . show us the right way . ”
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sins . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
in the book of the book has been presented to the book . this quran is inspired in it , to recite the quran , and the qur'an is a lesson for the human being , even though he has knowledge of all things . they have knowledge of the unseen .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
surely your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
and said : `` shall we follow a mortal , from among us ? we will surely be in error and madness .
the believers will not be able to believe in the believers and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have no supporters in their faith . as for those who are bent on denying the truth , it is only a confirmation of what you have done , and to allah is your return .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
indeed , those who turn back after the guidance had become clear to them , satan has embellished their ways for them and has given them false hopes .
and for their taking usury , that they were forbidden , and because of their devouring people 's wealth , and among them among them we have prepared a painful punishment .
and if they are pleased with that which allah has given them , say , `` god is sufficient for us . '' and say , `` god will not grant to him a thing , and we will give him his grace , and we will give him to the righteous ones . ''
they have no faith . when they see our wrath , they will believe in it . indeed , it is for allah ’ s servants to have a loss .
and we will surely test you until we know the strivers among you and those who are steadfast , and we will try your reported .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
this is hell which the guilty called a lie .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
and those who believed and migrated , and struggled in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , those are the believers ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
by the dawn ,
and he inspected the birds , and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it ; surely he was unjust , ignorant .
we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ''
and do not say about what your tongues assert , `` this is lawful , and this is lawful , so that you may invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper . ''
surely those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
have you not seen those who were bent on denying the truth and the people of the book , saying , `` if you are driven away , we will not help you , and if you have no faith in us , then indeed , allah is witness to the liars . ''
when we bless man , he turns away and withdraws aside ; but when evil touches him , he is full of endless prayers .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for ungratefulness and led their people into perdition ?
so we saved him and those with him by mercy from us , and we cut off the roots of those who denied our signs and were not believers .
and they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
and among them are some who listen to you , but when they leave the presence of your presence , they say , `` what has he said now ? '' those are they whose hearts allah has sealed , and they follow their lusts .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
it is not allowable for them , nor are they capable .
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and the last , the last , and the outward , the all-knower .
arise and warn .
have you heard the story of the children of israel after moses said to their messenger , `` bring him to the cause of god ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with you that if you have spoken to the cause of god , he says , `` what is the matter with you that you will not be able to turn away from the way of god ? '' then they will not be able to turn away from the way of god .
we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride and some they eat .
never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
she screened herself from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
the sun and the moon have been determined for them , for the sun 's invited to the sun and the moon . and whoever is freed from evil , it is with a great punishment , and that which you have been wont to do .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that will remember ?
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein forever . they will abide therein forever .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan ? he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and is careful ofhim , they are the winners .
and follow the limits of abraham , isaac , and jacob , not a son . it was not for us to associate with allah any one . and he is of the thankful .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments , and we threw them , and thus was the samiri . ''
but if you wish to replace one another with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take it away from it . would you take it by slander and open sin ?
among you is he who loitereth ; and if a misfortune befalls you , he said , `` god has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ''
'adbelied , then howwas my punishment and my warning ?
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do , and on the day when you will return to him , and he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of all things .
wherein they will dwell forever , desiring no removal from them .
wherein they will live forever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
verily , those who disbelieve in our signs , we shall roast them into a fire . as often as their skins are cooked , we shall replace them with other skins so that they may taste the punishment , for allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who do wrong . they will be drowned . ''
and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
and when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you commit a painful punishment , whereas i have come to you with a noble messenger ? ” but when they are returned to the truth , allah does not guide the guilty people .
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word will be fulfilled , and i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and when those whom they call upon , and those whom they call upon , they will say : our lord ! these are they whom they call upon , and they say : our lord ! lo ! it is they who are the false , and they say : verily ye are lying .
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and the angels , and the men of knowledge . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
but he who suspects wrong or partiality on the part of the testator , and brings on the parties a settlement , there is no sin for him . god is forgiving and merciful .
and when they are their liking , they will say , “ this is our religion , and if evil touches them , they speak to him , and what is with you is the most honourable , the most merciful . ”
say , `` if you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , you would hold them back for fear of spending , and man is ever niggardly . ''
offspring , one of the other . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
no associate has he ; and this i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
so , as for the creation of the qur'an , he has created the creation of the two seas , and when they are averse to the truth , they treat it as a screen , and if you are to see , we will surely gather you as you are like the like of it .
so i swear by what you see
that is because you used to rejoice on earth without right , and that you used to behave insolently .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be blackened . and it will be said , `` this is what you used to call for . ''
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds . ''
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
rivalrydistracted you
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . allah may bring them all to me . he is the knowing , the wise .
has the story of the overwhelming event reached you ?
except those of the idolaters with whom you have made a treaty , then they have not failed you in aught , nor have supported anyone against you . fulfil their treaty with them till their term . god loves the righteous .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
but he who suspects wrong or partiality on the part of the testator , and brings on the parties a settlement , there is no sin for him . god is forgiving and merciful .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and the believers are you , and the believers , and the believers , and the believers are , and they will not be called to account for them , and it is a right course for them , and it is a right course for the believers , and it is a right course to the believers . it is a straight course for them .
and you are a resident of this city .
and they will question you concerning the best of this , and say , `` the right way is better than the right way ; and if you are guided , it is as a way to the right way . god is majestic and all-wise . ''
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in your hearts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play ; indeed the home of the hereafter is the life to come , if only they knew !
and then severed his life-vein .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so whoever wills may remember it .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion is wholly wholly . but if they desist , allah is seeing of what they do .
say : `` a man who is in the presence of allah that you should be of the ones to whom you do not go back from the truth . '' and he is the best of those who do good , and the way of allah are the best of the right and the right path .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but man is the most disputatious of things .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
surely we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
they used to sleep but little by night ,
is he who has brought the dead to light , and to make it a light for people who are in darkness and light ? such is the result of their deeds . thus do they know what they have done .
indeed the criminals will be in the punishment of hell , abiding eternally .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon besides him is false ; and allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearing death ; and allah surrounds the disbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` if i have fabricated it , my guilt is upon me , and i am innocent of what you commit . ''
as for him who is given his hand in the presence of his wife , he will say to his family , `` do not turn to the footsteps of the good news of what we have given to him . '' or that we may give them a guidance , or a guidance , and a guidance for the people of the earth ; and that is how they do not know .
like the shaitan , when he says to man , `` disbelieve , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the creation . ”
who is he that will lend allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you will be returned .
as for him who is given a sign , he is too worthy of all that is in his presence , and to him do good deeds , and he will give them good deeds , and the evil is the most severe .
by the sky and the night-visitor ,
he said : 'have you considered what you worship ,
and on the contrary , it is a garment for them , a garment of gold and a garment for them ; and they will be made to live therein for ever .
or that he will not seize them in theiractivity , and they will not be able to escape .
say : allah knows the secret in the cave in the cave ; and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth is allah 's ; and he is not of the trustee .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : `` allah . '' how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends , but many of them are disobedient .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
the day when they will hear the blast in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
`` o my people , tell me , if i had the truth from my lord , the right and the mercy of my lord was better , and he would have received me your mercy , if you should be of the truthful . ''
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : o my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges .
say , “ who is the lord of the seven heavens , and the lord of the thronesupreme ? ”
and the mountains are set in motion , and become a mirage .
and the children of israel and the children of israel , and pharaoh and his hosts , and came with them , they said , `` this is no god except allah , who is the only god , the children of israel . '' so he said , `` i believe in allah , the children of israel . ''
and your lord has said , `` call upon me , i will respond to you . indeed , those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ''
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
on the day when the heaven will shake with a dreadful shaking ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
surely those who disbelieve say : allah is there : there is no god but he . but if ye do not desist , there is no god but he ; and for those who disbelieve there will be a painful punishment .
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play . we will take care of him . ''
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is yellow , ” he said , “ he says , a yellow heifer , bright yellow , pleasing to the beholders . ”
peace—a saying from the merciful lord .
they are those that are allah 's grace , and zakariya , and the children of ibrahim , and the seed of abraham , the upright , and when the signs of abraham came to them .
likewise , no messenger came to those before them but they said , `` a sorcerer or a madman . ''
so we seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea . he was blameworthy .
will you not then remember ?
by the much-frequented house ,
then is there not a town that believed and benefited by its belief ? but when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world , and we gave them enjoyment for a time .
no indeed ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
o dear prophet , ask forgiveness for you , or do not ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will never forgive them . indeed , they have no faith in allah and his messenger , and allah does not guide the transgressors .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . god has made account of them while they forgot it . god is witness over everything .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
as for those who hold fast to the book and keep up prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
have they not seen the earth , that they might see the end of their former generations , and how was the end of those who have gone before them ? and allah is ever free of all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is all-powerful and all-powerful .
satan has gained the mastery over them , so he has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . indeed , the party of satan is the losers .
beautified is the life of this world for those who disbelieve , and they scoff at those who believe , and those who are godfearing will be above them on the day of resurrection . god gives whom he wills without account .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
the revelation of this book is from the lord of the worlds .
thereafter you will surely die .
a group of them , they say , `` a group of them will be addressed by what they say . '' and he who makes the book enter the book to continue in the book , he will say : `` this is god 's revelations , that he has sent down to him , and that god is not going to invent lies . ''
they said , ‘ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and tall palm-trees with compact spathes
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . god knows all that is inhearts .
and what he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues , surely in this is a sign for people who remember .
as for those who do good , they are responsible for what they have done . to him is a pattern for him , as a confirmation of the believers , and the like of it is the same for those who believe , and those who have faith in allah , and those who have been unjust will know that they are to know .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and we will not be punished . ''
those who do not believe in the signs of allah do not believe in the signs of allah . these are the liars .
god will not lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should avoid . god has knowledge of all things .
and cite for them the parable of two men , to one of whom we had provided two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with palm trees and placed between them tillage .
it will be a day when no soul will be exchanged for another , and that day , will bewith allah .
and assuredly we have brought unto them a book which we expounded with knowledge , and a guidance and a mercy unto a people who believe .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . if they are in their hearts , they will be in their hearts , or allah 's heart , or he will give you account of whomever he wills . and he has power over all things .
verily allah ! he is the provider , owner of power , strong .
that is the bounty of allah , and he bestows it on whom he pleases . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
for a reminder , and we never harmed .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you ask for .
so we took vengeance on them . both are on a clear roadway .
he is the living , there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
and indeed those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will , but most people do not know . '
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
it is he who made the night for you to rest , and the day to make visibility . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse not save infidelity .
and when distress befalls you at sea , all those whom you invoke forsake you . but when he delivers you safely to the land , you turn away . man is ever ungrateful .
verily man is in loss ,
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , none will speak except him whom the most merciful has given permission , and he will speak to him what is right .
and the messenger will say , “ my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ”
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
inform my servants that i am the forgiving , the merciful ,
your lord has decreed for you , other than him , that you should worship other than him ; and when one of them is an ant , do not speak to the right side of the two and the right .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they entreat .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? rather , you are a people transgressing .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more severe ; and they will not be able to save them from allah .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and they are oblivious of the hereafter .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
enter paradise , you and your spouses , joyfully .
and let not their wealth and their children impress you . allah only desires to punish them with these in this world , and that their souls may depart while they are disbelievers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a lying , sinful forelock .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he established his throne on the throne . the merciful is the most knowing .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
and raiding at dawn
god said , `` indeed , i will send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i will not punish anyone in the world to come . ''
and recall what time allah hath made you their successors after the posterity , and we made for them the land , and made the land fairseeming unto thee in the land , and make mischief in the land .
indeed , i should be in manifest error .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth , and there is no change in the creation of allah . there is no changing the creation of allah . this is the right religion , but most people do not know .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
and indeed we sent among them warners .
and it is he who has created man from water , and made him kindred of blood and marriage . your lord is all-powerful .
then it will be said to them : `` where are those whom you associated ? ''
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they ask thee about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the chiefs are conspiring to kill you , so leave . i am your well-wisher . ”
storming tempestuously
o people of the book ! why do you dispute about abraham when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not exercise your reason ?
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will the people of the wrong be destroyed ? ''
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
gardens of eden they shall enter , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be of silk .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein ; and they are the worst of creatures .
alif . lam . mim .
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and when it is said to them , `` spend out of what god has provided for you , those who have faith say to those who believe : `` shall we feed those whom god has made to feed ? you are only in clear error . ''
there is a book in the book . the quran is presented to the tongue of this quran . this is a clear knowledge , to say : `` allah is the knower of the unseen and the seen , '' and the knowledge of the book is with allah .
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that god has power over all things ?
for those who do good is goodness and more ; and neither darkness nor ignominy will cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , and they will remain in it .
say : `` a man who is in the presence of allah that you should be of the ones to whom you do not go back from the truth . '' and he is the best of those who do good , and the way of allah are the best of the right and the right path .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him .
in it the angels and the spirit descend by the permission of their lord with every command .
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and when the believing men and their covenant have not been given to you , they do not consider it to allah . and do not speak to him with any evil , and do not speak to them with an evil word . indeed , allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and the story of noah to his people . he said , ‘ o my people ! if you have done so , my people , if you are truthful , i have no relation with my religion , and then do not keep me with my religion , for then do not be a skeptic . ’
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof , and your lord is watchful over everything .
o man ! there is no god but he , there is a god but he , and he forgives you , and ask forgiveness of you , and so that he may show you the right way , so that you may be guided .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and we raised him to a high position .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were of the righteous .
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do this . so patience is better ; and allah is help against that which ye ascribe .
thus we diversify the verses , so that they may say , `` you have studied , '' and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he said : `` o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and graced them with freshnessand joy .
it is a word that has been revealed to them from a piece of what they say , and a barrier between them , and a barrier between them and with allah and his messenger , and with allah and his messenger . god bears witness that they are liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were of the righteous .
of his kind was abraham .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah is aware of the unjust .
to bring every wellversed sorcerer to you . ''
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger ; and whoever opposes allah , then surely allah is severe in punishment .
and these similitudes we strike for mankind , but none shall understand them save those who understand .
and if an evil suggestion comes to them , or spend in the future , they will be made to die , and if they are averse to it , they will have no fear ; and if they are patient , they will have no fear . god is the guardian of all things .
those who believe fight in the cause of god , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
`` o my people , tell me , if i had the truth from my lord , the right and the mercy of my lord was better , and he would have received me your mercy , if you should be of the truthful . ''
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . so enjoy yourselves , for you will soon come to know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those who know .
and by the book inscribed
but allah has been gracious to us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
and that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is aware and sees his servants .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
he said , “ who is your lord , moses ? ”
is he who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste what you used to earn ? ''
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels , `` was it you that these people used to worship ? ''
no indeed ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
those are they whom allah guided , so follow their guidance . say : `` i ask of you no reward for it ; it is only a reminder to all mankind . ''
and verily i desire that thou shalt be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become of the fellows of the fire : that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse not save infidelity .
or that he will not seize them by a process of slow wastage
say , “ whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , god knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ; and allah has power over all things . ”
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before , and tasted the evil consequence of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
and we have put a barrier before them and a barrier behind them , and we have covered them up so that they can not see .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and do not give up your property except the benefit of your property , unless it be the extent of the extent that the extent of which you have been commanded , and do not measure , for it is the same for you , that your lord may tell you what you have done .
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and when they said , “ o people of yathrib , there is no doubt about you , but others will go away from it , and others will say , ‘ our houses are exposed and our houses , but they are not in front of it . ’
we shall bring to them their hearts , with which they are bound to flow with it . they will say , `` praise be to allah who has guided us to what you have been commanded , and indeed , it is he who has been the guided of what you used to do . ''
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ''
`` what is the matter with you that you do not help one another ? ''
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
anda quran which we have divided , in order that you may recite it to mankind at intervals , and we have revealed it .
so hasten thou not against them . we are counting for them anumber .
and those who guard their private parts
but whoever seeks to go beyond that—these are the transgressors .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord willed , all those who are on earth would have believed . will you then force people until they become believers ?
how many a sign there has come to them from your lord , so he who is upright and follows the right path , he is the foresaker of him who turns his back , and he is the guardian of it .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening , and on the day when the hour is established , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the most terrible chastisement . ''
or receive someadvice which would benefit him ?
then an entertainment of boiling water
he said , “ will i trust you with him as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
a brief enioyment , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
`` till the day of the time appointed . ''
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear allah , so do you not understand ?
have you not seen that allah will take you out of the heaven upon the coming of the heaven ? then he will make it one of the like of the like of it , and to whomsoever god will bring forth the like of it , to whomever he wills . and to whomsoever he will , will come to light .
crystal-clear , made of silver ; they will determine the measure thereof .
and other spoils that you have not taken , but allah has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
and by the moon when she follows him ,
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
do you not see that the ships sail through the sea by allah ’ s grace , that he may show you some of his signs ? indeed in that are signs for every patient and grateful .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
this is the creation of allah ; now show me what those besides him have created . rather , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
what , do you come to males ,
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a monotheist , and was not one of the polytheists .
o you who believe ! do not take the unbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do you wish to give allah a clear authority against yourselves ?
pharaoh said , `` o people , i am no other than that which you do not speak except me , o you , , o haman , do not say to me , `` o you who have been given the truth , o you who have received the truth . ''
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
or receive someadvice which would benefit him ?
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment . ”
do not be grieved by their lord in the mornings and in the evenings ; and their reckoning is not for you , and the reckoning is not for you to be of those who do not see .
but he tarried not long , and said , “ i have learnt what you did not comprehend . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and madesmooth for him .
this day you will not be able to benefit or harm one another . we will say to the evildoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
when his lord said to him , ‘ submit ! ’ he said , ‘ i have submitted to the lord of the worlds . ’
and what is the matter with you , that you are not in the heavens and the earth , but whatever there is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah , and the future is to him , and allah is the subtle , the merciful .
when abraham said to his father azar , `` do you take idols for gods ? i see you and your people in manifest error . ''
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the perishing .
say : o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , and allah is witness of what you do ?
the lightning almost snatches away their eyes . when it flashes forth to them , they will be in it , and when it flashes forth , they stand in their hearts , and if allah willed , he could have put away their hearing , and allah has power over all things .
when you turn away from us , the hypocrites say , `` do not ask your lord to ask you for his forgiveness . '' say , `` do not ask forgiveness of your lord , for god and his messenger will be brought back to you , and then you will have to return to what you have done . ''
some faces on that day will be bright ,
but they will not remember , unless allah wills ; he is worthy to be feared , and he is worthy to forgive .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
on the day when they behold the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty , and they will say : `` a ban forbidden ! ''
and when they passed them by winking at one another ,
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot , and allwe preferred over the worlds .
in order to make a lesson for them , the message has come to them , and to make clear to all things in order to make clear to all things . moses said to the people , `` do what they have been doing . ''
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and by the moon when it grows full ,
so that , when the apostles are tried , in fact , a falsehood , that is a falsehood , that is the most disputatious of people . and whoever will be a liar , we shall surely be a liar .
exalted is he and high above what they say .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we cited for you how we dealt with them .
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and they will be given to drink of a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
and if you find no one in it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told to go away , you will be told , `` if you are given a message from you , do not go back . ''
nay ! they say : `` we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps . ''
thus do we reward the virtuous .
again , woe to you , and woe !
on thrones , facing one another .
and before them , the people of noah , who were more unjust and insolent .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we shall requite them the worst of what they used to do .
and there is no blame on you for the bounty of your lord for you , but when you turn away from 'arafat , remember god , and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were among those astray .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was a tyrant in the land .
doer of whatever he wills .
this is so , when he came to clear signs , and clear signs , but they denied the truth , but allah is a severe punishment .
he said , `` o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? you put him behind your backs . my lord encompasses all that you do .
he said : 'lot is in it . they said : we know well who is in it . we shall save him and his family , except his wife ; she shall be of those who remain behind . '
we never descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us and what is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
so go forth with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you turn back , and go back to where you are commanded . ''
and of them are some who look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they see not ?
tell my servants to say that which is best , for satan sows discord among them . indeed satan is an open enemy to mankind .
is he who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste what you used to earn ? ''
these are they whose works have failed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o you who believe ! fear allah and believe in his messenger . he will give you a double portion of his mercy , and will give you a light by which you will walk , and forgive you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
surely in that is a lesson for him who fears .
and to midian we sent their brother shu'aib . he said : o my people ! worship allah , and fear the last day , and do not commit evil in the land .
then we have made the quran to be a guide for those of them who have been wronged . some of them are some of the people of the same way , and some of them are averse .
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` nay , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste . ''
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
indeed , the reward of those who oppose allah and his messenger , and make mischief in the land , it will be for you to be free from the earth , and to them is a terrible punishment .
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent slave .
so that they are the ones who told the truth , and the devils will not be called to account for the people of the truth . they are the ones who have received the truth , and they have no knowledge of this , and they will have no power to do anything .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and we created you in pairs ,
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
verily this qur'an relates to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
and who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and fruits such as they desire .
again , be accursed , how he plotted !
then we revealed to you , “ follow the religion of abraham , the hanif , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
for the beggar and the outcast ;
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they will return .
averted from it is he who is turned away .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
or do they say , `` he has invented it ? '' say , `` then bring a surah like it and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
we sent against them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble of a fold-builder .
or have we sent down to them any authority that speaks about them ?
and thus we have sent it down as a decision in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge which has come to you , you will have no guardian or defender against allah .
fight them , god will punish them by your hands , and humiliate them , and help you against them , and heal the breasts of a believing people .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
they say , `` these are confused dreams , but he has invented it . '' rather , he is a poet . so let him bring us a sign , as the messengers were sent to us .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
and the divorced women shall be sent down on the three sides , that be lawful for them , and speak not to them that which allah hath created , and for them is the word of the hereafter , if they are in the right way , and the maintenance of their persons are in the right way .
then , on the contrary , some of them are like a piece of stones , and of the sky is split asunder , and some of them fear allah , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
hesaid : 'this is the truth , and i speak the truth :
and gathered unto solomon of the jinn and humankind , and the birds , and they were gathered in ranks ,
and raiding at dawn
nay , but it is a glorious qur'an ,
if you call upon them , they do not hear your prayer , and if they heard , they would not answer you . on the day of resurrection they will disown your partnership . none can inform you like him who is aware .
in parchment unrolled .
and all have degrees according to what they did ; and your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say : `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
except those who believe and do good deeds , for they will have a reward uninterrupted .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by god ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you with truth , and allah does not desire any injustice to the worlds .
in a book well-guarded .
they ask thee about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
and had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whomever he wills into his mercy ; and the wrongdoers have neither any protector nor helper .
and confers no favor upon anyone for reward
and extended shade ,
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while . you are indeed guilty .
and hearkens to allah and his messenger , and his noble messenger , and the teaching of them , and if they should go forth , they would have taken it back , and indeed , allah is with those who are patient , and the steadfast .
and when the messengers came to them from before them and behind them , they said , `` do not worship anyone except allah . '' they said , `` if our lord had pleased he would not have sent down angels . we believe in what you have been sent with . ''
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has appointed darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them tocategories of the worldly life , so that we may test them in the life of this world , and your lord is better and more enduring .
and as for those who have knowledge of knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord of the truth , and he is the subtle , the merciful .
except those on whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in their lord , their works are like ashes which a wind blows furiously on a stormy day . they have no power over that which they have earned . that is the extreme error .
and whoever is blind in this world , will be blind in the hereafter , and more astray .
he invokes instead of allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
but those whose scales are light are those who have lost their souls , in hell they will abide .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray , and we shall trample them under our feet so that they may be among the lowest .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
and those who stand firm in their testimonies .
he said , “ your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the heavens and the earth , and i am one of the witnesses . ”
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
and he had no party to help him against allah , nor was he able to defend himself .
indeed , the first part of the night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
the imminentis near at hand .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
he created man .
and to allah prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and their shadows in the morning and evening .
allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . those who deny the truth will enjoy themselves and eat as cattle eat . the fire will be their lodging .
honourablel scribes .
none besides allah can unveil it .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
the piercing star .
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no guardians besides allah , and you will not be helped .
they said , “ o lot , we have come to the punishment of the noble messenger – you will not be able to accept the course of the night , except the one of you who has spoken to the truth . what , the promise of god is near ? ”
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of night and day , are signs for men of understanding .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he was far astray . ''
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be constant in it . we do not ask you for any sustenance , but we provide for you . the outcome is for the cautious .
and withthamud , who clove the rocks in the valley .
and those speeding along with ease ,
they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant ; it is they who are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worship .
of his kind was abraham .
he it is who drives for you the sea , so that he may make clear to them the right path , and that the right path is on the right side of the night , and they will have a terrible punishment in the morning , and they will be of the people who are upright , and they are not to be of the believers .
what , are you teaching the right path to the sacred mosque , as the one who believes in god and the last day , as he who believes in god and the last day ? such are the two groups . god does not guide the unjust people .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen those who were told to be told , `` do not be afraid ? '' but when you have entered the prayer , do not pray to the people of the right hand , or say to them , `` this is the enjoyment of the hereafter , if only you were to have a little . ''
say : `` each one acts according to his disposition , and your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
and be wary of the sun , and the moon ; and whoever does so , he will have a dispute , and he is the one who does so with his own , and indeed , allah is the best of those who are godwary .
who taught by the pen ,
and keep your duty to allah , and be dutiful to him , and if it is a matter , he is rightly guided , to him who is upright , or is it that he is the one who is upright , and that he is the one who is upright , so that he may make a division . that is a great punishment for him who is upright .
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
so he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
`` o yusuf ! o man of truth ! expound to us the seven fat kine which seven lean ones were eating , and seven green ears of corn and seven seared , that i may return to the people , so that they may know . ''
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah suffices as witness .
and my people , let me bring you out of mine , and let the people of noah fall down on that which struck the people of noah , hood , and salih , and the people of lot are not far away .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
and allah will vindicate the truth by his words , even though the guilty may detest .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
he directs the affair from heaven to earth , then it will ascend to him in a day whose measure is a thousand years of your reckoning .
when allah has made a covenant with the messengers of the messengers , they said , `` i have sent to me a messenger from which you had been sent to me . '' and he said , “ you have received me , and i will say , ‘ do so and inform me of what you are commanded . ’ ”
and pharaoh led his people astray , he did not guide them .
there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
so believe in allah and his messenger , and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening , and on the day when the hour is established , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the most terrible chastisement . ''
he said , “ my lord , i seek refuge with you from asking you something of that which i have no knowledge . and if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i will be among the losers . ”
do you then hope that they will have faith in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it , after they understood it ?
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
do they not ponder the quran ? had it been from other than allah , they would have found therein many contradictions .
and appoint for me a minister from my family
have you not seen those who do not give the lie to the truth , but then they will be guided by their transgression and disobedience to the messenger ? and when they are greeted with you , they will be greeted with , and evil is what they say .
i fear my kinsmen , after me , my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
you will certainly see hell .
and it will be said : call upon your associate-gods . they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the torment , if only they had been guided .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . to him belongs all praise . he is powerful over everything .
the messenger of the believers have believed in their lord and the messengers who have received the revelation from their lord and the angels and the injeel ] . they will say , `` you are only ignorant ones . ''
murmuring among themselves : `` you have tarried but ten days . ''
and fear a day when no soul shall avail another , nor will any ransom be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor will they be helped .
you can not guide whom you love , but allah guides whom he wills . and he knows best those who are guided .
have you seen what you sow ?
and those who believed and migrated , and struggled in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , those are the believers ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
they said , `` glory be to you . we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ''
and if they were to see a fragment of the heaven falling down , they would say , `` clouds heaped up . ''
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their promise to allah and because they lied .
a believer of pharaoh 's people , that he may say : `` should i save you from the way of your lord ? '' he said , `` should i deliver to him the way of your lord ? '' but if you should be truthful , he would have certainly been warned , and if you are truthful , i am the most disputatious of people .
it is not in the way of allah , that he may make good for you , but it is that you are the ones to whom you will have the right hand , and that you will be the best to give guidance .
those who do not believe in the hereafter will say to them , `` when will come to pass ? '' and they say , `` when will the believers believe in it ? '' indeed , those who dispute about the hereafter are in a right course .
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
or he combines them males and females , and he renders barren whomever he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
then , on the contrary , some of them are like a piece of stones , and of the sky is split asunder , and some of them fear allah , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
we are the rangers ,
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world , and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
they are nothing but names which you have named , you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and their own desires . yet guidance has come to them from their lord .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you , and if you revert , we will revert . we have made hell a prison for the unbelievers .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
o you who believe ! let not your wealth or your children distract you from the remembrance of allah , and whoever does that—these are the losers .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that you have spoken the truth to us and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
we have indeed created man in the best stature
for the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their possessions , seeking bounty from god , and help god and his messenger , and help him . these are the truthful ones .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time the messenger came to a nation they belied him , so we made them follow one another . so away with a people who do not believe .
yet they assign to him some of his ownworshipers ! man is clearly ungrateful .
let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter . and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall give him a great reward .
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought forth .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and favours , he says , `` my lord has honoured me . ''
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
is he who has deserved the decree of punishment ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be decided , while they are heedless and do not believe .
and we put veils over their hearts that they may understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
moses said to them , “ throw whatever you are going to throw . ”
and moses said to his people , `` o my lord , if you were to follow me , he said , ‘ my lord ! if i had spoken to me , is it that i had no knowledge of what you used to do ? ’ you are only one of those who have been guided , and you are the best of the best .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
does he have knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and graced them with freshnessand joy .
and cite for them the parable of the landlords of the town—when the messengers came to it .
are these not the ones whom you swore that allah would not have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , and fear no fear , nor shall you grieve .
so you will see the fire that you will be burned in the fire , and to remain in it . those who believe say to them : `` the unbelievers are the ones who are the ones who will suffer the right way .
and we have not appointed for the people of the fire any other than a matter for those who disbelieve , and to those who have been given the lie to the truth , it is only for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and that the disbelievers may say to the believers : `` what is the matter with god that he will guide the believers ? '' and it is only for him that he will guide . and it is only for him that he will guide .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
surelyis one of the greatest ,
and do not give the feeble-minded your property which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed it and clothe them , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
your lord would not destroy the towns unjustly while their people were righteous .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
and if man we shall give good man , he will say to them , `` this is a wonderful thing , '' and he has made it a great thing ; and if it was to my lord , he is the best of those who are bent on denying the truth , and to the end of those who were bent on denying the truth .
whoever is opposed to the messenger , then after the guidance has been shown to the believers , it is a guidance for the believers , and he will admit the righteous .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity ; and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
the foolish , when the people are brought to the bottom of the good , when they are asked to be given the good deed , do not give it to your money , and be wary of allah , and do not be a skeptic .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels before us .
they are more awful in their hearts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
o you who believe ! do not betray allah and the messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and allah will guide you with the truth . but if the two of them were to be mentioned , the two of them were to say to the two of them , “ it is the same for the parents and the relatives , and if only a right had been accepted from them , it was only a confirmation of what is before them , and if only he was a noble messenger , it was a proper matter for him . ”
and the women of the idolaters do not believe until the truth is better for those who believe , and the truth is better for the polytheists ; and it is they who are the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
god , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ’
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
if you are saying to this , ‘ your people , then , have deceived you , i have heard what you have preached to me . i have no power to harm you in the least , for indeed my lord has power over all things . ’
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your footsteps , lest you become losers .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be set in array ,
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
so turn away from them , for you are not to be blamed .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments , and we threw them , and thus was the samiri . ''
and the women of the idolaters do not believe until the truth is better for those who believe , and the truth is better for the polytheists ; and it is they who are the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable .
recite the course of allah , or a man who is a jew , or a christian . it is not a way to be accepted from the audience , and it is not a matter to be accepted from them . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
we enjoin the commands of good to the parents and the relatives , and to the mother of the moon , to the poor , and the declining of the moon , until the day of judgment , and i am commanded to be of the righteous . i am commanded to give you the right way , and i am commanded to give you a right way .
and if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth , they will say , `` god 's . '' they will say , `` god will bring to them what they want , and say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . '' say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . '' say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . '' say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . ''
that is the extent of their knowledge . your lord knows best who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
as for him who has been sent down to his lord , his messenger has been sent down to him , and a guidance , and a mercy to those who do not believe in the truth , and do not be of the believers .
god says , `` do not take two gods . he is only one god . so fear me alone . ''
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be sent down against them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : `` mock ! god will surely bring to light what you fear . ''
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
and among them are some who criticize you concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given from it , they are pleased , and if they are given from it , they become angry .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow ; that is the great success .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you judge ?
these towns—we narrate to you some of their stories . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus god seals the hearts of those who deny the truth .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
and had allah willed , he could have made them one community , but he admits whomever he wills into his mercy ; and the wrongdoers have neither any protector nor helper .
o you theenwrapped one !
and placed therein lofty mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and landmarks . and by the stars they are guided .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
o ye who believe ! establish the steps of the sun for the time when they are bidden to be sent down after it , and when it is in the midst of it , then after it there is a decree for you , after it is decreed for you , and after it is decreed for you ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
and in the alternation of night and day , and the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the changing of the winds , are signs for people who understand .
he said : i am better than he . thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt .
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the chiefs are conspiring to kill you , so leave . i am your well-wisher . ”
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is clement , merciful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . it is an indecency , and an evil way .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
and your people reject it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
he invokes instead of allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
it came to the people of the city saying : `` o my father ! make for us a good reward , andto make us a recompense for it , and make for us the recompense of your father . '' he said , `` do not be afraid . you are not unjust to the people . '' he said , `` do not be afraid . ''
and when it is said to them , “ follow what god has sent down , ” they say , “ nay , we will follow what we found our parents ” ; what ! even if satan were calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
till he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
and protect them from the evil consequences of evil deeds ; and whomsoever you protect from evil will be on the day of resurrection . that is the supreme success .
some of the bedouin arabs around you are hypocrites , and some of the townspeople of madinah . you do not know them . we do not know them . we will punish them , then they will be brought back to a severe punishment .
are they not waiting for what the angels say to the first death , or your lord will be of those who are bent on denying the truth on the day of resurrection ? say to those who believe , `` the command of your lord will be on the day of judgment . '' say , `` the command of your lord will be true . ''
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none payeth heed except him who turns to him .
when the scrolls are laid open ,
so i swear by what you see
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein ; and they are the worst of creatures .
and if some of you believe in what i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . ''
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , ‘ this is my lord ! ’ but when it set , he said , “ if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people astray . ”
have you not considered how allah sets forth a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firm , and its branches are in the sky .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold . ”
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a group of them turns away ?
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in station and best in station ?
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before , and tasted the evil consequence of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul will see its good deeds , and as an example for the good of it , it will wish for the evil of it , and allah will lead you into a great distance . god is kind towards the servants .
and thus we have sent it down as a decision in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge which has come to you , you will have no guardian or defender against allah .
that he may pay them their wages in full and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
nor is it the word of a soothsayer ; little is it that you remember !
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
and when it is said to him , “ fear allah ” , he becomes more resolute in sin . so enough is it for him , a hapless dwelling !
when their brother hud said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that they are forced up .
say , “ my lord has established the command of justice , and in all things they hear , and their hearts and their skins are in different parts . and to him you will be brought back . ”
“ set out with my servants by night . you will be pursued . ”
to you is the case , and of your hearts , and you in the midst of your own abode , and then turn away from the dwellings of the companions of the garden , and they will have what they want .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed unjust . ”
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
therefore remind , you are only a reminder .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are unbelievers , never be accepted from any of them , even if it is accepted from them , it would not be accepted from them , nor would they have any helpers .
that is because you took the signs of allah for you , and the life of this world deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to please allah .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah . ye have no other god save him . will ye not ward off ?
and it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that they will bring it down , and we will bring it into a light , and a light , and a condiment for a people who are upright . indeed , there are signs in this for a people who believe .
see how they invent examples for you . they have gone astray and can not find a way .
and those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
and when it is said unto them : what is it that your lord hath sent down ? they say : fables of the ancients .
when he ran away to the laden ship ,
i ask of you no wage for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and the wicked will be in hell ,
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
this is a warner of the warners of old .
to us is their return .
in a lofty garden .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all .
as for those who were before you , they were destroyed by your wealth and your lives . then by the means of what they have been related to you , are the same , as if they were to be mentioned . they are the ones who are in the same way . they are the ones who are in the same way .
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ this is sorcery , and we reject it . ”
except those on whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
we have made all that is on the earth as an adornment for it so that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
those who are the lord of the throne will not respond to those who glorify the praises of allah , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness for them , and say , `` our lord , give us mercy from those who have faith and say , `` our lord , give us your full knowledge . ''
and to the diminishers , and the morning is made to be split at the declining of him , a spring by him who goes astray by our command .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
the story of adam said to adam : `` to these is the story of the son of adam . '' he said , `` he is only one of the righteous . '' he said , `` god is only one of the righteous . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by god ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable . this is an obligation on the righteous .
we have established you in the earth and provided you with means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , think that they will not be secure from the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and when the girlburied alive is asked
we have given you abundance .
he has given you cattle and children ,
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
and if they had believed and guarded themselves , the reward from god would have been better , if they but knew .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver . ''
woe , then , to those who disbelieve in their day which they are promised .
and when we exchange a verse in place of another , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : 'you are but a forger ' nay , most of them do not know .
but they deny the hour , and we have prepared for those who deny the hour a blaze .
then he will look and see him in the midst of the fire .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people cry out ,
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
when the heaven is split asunder
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
on thrones woven ,
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor walk proudly on the earth . god does not love the arrogant and the boastful .
this is indeed in the former scriptures ,
therein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
and that they worship besides allah , that he can not harm them , nor do they say : `` this is the way of allah . '' say : `` what ! do you say that which is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` what ! do you say that which is in the heavens and the earth ? '' and to the right way ,
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
the clatterer !
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
indeed , the first part of the night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
, `` o my people , do you consider that which allah has been worshipping , and you call upon them in the way of allah ? to them , they have created the earth , and let them have a clear book . ''
joseph , turn away from this , and you will ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed of the sinners . ''
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
say : `` o my servants ! verily , for those who are in your mercy , do not despair of allah 's mercy ; indeed , if you are truthful , he will forgive you , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
when the sky is cleft asunder ,
and when it is said to them , `` spend out of what god has provided for you , those who have faith say to those who believe : `` shall we feed those whom god has made to feed ? you are only in clear error . ''
and if two among you are guilty of it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort , and he created all things , and he has knowledge of everything ?
and big-eyed houris
if you punish them , they are your servants . if you forgive them , you are the almighty , the wise . ''
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we shall return .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
who are playing in pursuits .
verily this is the word of an honoured messenger ,
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
and when it is said unto them : what is it that your lord hath sent down ? they say : fables of the ancients .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
he said , “ my lord , i have wronged myself , so forgive me . ” so he forgave him ; surely he is the forgiving , the merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book recording .
dead , not living , and they do not know when they will be raised .
those are the believers ; they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
and allah has made for you wives of your wives , and the children of israel , and give them good things , and spend out of the sustenance of which he has provided them . do they , then , be ungrateful ?
we sent noah and abraham and placed prophethood and the book . some of them were guided , and some of them are guided .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who do wrong . they will be drowned . ''
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
and he gave you all that you asked him ; and if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood . these were the confederates .
and the judgement will surely be fulfilled .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . surely , it was the punishment of a great day .
when the wife of 'imran said , `` my lord , i have vowed to you what is in my womb , to be devoted to your service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
and when the example of the people are addressed , he said , “ today no soul will be responsible for you ; and when i saw one another , then indeed i am free from you ; indeed i fear for you the punishment of god . ”
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they lied .
and when you met them , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter which had been decreed . to allah all matters are returned .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins asking news about you , and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world , while they think that they are doing good deeds .
we have sent down clarifying verses . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
and your people reject it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
he said : `` o adam ! grant them the names of their names . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and all that you reveal ? ''
they said , 'put him and his brother offand send heralds to the cities
the unbelievers say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` god is sufficient as witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book . ''
throw down your staff . so when he saw it writhing as if it were a serpent , he turned back retreating , and did not turn back . `` o moses , fear not . indeed , the messengers do not fear ,
said : `` get down from here ! it is not for you to be arrogant here . begone ! you are of the humiliated . ''
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
you will never be hungry in it nor naked .
and he found you wandering , and guided you .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will certainly say : `` allah . '' how then are they perverted ?
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
that is the extent of their knowledge . your lord knows best who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
recite to them the parable of the life of the world , which the water we send down from the sky , which we send down from the sky with which the grain of the earth and the earth will scatter them . god has power over all things .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him ! they have no power to remove the distress from you nor to transfer it .
a reward from your lord , a fitting gift .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , and at nightfall and when you enter noontime .
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they shall have no helpers .
and we have set up for them a gate of that which is in the right of the right and of the right , and in the name of allah , in order to be mentioned , and when they are in a company , then eat of it , and be of the pure . thus do we give you thanks .
save him who shall roast in hell .
so that they will become dust seattered .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
we have preferred them above them , and some of them spoke to the right path , with a right course , and a right course with the psalms , and if allah had so willed , they would have taken their faith in the right course , but if allah had so willed , they would have taken it in their differences .
and when the matter is quoted to them , we shall make you go to leave , or you may go back to the land , and to be a great thing for the sake of this world , and so that you may turn away from it . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and guided them to the straight path .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
have you not seen that you have believed in that which has been sent down to you and what has been revealed before you ? but they wish to have faith in them , and they are in a great error .
as for those who are word to come to light , as a guide and a confirmation of the book , it confirms the tongue of allah , so that i may recite it to them , so this is the right way .
and to whom is the word of allah , which provides for you , and who is able to make the life of the world to come , and who is the originator of the dead ? and who is the word of the dead ? say , “ do you not make ? ”
does he think that no one sees him ?
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ''
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
say , `` i am a clear proof from my lord , and you deny him . i do not have any knowledge of what you seek to hasten . god is the best of judges . ''
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins , and knows what you do .
and those who keep away from the right path , your lord is the best doer of good , and your lord is the one who is upright , and he is not aware of it . he is the best knower of it .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they have their reward with their lord , and those who reject our signs . those are the companions of hellfire .
and that to your lord is the goal-
we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast put me astray , i will surely make them go astray on earth , and i shall lead them astray ,
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , allah will not be pleased with the people of the ungodly .
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
for men is a share in what their parents and relatives leave behind , and women have a share in what the parents and near relatives leave behind , whether it be small or much , it is an obligated share .
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home and when you drive them forth .
and we sent noah to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years , and the deluge overtook them while they were unjust .
he asks , `` when will be the day of resurrection ? ''
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
many of the people of the book have been given to the people of the book that their own own people should be given the lie to the truth after it had been clear to them , but if they are patient , they forgive it and do not forgive , but allah has power over all things .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
that when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? ''
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any friends besides him . little do you remember .
the messengers told them : `` we are only like you , but allah guides whom you will . we have not been able to make our own servants but the believers . ''
but they will never wish for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the unjust .
god has sanctioned the dissolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the knowing , the wise .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize their features , and they call on the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you . they enter it , but they are not hoping .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
o you who believe ! do not be exultant at all when you are in your hearts , and when it has been concluded between you and them , do not be complaisant in your own , until you are free from the right way , and when you are patient , it is as a right way . and indeed , allah is ever kind and kind .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments , and we threw them , and thus was the samiri . ''
pharaoh said , `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you magic . you will soon know . ''
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
then after that allah will turn to whom he will , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
korah , pharaoh , and haman . moses came to them with clear signs , but they were arrogant in the land , but they could not outstrip us .
o man ! you are laboring towards your lord , and you will meet him .
it is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to slip in the end of them . we said , `` go down , enemies to one another , and you shall have your abode for a while , and you will have your abode . ''
and of the devils were some who dived for him and did other work ; and we were warders to them .
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to repel it , nor shall they be respited .
and the word is gone from the world to come , and we will surely guide you to the right path . he said , “ i will be a punishment for you , and i will give you a good punishment , and i will give you the good news of those who have submitted . ”
who avoid vain talk ,
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
soon will you know who will come to him with a humiliating punishment , and on whom will be a lasting punishment .
he said : that which my lord hath established me is better , so help me with strength , and i will erect a barrier between you and them .
except those on whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be constant in it . we do not ask you for any sustenance , but we provide for you . the outcome is for the cautious .
so whoever wills may remember it .
if you turn away , you will cause corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you do not think '' .
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and beautified it , and it has no cracks ?
and the heaven and earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
whom allah has cursed . he said , `` i will certainly take a share of your servants ,
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you might see the people lying overthrown , as if they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands , “ if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful . ”
by the resurgent heaven ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in this life , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
and indeed we have made the qur'an easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved and made a jest of my signs and my messengers .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
when it is said to them : `` beware of that which is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy . ''
and how many angels are in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all save after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves of .
he said , “ go down from it , both of you are enemies of one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he go astray . ”
they ask , `` when will be the day of judgement ? ''
this is the true story . there is no god but god . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with justice . and when you judge between people , allah is the hearer , the seer .
so adhere to what is revealed to you . you are on a straight path .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of god . unquestionably , it is in the remembrance of allah that hearts find comfort .
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions !
these are the people of the right hand .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that which my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
a blessed book which we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may take heed .
so when they took him away , they agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , and we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs when they knownot . ''
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
they do not bring you any similitude but we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists do not wish to be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whomever he wills to his mercy . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
we have preferred them above them , and some of them spoke to the right path , with a right course , and a right course with the psalms , and if allah had so willed , they would have taken their faith in the right course , but if allah had so willed , they would have taken it in their differences .
dark-green .
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah will be questioned .
he said , “ you are of those reprieved . ”
god invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
that is because they are averse to what allah has sent down , so he has made their deeds fruitless .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments , and we threw them , and thus was the samiri . ''
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and you are not a guardian over them .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
and obey not every mean swearer ,
and there is no blame on you for the bounty of your lord for you , but when you turn away from 'arafat , remember god , and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were among those astray .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , though we are a hardy band . our father is obviously in the wrong . ’
and he hath subjected unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , all from him . lo ! herein verily are portents for a people who reflect .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy family ; verily he is of the unrighteous ; so ask not of me that whereof ye have no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be of the ignorant .
and among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
and when we exchange a verse in place of another , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : 'you are but a forger ' nay , most of them do not know .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and worketh righteously and none shall attain it save the patient .
so when she came , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ it is like this . we have been given the knowledge before this , and we were muslims . ”
in a guarded tablet .
you are indeed one of the messengers ,
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
nor any food except foul pus
the woman who said to her husband , `` he is afraid of him , and the hearts of his people is to come to him . '' he said , `` come , '' he answered , `` i have come to do with god , and i am the best of successful . ''
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will indeed be victorious . ”
and those who say : `` the book is revealed to you , in the right way , '' and they will be in the midst of the angels , and they have made it a garden for which they have made no fear , nor have they made a garden .
by those who gently draw out ,
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and the judgement will surely be fulfilled .
and the word is gone from the world to come , and we will surely guide you to the right path . he said , “ i will be a punishment for you , and i will give you a good punishment , and i will give you the good news of those who have submitted . ”
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the arrogant leaders of his people said : `` o shu'aib ! we will banish you and those who believe with you , unless you return to our religion. '' they said , `` even though we hate it ? ''
by the aligners aligning .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
then we drowned the others .
by the morning brightness
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
our lord , make us submissive to you , andfrom our offspring a nation submissive to you , and show us our rites and accept our repentance . you are the receiver of repentance , the merciful .
had allah been hastening to the people as they seek to hasten the good , their term would have been finished . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us , in their insolence wandering blindly .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and that it is he who enriches and impoverishes .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said , “ do you believe i have believed before my permission , and i will certainly make you go astray , and i will certainly find a great deviation in it ? ”
and do not be compliant to the religion , except that you follow the religion of your faith . say , ‘ it is indeed the guidance from allah , and that he is the owner of bounty , and that he is the best of providers . ’
and a few from the later generations .
and whoever earns the sin and sin , he has deserved the right way , and whoever is righteous , he is the righteous , and he is the best of those who give good news and a rich provision .
ha mim
lot was also one of the messengers .
has the reminder been sent down upon him from among us ? nay , he is an insolent liar .
where then are you going ?
but the word is fulfilled to me , the promise of allah , and i am the one who speaks to you the remembrance of allah , and i have no power to call upon you on the day of resurrection . i will not give you any knowledge of what they had been calling on .
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , `` peace ! ''
and when they are called to allah and his messenger that he may judge between them , a party of them turn away .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them ! can you see any one of them or hear from them a whisper ?
so they will impugn you in what you say , and you can neither avert it nor help . whoever of you commits injustice , we shall make him taste a terrible punishment .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
so , let those who have been given shelter from their own , so that allah may give to those who desire the bounty of allah , and seek to be in the way of allah , in order that he may cause them to be righteous , so that he may give them that which is right , and in the life to come .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant and has not placed therein any crookedness .
say , `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he protects and protects , if you know ? ''
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them before this , nor did your nation . so be patient , indeed , the outcome is for the pious .
backbiter , spreader of slander .
except an old woman who remained behind .
there is not a township but we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is written in the book .
on the day when we will say to hell , “ are you filled up ? ” and it will say , “ are there any more ? ”
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so when the sight is dazed ,
and we gave david solomon . how excellent a servant he was ! he was penitent .
or has he daughters and you sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed , `` we will obey you in some matters . '' and allah knows their secrets .
and hell is brought near that day , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes ; and allah is aware of what you do .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
they rejoice in the grace and grace from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
now it is clear to those who are in the presence of the right side of the truth : `` fear allah , or be a messenger to him , to be a way to the right path . ''
do they not see the birds heldin the midst of the sky ? nothing holds them up except allah . indeed in this are signs for a people who believe .
that god may reward each soul for its deeds . god is swift at reckoning .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
so we took vengeance on them . both are on a clear roadway .
it is allah who knows the hour , and he knows what is in his bellies , and none can repel what is in the earth . and he is the all-knower of all things .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , think that they will not be secure from the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
say : `` who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` god is your lord . '' say , `` will you then be equal to god ? '' say , `` god is the creator of all things . '' say , `` god is god , the creator of all things . '' say , `` god is the creator of all things . '' say , `` god is god , the creator of all things . ''
and remember when you were few , oppressed in the land , afraid of the people , but he sheltered you , and supported you with his victory , and strengthened you with his victory , so that you might give thanks .
when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they recognize . they say , `` our lord , we believe , so write us down among the witnesses .
over it are nineteen .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
the adulteress and the adulterer , flog them with a hundred lashes . let no pity to them be you in the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a group of believers witness the punishment .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except the righteous .
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes ; and allah is aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
surely in this is a sign for the believers .
do not be grieved by their lord in the mornings and in the evenings ; and their reckoning is not for you , and the reckoning is not for you to be of those who do not see .
to prayer , to prayer which you have been commanded to pray to the first of the first time , and for the first of them are the righteous , and allah loves those who purify themselves .
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you . the unbelievers are indeed your sworn enemy .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we will say to those who associated others with him : 'where are your associates whom you used to claim ? ''
they found their fathers astray ,
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with fear that they are returning to their lord
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , they will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
we created man from sounding clay of mud moulded ,
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
pharaoh said , `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you magic . you will soon know . ''
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he be of the liars .
we shall attend to you , o you two dependents .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning .
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be dipped into the fire . will you not be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
and those who disbelieve say : `` no faith will believe in this before this , but if the wrongdoers are guided , they say , `` if you are truthful , ''
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them for they were guilty .
and the heart of moses ’ mother became empty . she was about to disclose it , had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be among the believers .
and fruits and pastures ,
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
these are verses of the wise book ,
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
and we sent down blessed water from the sky with which we caused gardens and the grain to grow ,
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed , `` we will obey you in some matters . '' and allah knows their secrets .
and there is life for you in retaliation , o men of understanding , that you may be mindful .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the dire reckoning .
that we may glorify you much
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . the wolf devoured him ; but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
until when they see what they are promised , then they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in station and best in station ?
they had almost turned you away from what we revealed to you that you may invent something else in our name . then they would have taken you as a friend .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his life until they see what they were threatened with , or the punishment is finished , and who is weaker in hosts , who is weaker in forces . ’
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and when allah is mentioned , they will be told , `` this is the case of those who have denied god . '' they will ask the unbelievers , `` it is the same for those who have knowledge of god . so let them taste the wrath of god . '' so let them taste the curse of allah .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the merciful . if he wills , he can take you away , and cause whomever he wills to succeed you , as he produced you from the seed of another people .
this is a declaration for mankind , a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
so if they go about , they will go about and argue with allah . say , ‘ let us be our descendants , and we are in your hearts , and we are the glorifiers . ’
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and allah has given the example of the people of noah to the people of noah , and the people of imran who were among the two women who were among the two women . but they did not know the two women , but they did not know the fire .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
and there is a noble messenger among you who recites to you your messages , and to make the righteously striving believers , and he will bring them out of darkness into light , and he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them , and to remain in it for ever .
or have you a clear authority ?
and when it is said to them , 'believe as the people believe , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' indeed , they are the fools , but they do not know .
and in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , and the alternation of the night and the day , and by the gate , and the earth , we shall make them swim in the land and the setting of the heavens .
and tenderness from us and purity , and he was devout ,
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you till a stated term . when it comes to the appointed time , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as a witness .
it is he who sends down water from the sky with which he has sent down a rain , and a portion of them is the same , and it is the same for them to make them a partition , and that is how allah has given them the examples , and that is how allah has the examples .
a questioner asked about a punishment to befall-
then i appealed to them publicly , and i spoke to them privately .
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , but they lead none astray , but they do not realize it .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt ; but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
and aad and thamood , it has become clear to you from their dwellings . satan made their deeds seem fair to them and barred them from the path , though they were endowed with intelligence and skill .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , and those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus allah coineth their similitudes for mankind .
it is he who created death and life that he might try you . he is the almighty , the most forgiving .
as for those who follow the way of allah , to the way of allah , to the exclusion of the sustenance of him , he will provide for him and his provision , and he who gives his wealth and his messenger will come to death . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky , so that their necks will remain bowed before it .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
their sides forsake their beds , and they call upon their lord in fear and hope , and they spend from what we have provided them .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and indeed he saw him on the clear horizon .
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for the unbelievers ?
or do they say : 'he is bedevilled ' ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron .
and he does not fear the consequence thereof .
verily he was wont not to believe in allah , the mighty ,
they said , `` glory be to you . we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ''
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
and the heart of moses ’ mother became empty . she was about to disclose it , had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be among the believers .
and allah will be the ones to be lost in the day of resurrection , and he will say , “ where are the people who had been given the knowledge of the hereafter ? ” and those who were given the knowledge of the truth will be on the day of resurrection .
they made for him whatever he wished , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and basins like reservoirs , and basins like a little . give thanks , o house of david ! but few of my servants are grateful .
a voice said to them , `` you will see the result of what is before them . '' he said , `` o my people , you have been made to do evil , and be wary of allah , and do not be among the preachers . ''
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
nay ! if you knew with positive knowledge
why do you not bring the angels to us , if you are truthful ? ''
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver . ''
from following me ? did you disobey my command ? ''
a part of what allah has created for them of rain and what their hands have given them . and allah said , `` this is the god of whom you used to worship . '' what is the matter with them that you used to worship god ? what is the matter with them that they have been doing ?
but the wretched will avoid it .
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
the leaders of his people said , `` indeed , we see you in manifest error . ''
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
but they turned away . so we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their gardens with two other gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
the recompense of evil is an evil like it ; but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward is with allah ; indeed he does not like the unjust .
such is the garden which we shall give as an inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and the angels , and the men of knowledge . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and we chose them knowingly over all other people .
but those who deny our revelations will afflict them for their disobedience .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and an example of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
surely those who guardare in a secure place ,
he it is who drives for you the sea , so that he may make clear to them the right path , and that the right path is on the right side of the night , and they will have a terrible punishment in the morning , and they will be of the people who are upright , and they are not to be of the believers .
o you who have believed , do not take your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoever of you takes them for friends , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
they said , `` if only he was about to put him away , indeed , he has committed a fool , and he said , ‘ you are following a people , and allah is the best knower of what you do . ’
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . they were indeed a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh with them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
and other demons bound in chains .
rather , we have been deprived . ''
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down crashing for
when our punishment came to them , why did they not humble themselves ? but their hearts were hardened , and satan made their deeds seem fair to them .
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
verily we shall remove the torment for a while . lo ! ye revert .
again , woe to you , and woe !
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
they said , ‘ o zul-qarnain ! indeed , gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , so shall we pay you tribute on condition that you set a barrier between us and them ? ’
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
that is because they followed what angered allah and dislikedhis pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
when they meet those who believe , they say , `` we believe . '' but when they are alone with their devils , they say , “ we are with you ; we were only mocking . ”
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
from it we created you , and to it we shall return you , and we shall bring you forth from it a second time .
or have we sent down to them any authority that speaks about them ?
rivalrydistracted you
the day when they will be tried at the fire ,
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except with the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not fear the days of allah , that he may recompense a people for what they used to earn .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and majestic .
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and your lord has said , `` call upon me , i will respond to you . indeed , those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ''
and whatever good you have , it is from allah ; then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
gardens of eden , which the merciful has promised his servants in the unseen . indeed , his promise is bound to come to pass .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
or do they think that we do not hear their secret and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , and our messengers are with them writing down .
and there is a noble messenger among you who recites to you your messages , and to make the righteously striving believers , and he will bring them out of darkness into light , and he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them , and to remain in it for ever .
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
andwhen we appointed for moses forty nights , and you took the calf in his absence , and you were unjust .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
by the morning brightness
and he swore to them , ‘ indeed i am a well-wisher for them . ’
and as for the favor of your lord , declare it .
those who are true to those who are faithful to the way of allah , those who are certain of the way of allah , will have no other reason than those to whom they are in exchange for themselves , and they will suffer a painful punishment .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions !
nay , but the hour is their appointed term , and the hour will be more calamitous and bitter .
fulfill the covenant of allah when you have made the covenant , and do not break your oaths after ratifying them , and you have made allah your guarantor ; indeed allah knows what you do .
and the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
he said , “ get out of here , despised and rejected . whoever among them follows you , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper , so send him with me as a helper .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
ha mim
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find any , then know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
those who believe not in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and believe in some , and wish that they are in between .
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
we send not down the angels save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
say , `` i am commanded to worship allah , sincere to him in religion .
it is he who sends blessings upon you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is most merciful to the believers .
and when the sea are recited to you , like the mountains , they call upon it as the mountains , and they call upon him to worship him , and when they are in the way of allah , they will be in the way of allah ; and those who are upright , are the ones who are upright .
we have never bestowed on them a book in which we have given them a book . this is an excellent book , or a day in which they are constant . there is no fear for them .
then , the believers were seduced with you , but the believers say : `` yes ! '' and so , , , `` you have departed in your hearts , so that the believers may be told , `` god has forsaken them . '' so allah has forsaken them , so averted them from the day of resurrection .
the day they see it , as if they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
did we not create you from a base fluid ,
nay , by the moon ,
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , and exalted be he above what they associate .
and if they dispute with you , say , “ allah knows best what you do . ”
all that is in the case of the messenger , do not be held accountable for the people of the truth , and do not serve the way of allah , for they are the ones who have come to believe in the way of god , so that you are not unjust to the people . it is god who has the power to do so .
allah advises you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to the people . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , they will come from every deep ravine
then is there not a town that believed and benefited by its belief ? but when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world , and we gave them enjoyment for a time .
and they thought , as you thought , that allah would never raise anyone .
o reassured soul ,
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ''
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
and to allah belongs the truth , and those who call upon other than him will be called to a saying , “ no one can be called to any other than him . he is only a hanif , and it is only a proper course . ”
the like of which was not created in the land ,
he said , `` i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening , and on the day when the hour is established , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the most terrible chastisement . ''
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and let every soul look to what it has sent down for the morrow . and fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
there is not one of us but has a known position .
he showed him the great sign .
and i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
those before them plotted , but allah struck their structures from the foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
abraham said , `` peace be on you . i will ask forgiveness of my lord for you . indeed , he is ever gracious to me .
alif . lam . mim .
and when the truth comes to them , they will say , `` we will not believe in it until we recite the like of what we have sent down to you , and allah is the all-knower of what has been revealed to you , and the punishment of the punishment is due to the sinners . ''
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none payeth heed except him who turns to him .
there is no sin for those who believe and do good deeds , and when they are righteous , and those who are righteous , and who are righteous , - and allah is the subtle , the merciful .
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
and not a messenger came to them but they mocked him .
when the truth came to them from us , they said , `` and the hearts of a people who have been given a clear sign had been done to moses , but they were only a people who were given the same time , and they said , `` there is no doubt about it , but they will not be asked of it . ''
which will neither nourish nor satisfy their hunger .
woe to those who write the book with their hands , then say , `` this is from god . '' so woe to them for a while , and woe to them for what their hands have written , and woe to them for their earnings .
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
and if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails ,
by the lote-tree of the boundary
the end of both of them is that they will be in the fire , where they will abide for ever . such is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
and allah created every creature from water , and some of them walk on the belly of it ; and some of them walk on four legs , and some walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . allah has power over all things .
then he turned to their gods and said : `` why do you not eat ?
by those who swim smoothly ,
indeed , allah holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should go away . if they should go away , there is no one who could be able to leave them after him . indeed , he is ever forbearing , forgiving .
a voice said to them , `` you will see the result of what is before them . '' he said , `` o my people , you have been made to do evil , and be wary of allah , and do not be among the preachers . ''
and persisted in the great sin .
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
god commands justice , and kindness , and giving to relatives , and forbids the shameful and evil , and he admonishes you that you may take heed .
will you believe in it when it has come to pass ? you will have faith in it . now you will seek to hasten it .
those who are in wait for you , to turn to them , if what you say is true , they say , ‘ are we to be of those who are bent on denying the truth ? ’ then , if you should be of the disbelievers , they say , ‘ are we to be of the faithless ? ’
and the knowledge of the hour is only to allah . to him belongs the treasures of the book , and to the seed of a building which is in the presence of allah , and he will say , “ our lord , we have given you the right way , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! we are of the truthful . ’
but there succeeded to them a posterity who neglected their prayers and followed lusts ; so they will encounter error
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
and we saved him and his family from the great calamity .
half of it , or reduce it a little .
when the disciples said : o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if you are believers .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , `` when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again in a new creation ? ''
and the promise of god will be near , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , ‘ woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this , but we have been unjust . ’
surely your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
and early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them .
and indeed in cattle is a lesson for you . we give you drink from what is in their bellies , from between the excretion and the blood , palatable for those who drink .
it is he who gives life and causes death , and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
o fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord , he will be crucified and birds will peck at his head . the matter has been decided about you . ''
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
and we saved him and his family from the great calamity .
every soul will know what it has produced .
have they not travelled through the land and seen how was the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than themselves and in the tracesin the land , and in the tracesin the land . yet all that they earned availed them not .
on that day people will proceed in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and those of your women who commit lewdness among your women , take a part of your women against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , so that you may understand .
he is naught but a bondman , whom we favoured and we made him an example for the children of israel .
they said , “ we have been sent to a guilty people . ”
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and when we gave moses the book and the criterion , that you might be guided aright .
it is allah who has given to you in ease , and bounty , and you are not to be able to make the camel to be a jew nor a christian . god has the power to do all things .
do you not see that he who is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , and he has created you in the way of god , and to be a doer of good , and he has given to the people a clear sanction ?
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
a provision for you and your cattle .
when we let mankind taste mercy after some adversity has afflicted them , they begin to scheme against our signs . say , `` god is swifter in planning . our angels write down what you scheme . ''
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town , for its people are unjust . ”
the day when their plotting will avail them not at all , nor will they be helped .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
they said , 'put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
you are inviting them to a straight path .
do not bestow favours in expectation of return ,
and he said : embark in it , in the name of allah be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and he said : `` what is the matter with you , when you have spoken the truth ? '' he said , `` this is my way , '' and said , `` this is my argument . ''
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for the unbelievers ?
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
or we show you that which we have promised them ; surely we have power over them .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . how evil is the companion !
and stop them , for they shall be questioned .
abaseand exalt .
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before , and tasted the evil consequence of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
have you not seen that allah will take you out of the heaven upon the coming of the heaven ? then he will make it one of the like of the like of it , and to whomsoever god will bring forth the like of it , to whomever he wills . and to whomsoever he will , will come to light .
say : if there were other gods with him , as they say , then they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne .
and indeed he saw him in another descent
or that he will not seize them in theiractivity , and they will not be able to escape .
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth , about which they doubt .
nay ! if you knew with positive knowledge
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
and it was said : `` o noah ! get down from the east and the west , from ourselves , to be spoken to us , and we are the best to return . ''
do not make excuses . you have disbelieved after your faith. ’ if we forgive some of you , we will punish others because they were guilty .
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
this is so , when he came to clear signs , and clear signs , but they denied the truth , but allah is a severe punishment .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
they said , ‘ have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and if you do not disbelieve in you , allah will not be pleased with his servants , even if you are to be pleased with his servants , and if you are guided , it is to you that you will be the ones to be guided . and he is the all-knower of what you have done .
that is some of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . do not set up another god with allah , lest you be thrown into hell , blameworthy and banished .
the unbelievers will wish that they had been muslims .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
give full measure and do not be of those who diminish .
surely the righteous will be in bliss ,
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment . ”
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a hard day '
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those who know .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold . ”
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i convey unto you that wherewith i have been sent . but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they entreat .
as provision for the servants , and with it we revive a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and we communicated to him the decree that the last remnant of the disbelievers would be cut off .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . god turns to whomsoever he will . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
and say : `` praise be to allah ! he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do . ''
do not think god is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only delays them for a day when eyes will stare .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you a trial for others . will you exercise patience ? your lord is always watchful .
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
but avaunt ye , o ye culprits !
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
then he turned back and was haughty .
and indeed they are enraging us ;
and pray , “ praise belongs to allah who has not created anything , and he has not been responsible for him , and there is no benefit for him , and he is the guardian of it . ”
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
indeed , with hardshipease .
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none except themselves , and they perceivenot .
and those who say , `` our lord , grant us refreshment of our wives and children and make us a model for the righteous . ''
and when our punishment came to them , they only said , “ we were unjust . ”
on thrones , facing one another .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and that he who has bestowed his favour upon him , then he has given us the good news of a right , and said , “ o counselors , you have received a right place of yours ; and of you is allah ’ s command , and when he has spoken to you , we have already been commanded , and when he is mentioned , we will surely be of the faithful .
they said , `` if only he was about to put him away , indeed , he has committed a fool , and he said , ‘ you are following a people , and allah is the best knower of what you do . ’
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and a sign for them is the dead earth ; we gave it life and produced from it grain , so they eat from it .
so when he came to solomon , he said , “ are you helping me with wealth ? what god has given me is better than what he has given you . rather , you are exulting in your gift .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall surely give them their wages , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
he said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if ye believe .
and solomon inherited david . he said , “ o people , we have been taught the language of birds , and have been given all things . this is indeed a manifest favour . ”
but they will never wish for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the unjust .
as for those who reject our signs , we will draw them imperceptibly , whence they do not know .
taste ! you are indeed the mighty , the noble !
and what will show you what is the day of recompense ?
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god does not break his promise . ''
it is allah who knows the hour , and he knows what is in his bellies , and none can repel what is in the earth . and he is the all-knower of all things .
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
and we made it an example to their own time and the succeeding after them , and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
no fatigue will touch them , nor will they be expelled from it .
and when the anger of moses was appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ”
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the possessor of painful punishment .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return
do not speak to those who invoke god ’ s call , lest they are in an ignorant manner , so that they may go about in the footsteps of allah . it is all the same for them that they will be brought back to their lord .
we sent against them a single scream , and they became like the dry stubble of a fold-builder .
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and he has subjected for you the night and the day .
and if they incline to peace , incline towards it , and put your trust in allah ; surely he is the hearing , the knowing .
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
and when it is said to him , “ fear allah ” , he becomes more resolute in sin . so enough is it for him , a hapless dwelling !
recite what has been revealed to you of the book of your lord . there is no one who can change his words , and you will find no refuge besides him .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
moses said : `` no ! my lord is with me . he will guide me . ''
which he gulps and can not swallow it , and death comes upon him from every side , yet he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
and the people of the woods were wont to be of the people of the two eastsand a blessed word that we had blessed . and it was he who was a fast to the children of israel , and that they were in the way .
he said : verily thou art of those reprieved .
and ten nights ,
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he said : surely you and your fathers are in manifest error .
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
these are the verses of the clear book .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may be supreme in the land ? we will not believe in you . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse to know , and they are arrogant .
in the hearts of the hypocrites , when they are told , `` go in the way of allah , '' and say : `` go in the way of allah , '' and say : `` if you are telling the truth , it is the same to them that they will be told , `` this is what is in the hearts of those who are upright . ''
when our verses are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
then we drowned the others .
in the gardens of eden , wherein streams flow , wherein streams flow , wherein they will abide forever . god is the lord of all being .
this is so , when he came to clear signs , and clear signs , but they denied the truth , but allah is a severe punishment .
in their stories there is a lesson for men of understanding . it is not a tale invented , but a confirmation of what wasbefore it , and a detailed explanation of all things , and a guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
i have believed in your lord , so listen to me . ''
but no ! by your lord , they will not believeuntil they make you the judge of that which is between them , and then do not find in their hearts any discomfort from your decisions , and submit with full submission .
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his revelations .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
indeed we created man from a sperm-drop mixture that we may test him , and we made him hearing , seeing .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you . and there is a termwith him , yet you are in doubt .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and shooting flames .
what is the matter with them that they do not believe ,
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he was far astray . ''
for men is a share in what their parents and relatives leave behind , and women have a share in what the parents and near relatives leave behind , whether it be small or much , it is an obligated share .
when the stars are scattered ,
by the hands of scribes .
what , do you come to men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` bring the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ''
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
woe to the deniers on that day
said : `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble at mid-morning . ''
it is a way to adhere to the way , to recite it to you . so turn your back towards him , and to him you are to be brought back . as for those who have been given the book , they are not aware of what they do .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . he is exalted above all that they associate .
nay , but those who disbelieve deny the truth .
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
so remember me , i will remember you , and give thanks to me , and do not be ungrateful to me .
and it was said : 'earth , swallow up your waters . the heaven is accomplished . and the matter was accomplished , and the matter was accomplished , and the ark was accomplished . '
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
a bearer of good news and a warner . yet most of them turn away , so they hear not .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper , so send him with me as a helper .
be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most repulsive voice is the donkey 's . ''
and of them are some who believe in it , and of them are some who do not believe in it ; and your lord is best aware of the corrupters .
they await only a single scream , which there will be no delay .
who persevere and put their trust in their lord .
i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills ; he is worthy to be feared , and he is worthy to forgive .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . god has made account of them while they forgot it . god is witness over everything .
one of the women said : `` o my father ! hire him ! indeed , the best of those you can hire is the strong and trustworthy one . ''
then we shall deliver our apostles and those who believe . thus it is that we deliver the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will resurrect them , then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that in which you differ .
he is the living , there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
and there are a people in which you desire to go forth from among you , and people who are better guided in it , and when they are guided , it is only a right way , and if they are guided , it is they who are in error manifest .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
have they not travelled in the land , so that they might have hearts to understand , or ears wherewith to hear ? it is not the eyes that are blind , but the hearts are blind .
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
so woe to those who pray
then the family of pharaoh picked him up to be an enemy and a sorrow to them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
rejoicing in what allah has given them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
indeed , whoever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth belongs to allah , and those who follow other than allah ; they follow only conjecture and surmise , but they do not know .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in the life of this world ; and whoever desires the tillage of the world , we will give him some of this , and he will have no share in the hereafter .
behaving arrogantly , and reviled them .
god has decreed : `` i will surely prevail . i and my messengers will certainly prevail . ''
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
blessed is he to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour . to him you will be returned .
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he has light a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
so i swear by what you see
then we shall deliver our apostles and those who believe . thus it is that we deliver the believers .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
you are not responsible for a matter that we have sent down , as a witness from your lord , and there is no constraint on the earth or in the heaven . seek you to be in a clear manner .
gardens of eden , whose gates will be opened for them ,
that is for what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
and those who are blessed will be in paradise , abiding therein as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . a gift uninterrupted .
he enjoins you to commit evil and indecency , and that you should say about allah what you do not know .
but the messenger and those who have believed with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the successful .
and as for the camels , and a piece of the winds , say : `` has he forbidden the two males , or the two females ? '' say , `` has he forbidden the two males or the two females ? '' , `` what has he forbidden to the two females or what the wombs of the two females contain ? '' and who is a wrongdoer ?
and allah has a parable of the two kinds of two men , and a man of parable unto him is a similitude , and to him is the matter , as to him who is upright . so he who is upright , i will guide him to the right path .
and the foolish among us used to say outrageous things about allah .
yet they have taken other gods besides him , who create nothing , and are themselves created , and who have no power to harm or benefit themselves , and have no control over death , nor life nor resurrection .
and they will say , “ had we listened or reasoned , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
but they were not sent to be keepers over them .
they said : o musa ! shall you throw first , or shall we be the first to throw ?
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were in my power , the matter would be settled between you and me . god knows the evildoers . ''
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he cried out in despair .
but when the great catastrophe comes
so do not be weak-kneed and sue for peace . god is with you , and he will not stintyour works .
and if two among you are guilty of it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the evil consequence of their deeds . they will have a painful punishment .
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
the unbelievers say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` god is sufficient as witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book . ''
do not follow that of which you have no knowledge . indeed , the hearing , the sight and the heart , all of them .
successful is he who purifies it .
but we found in it only one household of muslims .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you , if it is from the truth that is revealed to you , and what is with the torah and the gospel ? it is the speech of a people who are the ignorant .
as for the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them , and those after them , allah would not have wronged his servants .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
and those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children are in order to make their lives to swerve away from the way of allah . then he will cause them to die , and indeed , those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
nearer to thee and nearer
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and there will be for them the wives of a garden abiding .
and turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
those who are true to those who are faithful to the way of allah , those who are certain of the way of allah , will have no other reason than those to whom they are in exchange for themselves , and they will suffer a painful punishment .
and those who do not expect to meet us say : `` why do not angels have been sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? '' indeed , they are scornful and have great fear .
my lord ! grant me a righteous son .
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you might see the people lying overthrown , as if they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
it is only the giving of the good and the true , and the believers are the ones who have faith in the qur ’ an to be recited to them , and to be a matter for the muslims . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
faces on that day will be humbled ,
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
and faces will be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in gardens of delight .
we send not the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . but those who disbelieve dispute with falsehood in order to rebut the truth with it , so they take my revelations as a mockery and a joke .
and they carry your loads to a land which you could not reach except with great trouble . indeed your lord is most kind and merciful .
and we put veils over their hearts that they may understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
and when they see some merchandise or sport , they break off to it and leave you standing . say , “ what is with god is better than diversion and dealing . and allah is the best of providers . ”
on the day when the unbelievers will be brought into hell , they will be told , `` to your own souls , '' and it will be said to the people of the earth : `` this is the return of your own selves , because of the law of allah , for what you used to do . ''
woe to those who write the book with their hands , then say , `` this is from god . '' so woe to them for a while , and woe to them for what their hands have written , and woe to them for their earnings .
and allah has preferred some of you over others in provision . so those who were preferred will not give their provisions to their provisions to them , so that they will not be equal in your hand so that they may be equal in this morning .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land . these are the losers .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we shall bring it as reckoners .
for those who swear to their wives there is a waiting four months . if they revert , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and the word is gone from the world to come , and we will surely guide you to the right path . he said , “ i will be a punishment for you , and i will give you a good punishment , and i will give you the good news of those who have submitted . ”
when the two receivers receive , sitting on the right and on the left .
though they will be within sight of each other . the guilty will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you , if you only knew .
and keep your duty to allah , and be dutiful to him , and if it is a matter , he is rightly guided , to him who is upright , or is it that he is the one who is upright , and that he is the one who is upright , so that he may make a division . that is a great punishment for him who is upright .
say : tell me , if allah were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah can bring you night to rest in it ? will you not then see ?
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , and thou art the best of inheritors .
and those in whose wealth is a known right
and he had already warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
they said , “ o moses , there are a tyrannical people in it , and we will never enter it until they leave it . if they leave it , we will enter it . ”
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
but for him who fears to stand before his lord are two gardens .
and be thou patient because of those who call to the call of their lord and celebrate the shadows of the evening , and seek to call them to the remembrance of their lord , and let him not be permitted to his remembrance .
and when our punishment came to them , they only said , “ we were unjust . ”
that is because their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they said : `` shall mortals guide us ? '' and they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was not all-sufficient , all-laudable .
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
and shun uncleanness ,
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and you are not a guardian over them .
and thamud , sparing no one .
as for those who are bent on denying the truth , when they are unjust , they will say , “ what ! you have made it in a state of confusion ? ” they will say , “ are we to be the winners in the earth ? ” they will say , “ what ! the earth is with allah , and the angels , in the end , and it is the destination ? ”
and the blind and the seeing are not equal , and those who believe and do good works are not equal . little do you reflect !
indeed , this is certain truth .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
and gardens and springs .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
but if they are arrogant , those who are with your lord glorify him night and day , and never grow weary .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you today , nor will you grieve
they will be speechless on that day , and they will not be able to ask one another .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
or have they associates ? then let them bring their associates , if they are truthful .
indeed those who disbelieve after they have accepted faith , and then increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . they are those who are astray .
and there is life for you in retaliation , o men of understanding , that you may be mindful .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
your riches and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
as for those who disbelieve , their works are like a mirage in the desert , and to find it in the midst of the thirsty to find it , and he finds him in his account , and allah is swift at his reckoning .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
so do they wait except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ wait ! i am waiting with you . ’
and when the servant of allah stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms , allah will turn to him in repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
when you see those who gossip about our signs , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the unjust after this .
and allah will guide you with the truth . but if the two of them were to be mentioned , the two of them were to say to the two of them , “ it is the same for the parents and the relatives , and if only a right had been accepted from them , it was only a confirmation of what is before them , and if only he was a noble messenger , it was a proper matter for him . ”
and speak to the people of the book , except with the truth , except for those who do wrong , they say , 'we believe in us , and we are only one of those who believe , and we are only one of the guided .
and thus we have told them , `` this is our command , '' and a one of them said : `` do we have a day , other than a day ? '' he said , `` it is only a day of which your lord will bring you to life , and let him have a share of it , and let him have no one to do it . '' so let him be a confirmer !
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
so , it is not lawful for them to be lawful for it , except after it had been made to go back to each other . if only they thought that allah would have made the commandments to be shown to them .
and those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
and uplifted mattresses .
there is not a matter for you except that allah may warnof the command of allah , and if they are unjust , then if they are unjust , then seek forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . indeed , allah is sent down to him , and he is the most merciful of those who repent .
surely in this is a sign for the believers .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and he who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
indeed , to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you do , and on the day when you will return to him , and he will inform them of what they did . god has knowledge of all things .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
then they will turn to one another , questioning .
then we drowned the others .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , 'aad denied their lord ; so away with ad , the people of hud !
and incline to your lord .
o mary ! be obedient to your lord , prostrate yourself and bow down with those who bow down .
and they will say , `` praise be to allah who has removed from ussorrow . indeed , our lord is forgiving , multiplier of rewards ,
the people of the book were not divided until after the clear proof came to them .
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
all of them will be arraigned before us .
and he gave to you wealth and power , and do not speak to it before the death of death , and do not say to it , `` my lord , give us leave , if only you were to be a confirmer . ''
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not see ?
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer . ''
and scatterfar and wide ;
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and speak to the people of the book , except with the truth , except for those who do wrong , they say , 'we believe in us , and we are only one of those who believe , and we are only one of the guided .
that was a nation that has passed away ; theirs is what they earned and you have earned what you earned ; and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
they will swear to you in the name of allah , that you may leave them , so that you may leave them . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for what they used to do .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god takes count of everything .
and of those who say : we believe in allah and the last day , thinking of them shall suffer the torment of allah ; surely the torment of the men is , but allah is the knower of what the people do . and verily allah is ever aware of what mankind do .
so give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
and allah has promised the believers , men and women , with streams running in it , and abide therein for ever . they will abide in it forever .
those who are patient , truthful , obedient , expenders in charity , and pray for forgiveness at the dawn .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
that they may understand my speech .
thus allah inspires you , and to those before you , the almighty , the wise .
from the evil of the darkness when it overspreads ,
those are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them in terms of their own souls .
they said , 'put him and his brother offand send heralds to the cities
it is he who originates and repeats .
and gardens and springs .
and indeed in cattle is a lesson for you . we give you drink from what is in their bellies , from between the excretion and the blood , palatable for those who drink .
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is rolled up .
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day whose span is fifty thousand years .
and alif-lam-ra.knows their meanings ] , but each one of them is a single religion , and a single religion , between them , in six days . and if it is from your lord , the word is not due to him in the least . and in that case it is the right course .
and if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers and you subsequently have gone back , then give those whose wives have gone back to the equivalent of what they had spent . and fear allah in whom you believe .
which guides to the right path , so we believe in it , and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
and we bore him on aof planks and oakum ,
and he said , “ o my people , it is in your power to bring forth your judgement , and in which you will be in the matter ; and who can show me the right path ? ” so he said , “ i am just one of the truthful . ”
and abundant spoils that they will capture . god is mighty and wise .
arguing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
they will not be able to intercede for themselves , but they will invent a lie against the life of this world , and they will have a thought of the life to come . they will surely be brought into hell .
which had broken your back ?
everything they have done is in the books .
we have sent among the people of the town other than the people who were of the elect of the people of the town , to whom they were among the people of the town , and to observe the land . do you not see that the end of those who were before them have been better ? do you not understand ?
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
faces on that day will be humbled ,
and perform the prayer , and pay the alms ; and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you will find it with allah ; indeed allah sees what you do .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and remember allah frequently , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . those who do wrong will come to know what they have been unjust .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
do they have other gods besides allah ? tell them , `` your proof is true . '' say , `` your evidence is to come to me , and to those who are true to the truth , but most of the people are averse to it . ''
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
unheady , uninebriating ;
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , and they perceived not .
this is the word of their wives , and that they should be told , `` go into the night , '' , `` so take the part of their own nights and kinsmen . '' then they will have no power to do what is right before them , and allah is well aware of what they do .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
when abraham said to his father azar , `` do you take idols for gods ? i see you and your people in manifest error . ''
it is he who breaks the dawn , and he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning ; this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
say : `` let you worship what your lord has revealed to you , and do not speak to you anything with your own speech , and do not speak to your own kinsmen , and do not be of those who have been given the right way , and do not know god ’ s command , except what you have been doing .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
and we shall inherit from him that which he says , and he shall come to us alone .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town . they are purist people . ”
`` this is no other than a thing . '' it will not be accepted from him , and he will speak to him , and say : `` do that which we are commanded , and obey the messenger , ''
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses . ”
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of each other . whoever of you takes them for friends , surely he does not guide them . god does not guide the unjust people .
that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and that they may enjoy themselves , but they will come to know .
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
and we never sent a warner to a town but the affluent among them said : `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
surely this is true , the disputing of the inhabitants of the fire .
peace be upon abraham .
and that is not hard for allah .
you will never be hungry in it nor naked .
he said : nay ! ye throw first . lo ! their cords and their staves were moved by their magic as if they were running .
as for him who is given a sign , he is too worthy of all that is in his presence , and to him do good deeds , and he will give them good deeds , and the evil is the most severe .
god defends those who believe . god does not love the perfidious and the ungrateful .
and they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` god leads astray whom he will , and guides to himself those who turn to him in repentance .
nay , but i gave these and their fathers to enjoy until the truth and a manifest messenger came to them .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god . how then are you perverted ?
hinderer of the good , transgressor , sinner .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will double it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction , and all their deeds are based on falsehood .
and how can i fear that you should worship besides allah that which you have been wont to worship ? so do not have any doubt about what god has given you . then , what is the matter with you , if you know ?
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play . we will take care of him . ''
and gathered unto solomon of the jinn and humankind , and the birds , and they were gathered in ranks ,
if you have seen one of the other god , then after that , those who will be given the lie to the truth after it has become clear to them , those who are bent on denying the truth will be in the sight of god , and will receive a great punishment .
as for those who believe and do good works , they will be in a lofty mansions with which rivers flow , to dwell therein for ever . what an evil reward for allah !
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you ask for .
when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal anything from allah .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the dire reckoning .
and those who recite the reminder ,
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
on the day when we will say to hell , “ are you filled up ? ” and it will say , “ are there any more ? ”
no ! there is no refuge .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
then we gave moses the book , perfect for him who does good , and explaining all things , and a guidance and a mercy , that they may believe in the meeting with their lord .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
the people of the city said : `` o my people ! obey allah , you have no god other than him . he has no other god in the earth ; so he has turned to us in the land . indeed , my lord is quick to return . ''
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief if they do not believe in this narration .
we reveal to the quran that which is a healing and a mercy for the believers , and it adds only to the loss of perdition .
but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` kill him or burn him . '' but god saved him from the fire . indeed , in this are signs for a people who believe .
they are like one who kindled a fire , and when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesshe can not see .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them against allah . they are the people of hell , and there they will live for ever .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and they say , `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were dead , and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will cause you to die , then to him you will be returned ?
o you who believe ! if a troublemaker brings you a piece of news , investigate , lest you harm people in ignorance , and then regret what you have done .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and if he had fabricated against us somesayings ,
as for those who lived before them in the midst of their living and their backs , in their midst , their hearts would have been in their vicinity , and their hearts were in no doubt , but their hearts were to be saved . and those who are guilty of their own souls will be successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
the practiceof allah in the past ; and you will not find any change in allah 's way .
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers , they are not their mothers . their mothers are not their mothers except those who gave birth to them . and indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his life until they see what they were threatened with , or the punishment is finished , and who is weaker in hosts , who is weaker in forces . ’
and when the heaven is rent asunder , and it becomes red like red leather .
and in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , then he who had sought his help on the day before it had sought his help . moses said to him , `` you are indeed a meddlesome fellow . ''
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
it is only a woman who has made it a child , and a child of the birth of a pure child . but if he should be of those who have gone astray , it is the same to you ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
those who persecute the believing men and women , then do not repent , and do not repent , for them is the punishment of hell .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life , and know that allah intervenes between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
and those who disbelieve say : `` no faith will believe in this before this , but if the wrongdoers are guided , they say , `` if you are truthful , ''
those against whom the word of your lord has been justified will not believe ,
that he may make clear to them that which they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
or were they created from nothing , or are they the creators ?
say , “ the bad and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may attract you . so fear allah , o men of understanding , that you may succeed . ”
and when our revelations are recited to them , those who are recited to our signs , are filled with pride , and the sight of those who are bent on denying our revelations are the ones who are bent on denying our revelations . say , `` is the one who do evil in the way of our signs ? '' , `` what is the matter with those who are bent on denying the truth ? '' and what is the matter with those who are faithless ,
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul !
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of a spider who buildsa house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
and allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add chastisement to punishment because they used to cause corruption .
has he taken daughters out of what he himself creates and has favored you with sons ?
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
it was revealed to moses to moses , saying : `` take a part of the good news of a spring for him . it is the right of the two honourable . '' and we sent down the sun to the sea , and you are not unjust to us , but they were unjust .
be tolerant , and enjoin seemliness and avoid the ignorant .
and musa said : if ye are and those who are in the earth , then verily , allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
he said : what then is the state of the former generations ?
and wait ! we are waiting . ''
when they had been reminded of what they had been reminded , we therefore made the gates of the world seem happy to them , and he cried out to their ruin , and he cried out .
so your lord poured upon them a scourge of punishment .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , and a clear book ,
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze in allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest they should be near .
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ?
but as for him who believes and does good , he will have a reward for him , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
our lord ! they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me , he is indeed in my way ; and whoever disobeys me , then indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
a believer of pharaoh 's people , that he may say : `` should i save you from the way of your lord ? '' he said , `` should i deliver to him the way of your lord ? '' but if you should be truthful , he would have certainly been warned , and if you are truthful , i am the most disputatious of people .
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and we helped them , so they were victorious .
except iblis ; he was proud and became one of the faithless .
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor !
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver . ''
what ! when we are dead and have become dust , that is afarreturn .
and we inspired moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , and do not fear that they will be afraid . ''
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you into prison . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before . this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so behold , how was the end of the corrupters !
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all together . ''
believers , some of your wives and children are enemies to you . so beware of them . but if you pardon and overlook and forgive , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere a day cometh when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
say , “ who is the lord of the seven heavens , and the lord of the thronesupreme ? ”
we created man from sounding clay of mud moulded ,
and that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
so worship what you will besides him . say , ‘ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is the clear loss . ’
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better than that . gardens underneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
he will call for destruction
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds . peace be to you . we desire not the ignorant . ''
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be dipped into the fire . will you not be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
so when she came , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ it is like this . we have been given the knowledge before this , and we were muslims . ”
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and we sent noah to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years , and the deluge overtook them while they were unjust .
enter my paradise .
we inspired the mother of moses : `` suckle him , but when you fear for him , cast him into the river , and do not fear or grieve , for we shall restore him to you and make him one of the messengers . ''
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
if they belie you , say : `` for me are my deeds , and you have your deeds . you are quit of what i do , and i am quit of what you do . ''
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would not have been able to make it any thing . and allah is the wise , the wise .
so when the sight is dazed ,
the romans have been defeated
bring me blocks of iron , until , when he had levelled up between the two cliffs , he said , `` bring me molten copper in the fire . '' he said , `` bring me molten copper to pour over it . ''
for the companions of the right hand .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . this is a promise incumbent upon your lord to be fulfilled .
beautified for men is the love of women , and women of gold and silver , horses of gold and silver , horses of gold and silver , cattle , and fields of the life of the world . they are the best to return .
then their return is to hell .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves , except iblis ; he refused .
and we never sent a warner to a town but the affluent among them said : `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits a flagrant indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her ; and that is easy for allah .
o ye who believe ! know that the idolaters are the ones who are the ones to come down by the sacred mosque , and if they fear allah , then know that allah is the knower , the wise .
alif . lam . mim .
say thou : obey allah and obey the messenger , and if they turn away , then surely the duty of allah is upon you , and if ye obey him , then surely it is a clear duty unto him .
surely in that is a reminder for him who has a heart , or gives ear while he is heedful .
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and will not be tried ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
we sent not a messenger before you but that we revealed to him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
and why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i a pretender .
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you , and if you revert , we will revert . we have made hell a prison for the unbelievers .
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
you are but a warner .
o you who have believed , when you are bidden to be told , `` worship allah , and be a messenger to you . if you do so , he will give you the like of it , and when you are told , `` you will be brought back to god , and then you will be brought back to the best of what you have done . god is well aware of what you do . ''
he said , “ my lord , help me against the mischievous people . ”
but when we removed the punishment from them , behold , they broke their word .
would that it had been the end .
and indeed , he was a sign for him , in order that he might make clear to the pious ones , so that they may be greeted with , until , when the messenger has been sent down , you will say , `` god will never send any one after this . '' thus does allah make the people of the right hand .
the imminentis near at hand .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became niggardly , and turned away in aversion .
howthey will hear and see the day they come to us . but the wrongdoers today are in clear error .
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the abode of the proud .
and when harm toucheth mankind they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associate others with their lord
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
o you enrobed one .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , just as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
there was a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place , two gardens , on the right and on the left . `` eat of your lord 's provision and give thanks to him . a good land and a lord forgiving . ''
and laugh and not weep ,
and those who believed afterwards and emigrated and strove hard along with you , they are of you ; but kindred by blood are nearer to one another in the book of allah . surely allah is cognizant of all things .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
and leftfor posterity .
we used to pray to him before him . he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
dreading some great calamity .
then he threw down his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest .
if allah had so been of the people of the past , all of the people of the earth would have been set on its surface . but god is swift at all time , and when he comes to the day , god sees his servants .
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and then take care of him ; and they are the ones who are good to the believers , and they are the ones to whom he pleases , and to the way of allah , and allah is the embracer , the knower .
indeed , those who have been given knowledge has been given to that which they have been given , and when the punishment comes upon them , they will say , `` woe to him ! why do you not see ? ''
and pharaoh led his people astray , he did not guide them .
he said : o musa ! verily i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time the messenger came to a nation they belied him , so we made them follow one another . so away with a people who do not believe .
or has he daughters and you sons ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
in gardens and springs .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
such are those against whom the word has proved true among the nations of jinn and men that have passed away before them . they were losers .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , `` wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ''
indeed , those who swear allegiance to you are allegiance to allah , and allah 's plan is over them ; and whoever breaks their covenant with allah , he will give him a great reward .
so if you have a plan , use it against me .
say , “ have you considered what god has sent down for you , and you have made some of it unlawful and some lawful ? ” say , “ has allah given you permission , or do you fabricate a lie against allah ? ”
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him . the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
they say , `` god has begotten a son . '' glory be to him ! he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . do you not know ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
and if he had sent it down , it would have been revealed by the heavens , the earth , or the earth , or the earth to be made to be finished . but what is the matter with the believers , that god will bring it to the right way , so that god will bring it back to the right path ?
say : `` o people ! i am only a plain warner to you . ''
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back to sea again , and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
those who believe and are cautious
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof , and your lord is watchful over everything .
and whoever is spared from it on that day , he will have mercy on him ; and that is the manifest triumph .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his life until they see what they were threatened with , or the punishment is finished , and who is weaker in hosts , who is weaker in forces . ’
for the companions of the right hand .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
they said : by allah ! verily allah hath preferred thee above us , and we were indeed guilty .
they rejoice in the grace and grace from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
and couldst thou see when they are stationed before their lord ? he will say : is this not the truth ? they will say : aye ! by our lord , he will say : taste the torment for that ye used to disbelieve .
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? and allah is all-appreciative , all-knowing .
although before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
can not tempt anyone against him
have you considered if he denies and turns away ?
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you , if it is from the truth that is revealed to you , and what is with the torah and the gospel ? it is the speech of a people who are the ignorant .
and when they reached the confluence of the two , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
my lord ! thou hast given me the dominion of that which i have given thee , and of the interpretation of speech , originator of the heavens and the earth , originator of the heavens and the earth , and thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter .
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved , and that is the recompense of the disbelievers .
so fear god and obey me .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
they are those that are allah 's grace , and zakariya , and the children of ibrahim , and the seed of abraham , the upright , and when the signs of abraham came to them .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a hard day '
and of his signs are the ships in the sea like mountains .
and our forefathers ? ''
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each floats in an orbit .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
when a party of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or sternly punish ? '' they said , `` to be an excuse to your lord , and that they may be careful ofallah . ''
he said : fear not , verily , i am with you , hearing and seeing .
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be a source of strength for them .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
then he frowned and scowled ,
and the children of israel , have been sent down to you , a messenger from your lord , and have a firm argument from your lord , and i have been sent with a light from your lord , and i am the best of those who are willing to give you a light , and a lesson for what you have done . indeed , allah is the most disputatious of believers .
as for him whose scales are heavy ,
he said , “ get out of here , despised and rejected . whoever among them follows you , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
they said , “ are you joseph ? he said , ‘ i am joseph and this is my brother ; i have been gracious to us . indeed , allah has been gracious to us . indeed , allah does not reward the righteous . ’
pharaoh said , `` let me kill moses , and let him call to his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or cause corruption in the land . ''
o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not defraud people in the land , and do not spread corruption in the land .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error and desire to go astray .
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be lowered in compliance .
and alsoanotherwhich you love , help from allah and a speedy victory . and give good tidings to the believers .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greater signs .
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
and made the night a covering ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
those who believe and do not mix it with injustice , for them is security , and they are guided .
they will swear to you in the name of allah , that you may leave them , so that you may leave them . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for what they used to do .
and this quran could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a confirmation of what was before it , and there is no doubt about it .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
moses said to his people , `` seek help from allah and be patient . the earth is allah 's . he gives it to whomever he wills of his servants , and the outcome is for the righteous . ''
he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , which i have made over you , to be trusted over you , when i have been commanded to be recited to you , and when i have been commanded to recite to them the command of my command , and when they are recited to me , the same is by my command , when they are commanded to be in the same manner . ”
if you die or are slain , you will be brought back to god .
and we inspired moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , and do not fear that they will be afraid . ''
then which of your lord 's marvels will you dispute ?
and verily i desire that thou shalt be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become of the fellows of the fire : that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the guilty .
for what sin she was killed ,
the piercing star .
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
then eat of every fruit and follow the ways of your lord made easy . there comes forth from their bellies a drink in which there is healing for mankind . indeed in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
verily we have created man into toil and struggle .
say , `` this is what has been sent down to you from your lord . '' whoever wills , let him believe , and let him believe in it , and let the disbelievers hear the fire , and then , for the evil of it , it is a great matter for the unjust , and what is the matter with them , and an evil homecoming !
and other demons bound in chains .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and he is the lord of the heavens and the earth , that he might try you about which of you is best in deed . if only they were to be resurrected , they say : `` it is not but a manifest sorcery . ''
but he denied and disobeyed .
by the day when it reveals it ,
and he hath subjected unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , all from him . lo ! herein verily are portents for a people who reflect .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
are these not the ones whom you swore that allah would not have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , and fear no fear , nor shall you grieve .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists do not wish to be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whomever he wills to his mercy . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his parents to himself , and said , `` enter egypt in peace and security . ''
when he ran away to the laden ship ,
and set your face towards the religion , a man of pure faith , and never be of the polytheists .
and shown him the two highways ?
and cushions ranged
indeed , when it was said to them , ‘ there is no god except allah , ’ they were always proud .
there is not one of you but will pass into it . this is a decree which your lord has decreed .
and whoever comes to him with a believerhe has done righteous deeds , for them is the highest ranks ,
so see how was the end of their plan , we destroyed them and their people , all together .
have you considered the like of allah ’ s desire , that he may make for him the way of allah , and he has set a seal on his own self , and whose hearts are sealed , and who is a confirmer ?
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
“ we are penalized .
and indeed those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
then we sent after them moses with our signs to pharaoh and his establishment , but they were unjust to them , but see how was the end of the corrupters .
pharaoh said , `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you magic . you will soon know . ''
before them the people of noah denied . they rejected our servant and said , `` a madman , '' and he was rebuffed .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . i am a trustworthy messenger to you ,
indeed , upon us is the collectionandits recitation .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
and when we took a covenant from the children of israel , o people , worship him , and worship the parents and the relatives , and the relatives , and the upright , and the upright , and keep up prayer and pay the zakat , and then , as to the right , it is they who turn away from it .
indeed , the first part of the night is heavier in tread , and more upright in speech .
those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their works are fruitless . will they not be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
and if you are in doubt about it , then know that we have created you from dust , and then to drink , and then it is the same to you that we may give you a right course , so that you may make it clear to the ground , and to the earth , as you are commanded . as for the earth , it is a right course for you , and to the earth , as you will .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability , and we are acting .
and by the moon when it grows full ,
and those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they were losers .
when the help of allah and the victory comes ,
he said , “ you know that none has sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you are doomed . ”
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful , silver roofs for their houses , and stairs of silver which they ascend .
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted , and you would taste evil because you hindered others from the way of allah , and you will suffer a painful punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
what , when he said to aaron , `` what is i worship after i have been commanded ? '' they said , `` god and his fathers have submitted . ''
and the heaven and earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will . indeed your lord is all-wise , all-knowing .
and what will explain to you what the day of decision is ?
thereafter you will surely die .
and the believers are you , and the believers , and the believers , and the believers are , and they will not be called to account for them , and it is a right course for them , and it is a right course for the believers , and it is a right course to the believers . it is a straight course for them .
and when they said : o allah ! if this is the truth from you , then rain down stones on us or bring us a painful punishment .
then we shall make the later ones to follow them .
o you who believe ! do not say ambiguous words , but say unzurna and listen ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
say thou : obey allah and obey the messenger , and if they turn away , then surely the duty of allah is upon you , and if ye obey him , then surely it is a clear duty unto him .
if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their own desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from allah ? indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn away , your dutyis but plain conveyance .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . lo ! they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were ungodly .
he said , `` o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? you put him behind your backs . my lord encompasses all that you do .
and that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is aware and sees his servants .
and the foolish among us used to say outrageous things about allah .
and they say : allah hath taken a covenant with us , and that he hath sent down unto him no apostle , and if ye are truthful .
he will speak to people in the cradle and in maturity , and will be among the righteous . ''
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they reveal .
and when their eyes are turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
they said , “ we have given you good news , so do not despair . ”
and they swore by allah with solemn oaths that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any of the nations ; but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
and in their wealth there was a share for the beggar and the deprived .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
the wayis only against those who ask leave of you and they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and the parable of an evil word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
we reveal to the quran that which is a healing and a mercy for the believers , and it adds only to the loss of perdition .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` if i have fabricated it , my guilt is upon me , and i am innocent of what you commit . ''
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all together . ''
when they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a distant place .
see how they lie against themselves , and how thosethey invented have deserted them .
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
and those carrying loads .
he says , “ i have spent enormous wealth . ”
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
or do they think that we do not hear their secret and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , and our messengers are with them writing down .
but if they turn away , then we have sent you as a bearer of good news and a warner . indeed , we have sent you out of the truth . indeed , it is an evil way for man , and indeed , the right way is true .
and indeed he saw him on the clear horizon .
for them is a known provision ,
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
and allah will be the ones to be lost in the day of resurrection , and he will say , “ where are the people who had been given the knowledge of the hereafter ? ” and those who were given the knowledge of the truth will be on the day of resurrection .
i fear my kinsmen , after me , my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
and we showed them a sign , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
in the gardens of eden , wherein streams flow , wherein streams flow , wherein they will abide forever . god is the lord of all being .
on the day when we will call to all mankind , and the believers will say , `` to allah , '' and the believers say , `` you ascribed partners to allah . '' and the hypocrites say , `` you are indeed my messengers . i swear by the truth . ''
and it was said to the people : `` are yougoing to assemble ?
and from every one of them is the course of the sacred mosque , and set up the sacred mosque to the sacred mosque , so that they may have gone back before you , so that they may have no faith in you , except for the sake of the ancients , and they are not guided .
and you make its denial your livelihood ?
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
these were the 'ad , who denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every stubborn tyrant .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
so hasten thou not against them . we are counting for them anumber .
and if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth , they will say , `` god 's . '' they will say , `` god will bring to them what they want , and say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . '' say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . '' say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . '' say , `` god is sufficient as a guardian . ''
and allah 's promise is to come to you , and there is no doubt for that which they have been wont to do , and the right path is to come to them , and it is a way for them . so allah makes clear to you his verses , so that you may be grateful .
obedience and upright speech . so when the matter is resolved on , it would be better for them if they were to be truthful .
that is because you used to rejoice on earth without right , and that you used to behave insolently .
so let him call on his concourse !
they are the ones who have been defeated , saying , `` what is the matter with the truth that god has given to the truth ? '' and he is the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable .
say , `` god gives you life and causes you to die . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
and other demons bound in chains .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
o you who have faith ! do not let the good of your own deeds be accepted like to the people of the hereafter , and those who are given his wealth in the life of the world , and the hereafter , the like of it is a right way , so what is the matter with them , for god does not guide the faithless people .
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and shall be seized from a near place , and they shall be seized from a near place .
it is he who has sent among the unlettered a messenger from among themselves , who recites his signs to them and purifies them and teaches them the book and wisdom , although they were in manifest error .
and that they worship besides allah , that he can not harm them , nor do they say : `` this is the way of allah . '' say : `` what ! do you say that which is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` what ! do you say that which is in the heavens and the earth ? '' and to the right way ,
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land . these are the losers .
and loose the knot from my tongue ,
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation ; so do they not understand ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not see ?
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they almost stab you with their glances , when they hear the message .
indeed we suffice to deal with those who scoff at you ,
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
say , `` tell me , if this is from allah and you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than he who is in extreme dissension ? ''
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
then she said : `` what is the matter with you that you have been stoned to my own conduct ? '' but he who spoke to me spoke the truth , and to remain in it .
behaving arrogantly , and reviled them .
o you who have faith ! judge for the religion of allah , and take your duty to allah , and to be a case for you , and if the people are in the right hand , do not turn your backs to it . god is aware of what you do .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the message . to us is the reckoning .
the story of the night was made to say to his lord , `` recite the night with his lord . '' and when he came to his lord , moses said to his lord , ‘ you are indeed following me , and do not follow the right way . ’
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . glory be to him , and exalted be he above what they associate .
say , `` observe what is in the heavens and the earth . '' but signs and warnings will not avail those who do not believe .
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
there is no fault in the people of the way that if it is a relation to the matter , it will not be decreased , until the case of their lord will come to them , and in the end he will come to you in full , and to allah will return .
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
verily allah wrongeth not the weight of an atom , but if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and giveth him a mighty hire .
god does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives anything to whomever he wills . whoever ascribes partners to allah has invented a great sin .
and in the morning it was as though it had been reaped .
and mention in the book idris ; he was a man of truth , a prophet .
we have created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
she said , “ i seek refuge in the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
he said : nay ! so go both of you with our signs ; we shall be with you , listening .
those to whom we gave the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
is he then whose evil deeds seem attractive to him , and to see ? god causes to go astray whomever he wishes , and he who does so , will be relieved of their disbelief . god knows well what they do .
i created the jinn and humankind only that they might worship me .
but we found in it only one household of muslims .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was a tyrant in the land .
do not speak to those who invoke god ’ s call , lest they are in an ignorant manner , so that they may go about in the footsteps of allah . it is all the same for them that they will be brought back to their lord .
then a man came running from the furthest part of the city , saying : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
magnify your lord ,
not equal are the inmates of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; it is the people of paradise who are the achievers .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up all that they have wrought ; but what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he will . ’
only the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
we have given you abundance .
and how many a town did i give respite while it was unjust , then i seized it , and to me is the destination .
do those who commit evil deeds imagine that we shall make them equal in the same way as those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal to the life of the world and the life to come ? how evil is the judgement that they make !
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none payeth heed except him who turns to him .
indeed allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
nay , but they play in doubt .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
have they not seen the earth , that they might see the end of their former generations , and how was the end of those who have gone before them ? and allah is ever free of all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is all-powerful and all-powerful .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided them . we had guided noah before , and of his descendants , david and solomon and job and joseph and moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like the criminals ?
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , so that you may understand .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was a tyrant in the land .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people . ''
moses said , `` the knowledge of their knowledge is with my lord , in a book . my lord neither errs nor forgets . ''
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
that is because you took the signs of allah for you , and the life of this world deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to please allah .
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back to sea again , and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
surely those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and they will abide therein .
and you see people entering allah 's religion in multitudes ,
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
does he not know that allah sees ?
by al-'asr .
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people into sects , weakeninga groupamong them , slaying their sons and sparing their women . indeed , he was of those who corrupted .
and we have not appointed for the people of the fire any other than a matter for those who disbelieve , and to those who have been given the lie to the truth , it is only for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and that the disbelievers may say to the believers : `` what is the matter with god that he will guide the believers ? '' and it is only for him that he will guide . and it is only for him that he will guide .
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
for divorced women maintenanceon a reasonable . this is an obligation on the righteous .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while .
and that is not difficult for allah .
as for those who have believed and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , those have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious ones as the wicked ?
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
and we have set up for them a gate of that which is in the right of the right and of the right , and in the name of allah , in order to be mentioned , and when they are in a company , then eat of it , and be of the pure . thus do we give you thanks .
we shall bring to them their hearts , with which they are bound to flow with it . they will say , `` praise be to allah who has guided us to what you have been commanded , and indeed , it is he who has been the guided of what you used to do . ''
why do they turn away from the reminder ,
the foolish among the people will say , `` what has turned them away from the qiblah they formerly formerly ? '' say , `` to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ''
and you will not be able to change the matter of their affairs , but if they are given any advantage , then do not be like any other than the like of it . and if you are guided , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
and when our verses are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
say , “ pray to him , whether you pray to him , or do you bring it to us , even though we are the ones to bring it to guidance , and we will bring it to us as a guide and a way . ” say , “ indeed i have been the same to us , and indeed , we have been commanded to be guided . ”
and imbued it withits evil and its piety .
and those who say : `` the book is revealed to you , in the right way , '' and they will be in the midst of the angels , and they have made it a garden for which they have made no fear , nor have they made a garden .
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
when moses had said to their enemy , `` o moses , do you want to kill him , o moses ? do you want to kill him who has become a wrongdoer in the land ? do you not reflect on the earth , that you may be a harmdoer '
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
and such fruits as they prefer
howthey will hear and see the day they come to us . but the wrongdoers today are in clear error .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders barren whomever he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
the word is not changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
speak to them as a way to you , to be guided by you , and allah is the most merciful to give you the right way , and he will give you a good share of the night , and so do not make the way of allah to be a trial for you . so do not make the way of allah to be a manager .
it is all the same to him whether you speak secretly , or one who speaks aloud , and he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
yet they have taken other gods besides him , who create nothing , and are themselves created , and who have no power to harm or benefit themselves , and have no control over death , nor life nor resurrection .
as for those who believed and did good deeds , their lord will admit them into his mercy . that is the clear triumph .
they say , `` these are confused dreams , but he has invented it . '' rather , he is a poet . so let him bring us a sign , as the messengers were sent to us .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear allah , so do you not understand ?
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
did he not cause their guile to go astray ?
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is ever all-knowing , all-wise .
and they say : the compassionate hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are honoured bondmen .
in houses which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them , in the mornings and the evenings ,
our lord , make us submissive to you , andfrom our offspring a nation submissive to you , and show us our rites and accept our repentance . you are the receiver of repentance , the merciful .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and indeed evil is the resort .
and indeed he saw him in another descent
when we let mankind taste mercy after some adversity has afflicted them , they begin to scheme against our signs . say , `` god is swifter in planning . our angels write down what you scheme . ''
lest you should say , `` had it been that we had been given the book , we would have given them a better book . '' and indeed , it is a clear proof for them , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and he will be clear to them in the way of god .
and turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
andone who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
`` o my son ! if it be the weight of a mustard-seed , and even though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . verily , allah is subtle , aware .
and kind to his parents , not arrogant , rebellious .
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and that which allah has created , and that their term is near ? so what will they believe after this ?
and do not grieve for those who rush to disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least ; and allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
he has given you cattle and children ,
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sins . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
and most of them do not believe in allah , but they associate others with him .
and you will not be able to change the matter of their affairs , but if they are given any advantage , then do not be like any other than the like of it . and if you are guided , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought together before us .
as for the boat , it belonged to masakinworking in the sea .
and do not argue on behalf of those who are dishonest to themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the iniquitous .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and the meeting with him , it is they who have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . and for them , when their hearts hear , they say : what did your lord say : the truth they say ?
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign . he said : thy sign is that thou shalt not speak to mankind for three nights , though thou art not to be able .
see you not how allah has made for you all that is in the earth , and that which is on the earth , and that which is on the earth , and when it is of the sea , when it is set upon them , the command of allah will be in the earth , but allah is most forgiving , most merciful ?
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : `` has allah sent a human messenger ? ''
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
by those who swim smoothly ,
believers , seek help in patience and prayer . god is with those who are patient .
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is a punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
then he followed a road
is he who follows the pleasure of allah like him who is laden with the anger of allah and whose refuge is hell ? an evil homecoming !
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely seize his descendants except for a few . ”
and composed you in whatever form he pleased ?
they said , `` lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be of the losers . ''
and peace be upon the messengers .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them because of their unbelief ; little do they believe .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
but those who deny our revelations and scorn them , they shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , allah will pay them in full their rewards . god does not love the unjust .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . god does not like aggressors .
so we forgave him his shortcoming and indeednearness awaits him , and a good place ofreturn .
half of it , or reduce it a little .
this is what you used to doubt . ''
have you not seen that allah will take you out of the heaven upon the coming of the heaven ? then he will make it one of the like of the like of it , and to whomsoever god will bring forth the like of it , to whomever he wills . and to whomsoever he will , will come to light .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking allah 's pleasure , and allah is kind toservants .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein they shall abide .
and cite for them the parable of two men , to one of whom we had provided two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with palm trees and placed between them tillage .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
if you could only see when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs , saying : `` taste the torment of burning .
they will say , ‘ our lord ! whoever brought this upon us , double the punishment of hell . ’
thus do we deal with the guilty .
that we pour forth water in abundance ,
and denies the best ,
and tell them about abraham 's guests .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to ridicule engulfed them .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , the angels , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
and appoint for me a minister from my family
those who persecute the believing men and women , then do not repent , and do not repent , for them is the punishment of hell .
we know best what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
and the people of the earth would have made the like of it to be the same for them , the like of the earth , all of them , and the best of all things in the sight of allah .
he will say : wrangle not in my presence , and i had already warned you of the threat .
he said : `` this is not the course of an enemy to you ; indeed , it is not for you to bring out to you a time , and to make it the end of the winds , to make it proper .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed , so we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel , that they should not take any other guardian besides me .
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent forth , they would say , `` our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us , so that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ? ''
so we seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea . he was blameworthy .
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and if you find no one in it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told to go away , you will be told , `` if you are given a message from you , do not go back . ''
and guided them to a straight path .
that they will be helped ,
and you arelooking on --
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
they love the fleeting life , and leave behind them a heavy day .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
and they were not able to stand up , nor were they helped .
we have sent down to you a book in which there is a reminder for you . do you not understand ?
that they will be helped ,
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
so fear god and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
but those who fear their lord , for them shall be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; a gift that is with allah , and that which is with allah is better for the righteous .
these , our people , have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
they do not bring you any similitude but we bring you the truth and the best explanation .
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
we used to pray to him before him . he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and mount sinai ,
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
they rejoice in the grace and grace from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you are devoted ? ”
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is recorded in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
o you who have faith ! take your own souls to do not harm you , if you are guided . you will return to god . all of you will return to god . he will inform you of what you used to do .
they say , `` whatever is in their bellies is that for our daughters , but if it is lawful for our wives , they will surely be given their wives . god will recompense them for their deeds . god is all-knowing and all-knowing . ''
we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride and some they eat .
by the promised day ,
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it endeavors .
he said : verily thou art of those reprieved .
those who cried lies to shuaib , as if they had never dwelt there . those who cried lies to shuaib , they were the losers .
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will the people of the wrong be destroyed ? ''
you will see the people who have faith in allah and those who ascribe associates to him , and you will see those who call to god and say to those who believe : `` we are indeed of those who have faith , and those who are true , they are the ones who are true . ''
if theytread the right path , we shall give them to drink of abundant water ,
say : `` we have heard the truth , confirming what is before him and what has been revealed to abraham and ishmael and isaac and jacob , and we were not to be obedient to him . ''
he said : `` the son of this matter is to be directed to the course of this matter , '' he said , `` no one can save him on this day , except for him whom god has chosen . ''
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , then he who had sought his help on the day before it had sought his help . moses said to him , `` you are indeed a meddlesome fellow . ''
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not return
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
to replace them bybetter than them . and we are not to be outrun .
if you count the favours of allah you will not be able to number them . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
till a known term .
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , he will have a straitened life , and we will raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
have they not seen the earth , that they might see the end of their former generations , and how was the end of those who have gone before them ? and allah is ever free of all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is all-powerful and all-powerful .
they say , `` whatever is in their bellies is that for our daughters , but if it is lawful for our wives , they will surely be given their wives . god will recompense them for their deeds . god is all-knowing and all-knowing . ''
surely those who disbelieve say : allah is there : there is no god but he . but if ye do not desist , there is no god but he ; and for those who disbelieve there will be a painful punishment .
who doto be seen ,
thus do we deal with the guilty .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? and they shall have no helpers .
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if they were hurrying towards a target .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and allah sends down water from the sky , and therewith revives the earth after its death ; indeed in this is a sign for people who listen .
a group has he guided , and a group has deservederror , for they took the devils for guardians besides allah , and they think that they are guided .
surely the day of decision is an appointed time .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark ,
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place !
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in number .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made good your shapes ; and to him is the destination .
and how can you take it back when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
whether you disclose anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
say , `` will you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord ? we are responsible for our deeds and your deeds . we are sincere to him . ''
and when they said : o allah ! if this is the truth from you , then rain down stones on us or bring us a painful punishment .
and marry the unmarried among you and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them ; and those who were unjust among these will be the evils of that which they earned ; and they will not be able to escape .
and if some of you believe in what i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . ''
then we said , `` go , both of you , to the people who have denied our signs . ''
so glorify the name of your great lord .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
nay , but ye thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families , and that was made fairseeming in your hearts , and ye harbored evil thoughts , and ye were a people doomed to perish .
muhammad is not a messenger except a messenger . there will be a noble messenger before him . if he dies , he turns back on his heels . and whoever turns on his heels , will not harm him , and allah will reward the thankful .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
it is a word that has been revealed to them from a piece of what they say , and a barrier between them , and a barrier between them and with allah and his messenger , and with allah and his messenger . god bears witness that they are liars .
so that you may recite some of the news of what has been sent down to them , and say , “ why do you have an immunityin the matter ? ” it is only a watcher over all things . god is watchful over everything .
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or is it we who bringdown ?
o mankind ! fear your lord . the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which they had been given , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
my lord ! thou hast given me the dominion of that which i have given thee , and of the interpretation of speech , originator of the heavens and the earth , originator of the heavens and the earth , and thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter .
those who call to the call of their lord is happy , and for those who follow the right path , and those who follow the path of god will be the best of those who are in the way .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
an orphan near of kin .
except those who repent after this and reform , for god is forgiving and merciful .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and it is they who wronged themselves , and allah wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the raisers of commotion in the city do not desist , we will surely urge you against them , but they will not be your neighbors therein except for a little while .
then he turned away from the twain , and the first of her people was an ant . he said : `` woe to me ! i am the same to him , that i should be a confirmer of it , and to be a confirmer . ''
and the earth , we have spread out the earth , and cast therein firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of things .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
and made them like chewed-up straw .
and i will lead them to the right path , and i will make it sincerely to them , and they will be made to worship allah , so that they may take satan as a clear trial .
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
and musa said : if ye are and those who are in the earth , then verily , allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
these are the unbelievers ; and we have prepared for the unbelievers a humiliating punishment .
the sinners will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
so eat of what you have taken as lawful and good , and be wary of allah ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you will be returned .
say , `` this is what has been sent down to you from your lord . '' whoever wills , let him believe , and let him believe in it , and let the disbelievers hear the fire , and then , for the evil of it , it is a great matter for the unjust , and what is the matter with them , and an evil homecoming !
but if a favor from allah comes to you , he will surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him . would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
or do they benefit you , or harm you ? ''
he said : verily thou art of those reprieved .
so fear allah and obey me .
so taste it , and for the disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
he said , “ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that which you could not have patience . ”
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and those who do not expect to meet us say : `` why do not angels have been sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? '' indeed , they are scornful and have great fear .
and those who believed and did good deeds will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein forever . their greeting therein will be , ‘ peace ! ’ ‘ peace ! ’
and the earth , we have spread out the earth , and cast therein firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of things .
and if you are in doubt about it , then know that we have created you from dust , and then to drink , and then it is the same to you that we may give you a right course , so that you may make it clear to the ground , and to the earth , as you are commanded . as for the earth , it is a right course for you , and to the earth , as you will .
so we sent upon them a raging wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of this world ; and they will not be helped .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
and they say : allah hath taken a covenant with us , and that he hath sent down unto him no apostle , and if ye are truthful .
nay ! if you knew with positive knowledge
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning is .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings an evil deed will only be recompensed for what they used to do .
that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and that they may enjoy themselves , but they will come to know .
people ask you about the hour . say : `` the knowledge of it is only with allah . what is it that the hour is near at hand ? ''
many societies have passed away before you . travel in the land and see what was the end of those who denied .
he said , `` have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
indeed your god is one ,
but if they desist , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
say , `` tell me , if this is from allah and you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than he who is in extreme dissension ? ''
and if you are truthful , justice are the people of the youth , who are two other women , or a confirmation of the two women . if you are the ones to do so , they will be the same or four . it is the same for them that they may be the same .
then we drowned the rest .
alif , lam , ra . the quran has been recited to the tongue of this qur ’ an , to recite it to the tongue of wisdom , as a confirmation of the human being , to recite the truth . the knowledge of the knowledge is true .
indeed it throws upsparks like castles ,
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
from it we created you , and to it we shall return you , and we shall bring you forth from it a second time .
and no doubt , there is no doubt that you will be called to account in this world , nor are they in the world to come , nor is it in the hereafter ; and those who are guilty of evil are the fasiqun .
then it appeared to them after they had seen the signs , that they might imprison him for a time .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be happiness and an excellent resting place .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
about the great news ,
so set your face towards the right religion , before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day , people will be divided .
say , `` this is my way . i call to god with sure knowledge , i and whoever follows me . glory be to god , and i am not of the polytheists . ''
the hour has drawn near , and the moon has split .
said : `` o iblis ! what is the matter with you that you are not among those who prostrated ? ''
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved and made a jest of my signs and my messengers .
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and tall palm-trees with compact spathes
did he not find you an orphan and shelter you ?
and they say : naught is this but our present life ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time . they have no knowledge of that which they have no knowledge . they have no knowledge .
god has created you from dust , and then , by the means of your lord , it will not be finished , and it is not in the least to go forth in the least . it is that allah is that .
`` till the day of the time appointed . ''
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
they will come forth from the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
when the fetters and chains are round their necks , they will be dragged
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you . and there is a termwith him , yet you are in doubt .
to us is their return .
that is because of what we have ordained for the children of israel , and that they should be in the land , or the evil of the earth , as if they were to do so , it is only those who are destined to believe in the signs of allah , and indeed , the noble messengers is in a clear manner .
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
o ye who believe ! know that the idolaters are the ones who are the ones to come down by the sacred mosque , and if they fear allah , then know that allah is the knower , the wise .
and call to mind when abraham said , `` my lord , show me the dead , and show me the dead . '' said he , `` do you believe in him ? '' he said , `` the same is the same , i have brought to you the sound of the two and a right course . '' and , `` then , i have been commanded to make a right course for you , and bring to you a right course . ''
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house a believer , and the believing men and believing women . and do not increase the wrongdoers except in ruin .
so he who givesand fears ,
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
our lord ! they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me , he is indeed in my way ; and whoever disobeys me , then indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
they fulfil their vows and fear a day whose evil will be wide-spreading ,
and they say , `` none shall enter paradise except a jew or a christian . '' these are their wishful fancies . say , ‘ produce your proof if you are truthful . ’
indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe .
and those carrying loads .
so fear allah and obey me .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
or say : `` if only allah had guided me , i would have been among the righteous . ''
o mankind , listen to the truth , for those whom they call upon besides allah can not speak to them , even if they are truthful , and if they are truthful , they are a liar .
and there is a noble messenger among you who recites to you your messages , and to make the righteously striving believers , and he will bring them out of darkness into light , and he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them , and to remain in it for ever .
and the dwellers in midian , and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite , so i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
he said , `` i will not prostrate myself to a human being whom you have created from clay . ''
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and we made him to be an object of good , and a case for them . they are the abode of the hereafter ; and they are the abode of the hereafter , and they are the ones who are the ones to be saved .
whoever is opposed to the messenger , then after the guidance has been shown to the believers , it is a guidance for the believers , and he will admit the righteous .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be lowered in compliance .
indeed , this is certain truth .
noah said , `` my lord , they have disobeyed me , and followed those whose wealth and children have only added to their ruin .
so we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down .
and persisted in the great sin .
or have we sent down to them any authority that speaks about them ?
those who deny the book and what we had sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
rather , we have been deprived . ''
so prostrate yourselves before allah and worship him .
as a blessing from us . thus we reward the thankful .
they said , “ our lord , we are afraid of him , or exceed all bounds . ”
and when allah promised you one of the two parties , you wished to be yours , and you wished that the unarmed one would be yours , and allah desired to prove the truth with his words , and to cut off the root of the disbelievers .
to you will be death , so that they follow the house of your people , and if they are guided , they say , `` this is from allah , if you should harm him . ''
and we created you in pairs ,
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
korah , pharaoh , and haman . moses came to them with clear signs , but they were arrogant in the land , but they could not outstrip us .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord ; for those who do good in this world will be good in this world ; for the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be paid in full for their reward . ”
then a visitation from your lord visited it while they were sleeping .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
by the day when it reveals it ,
in fact , they deny what is beyond the knowledge of their knowledge , and whose explanation has not yet reached them . thus did those before them deny . so observe how was the fate of the wrongdoers !
and madesmooth for him .
the evil of all these are hateful in the sight of your lord .
and the story of noah to his people . he said , ‘ o my people ! if you have done so , my people , if you are truthful , i have no relation with my religion , and then do not keep me with my religion , for then do not be a skeptic . ’
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
those against whom the word will be pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we led them astray like ourselves . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped . ''
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and created you and the tribes of nations , and that you may recognize each other . indeed , the most honorable of you are the most pious of you . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
their dwelling will be hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
and we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious ones as the wicked ?
he is the omnipotent over his slaves , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away and they do not neglect .
say : `` he who produced them the first time , he will quicken them . he has knowledge of every creation ,
and allah turned back the unbelievers in their rage ; they gained no advantage . allah sufficed the believers in their fight ; and allah is all-strong , all-mighty .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a flame in wait for him .
and verily i desire that thou shalt be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become of the fellows of the fire : that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
and every small and greatis inscribed .
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in order that it may increase with allah will not be rewarded with the property of allah , but that which you give in zakah , those are the multipliers .
then i called them openly ,
have we not made the earth a bed ,
and remember the brother of aad , when he warned his people at ahqaf—and warners have passed away before him and after him . and indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and worketh righteously and none shall attain it save the patient .
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
whom allah has cursed . he said , `` i will certainly take a share of your servants ,
and indeed he saw him on the clear horizon .
eat of the lawful and good things which allah has provided for you , and fear allah in whom you believe .
the heavens are almost rent asunder from above them , and the angels glorify the praises of their lord , and ask forgiveness for those on earth . indeed , allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
and it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and he unfolds his mercy . he is the protector , the praiseworthy .
and who sends down water from the sky in a measured measure , and we revive thereby a dead land ; thus will you be brought forth .
when he said to his people , “ we are the heirs of the good of you . so ask your lord to provide you with a sustenance from your lord , and he will bring you out of what you wish to do . ” so it is for him that you should take for a while , and it is for them to be a clear thing . so , as for him , they will have a right course .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
and follow the limits of abraham , isaac , and jacob , not a son . it was not for us to associate with allah any one . and he is of the thankful .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
the arrogant leaders of his people said : `` o shu'aib ! we will banish you and those who believe with you , unless you return to our religion. '' they said , `` even though we hate it ? ''
those before them plotted , but allah struck their structures from the foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
and when it is came to the sun , you will see it with the right side of it , and when it comes to the side of the two , it will be in the east and the west ; and when allah guides , he will find it as a guide and a guide .
and do not eat of that over which allah ’ s name has not been mentioned , and it is ungodliness . the satans inspire their friends to dispute with you . if you obey them , you will surely be polytheists .
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
and when they burst in upon david , he was afraid of them , but they said , “ do not be afraid ; one of them is one of the other , one of the other . do not be unjust to the other one else . show us the right way . ”
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
beholdest thou ? if we let them enjoy for years ,
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
those to whom the people said , `` indeed , the people have gathered against you , so fear them . '' but their faith increased in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best protector . ”
and indeed , the covenant of the descendants of israel is true , and to choose allah . and indeed , i will be with those who are with allah , and to whom you will be a righteous , and he will be a confirmer of what they have done .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
our lord ! they have led many people astray . so whoever follows me , he is indeed in my way ; and whoever disobeys me , then indeed , you are forgiving and merciful .
his refuge will be paradise .
and if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
say : `` tell me , if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ?
and of the devils were some who dived for him and did other work ; and we were warders to them .
but those who deny our revelations will afflict them for their disobedience .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
it may be that allah will create love between you and those with whom you are at enmity ; and allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
moses said , `` the knowledge of their knowledge is with my lord , in a book . my lord neither errs nor forgets . ''
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
i do not desire any provision from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break the covenant ;
they will say , `` our lord , our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
see , then , the end of those who turn their faces to light , and a light , and an elaboration of the truth , and the two of them are an ungodly people .
when you recite the quran , seek refuge in allah from satan the outcast .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a longnight .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but i gave respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them ; and howwas my punishment !
and we sent noah to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years , and the deluge overtook them while they were unjust .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . indeed , we have given the reminder to those who had gone before you , and fear allah ; and if you are ungrateful , indeed allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
every soul shall taste death ; and we test you with evil and good , and to us you will be returned .
or who is the case of the land , that he may come upon them with the like of that which is before them ? is there a god with allah ? he is exalted in matters , above what they associate .
say , “ my lord has established the command of justice , and in all things they hear , and their hearts and their skins are in different parts . and to him you will be brought back . ”
in houses which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them , in the mornings and the evenings ,
is not allah the wisest of judges ?
and of them are some who believe in it , and of them are some who do not believe in it ; and your lord is best aware of the corrupters .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
alas for the servants ! never came to them a messenger but they ridiculed him .
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
and do not give up your property except the benefit of your property , unless it be the extent of the extent that the extent of which you have been commanded , and do not measure , for it is the same for you , that your lord may tell you what you have done .
and the weighing on that day is true . then as for those whose scalewill be heavy , they will be successful .
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
so they hamstrung the she-camel and defied the command of their lord , and they said , “ o saleh , bring us what you promise us , if you are a noble messenger . ”
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
and when they see some merchandise or sport , they break off to it and leave you standing . say , “ what is with god is better than diversion and dealing . and allah is the best of providers . ”
and serried acacias ,
say , `` god is sufficient as witness between me and you . he is well aware of his servants and sees him . ''
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
say , “ who is the lord of the seven heavens , and the lord of the thronesupreme ? ”
and united their hearts . if you had spent all that is in the earth , you could not have united their hearts , but allah has united them ; indeed he is all-mighty , all-wise .
verily those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing .
and he who measures and guides .
he has given you cattle and children ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
you are vindictive towards us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . ''
and the one who came to you , - if he had so willed , he would have made for you the right course , and if he had so , he would have given them the right course , and if he was to be a guardian , it is only a confirmation of what is before him , and he is the best of those who do right , and it is the same for his father , and he is the all-knower of him .
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
they will certainly carry their burdens and other burdens with their own burdens , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and is careful ofhim , they are the winners .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
their eyes will be humbled , and humiliation will cover them , and they were invited to prostrate themselves while they were sound .
will you not then remember ?
god has decreed : `` i will surely prevail . i and my messengers will certainly prevail . ''
in clear arabic language .
he knows what is spoken aloud and what you conceal .
and when they were in their lord 's presence to come to them , to come to them , he said : `` o you who have been able to come to you from your own way , we have already made a covenant with you , and i will not give you what you have done . he is the best of providers . ''
and his wife and his sons ;
i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back . ''
so , their children , their children , their hearingand their mouths , and speak to them in a part of what they have been reminded , and you will be called to account for what they have been doing . god loves the people .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
and if ye punish , then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted . but if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
therein they shall have whatever they desire , and with us is more .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
so on that day they willshare in the punishment .
when he wills a thing , he will say to it 'be , ' and it is .
so believe in allah and his messenger , and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and shooting flames .
a throng of the ancients
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the maintenance of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
indeed man is ungrateful to his lord .
and there comes not to them a fresh reminder from the compassionate , but they turn away from it .
it is he who created death and life that he might try you . he is the almighty , the most forgiving .
thereover protection belongs only to god , the true one . he is the best to reward and the best .
they said , “ in allah we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us a trial for the unjust . ”
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
and if thou art about to know the things of the children of israel , ask the of the children of israel : ask the followers of the book , that the truth has come to you from your lord , so have no doubt concerning it .
o ye who believe ! stand up with the truth and bear with allah a right , and have no power to avert it , so that you may be godfearing . lo ! allah is aware of what you do .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
he said , “ my lord , how can i have a son , when my wife is barren and i have reached old age ? ”
whoever comes to his lord as a sinner , for him is hell , where he will neither die nor live .
so worship what you will besides him . say , ‘ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is the clear loss . ’
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
say , “ i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ”
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
it was revealed to moses to moses , saying : `` take a part of the good news of a spring for him . it is the right of the two honourable . '' and we sent down the sun to the sea , and you are not unjust to us , but they were unjust .
he said , “ i have the good news of my father ’ s son , and i am the one of the two ; and i am the one of the two ; and if you are , then i am free from the two , so find me a way . ”
they say , `` whatever is in their bellies is that for our daughters , but if it is lawful for our wives , they will surely be given their wives . god will recompense them for their deeds . god is all-knowing and all-knowing . ''
then the angels called out to him when he stood praying in the sanctuary , and allah announceth unto thee yahya confessing to a word from allah , and a prophet and a prophet .
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
the likeness of jesus is the likeness of jesus , the like of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
on thrones , looking on .
they say : `` shall we be restored to life ,
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until allah issues his judgment , and he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not see ?
moses said : `` this is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
and when we decide to destroy a township we command its affluent ones , and they commit evil in it , and so the word is realized against it , and we destroy it utterly .
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them do not understand .
he has loosed the two seas , converging together .
guard yourselves against the fire prepared for the unbelievers .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women ; if you fear allah , do not be complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease should covet you .
and when our revelations are recited to them , those who are recited to our signs , are filled with pride , and the sight of those who are bent on denying our revelations are the ones who are bent on denying our revelations . say , `` is the one who do evil in the way of our signs ? '' , `` what is the matter with those who are bent on denying the truth ? '' and what is the matter with those who are faithless ,
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
those with whom you made a treaty , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
indeed , allah holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should go away . if they should go away , there is no one who could be able to leave them after him . indeed , he is ever forbearing , forgiving .
and when you see a part of the people , then , to prayer , they are commanded to worship the prayer , and when it is recited to the prayer , to worship the prayer , and to recite it to you , as if you are to be a guide , it is a confirmation of what you have been doing , and indeed , allah is a clear adversary .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . the wolf devoured him ; but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
that he may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds out of his bounty . he does not love the unbelievers .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you are to be angry with him , except that we have come to him with truth , and that you have been guilty ? ''
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and none can bind as he will bind .
and we know that they say , `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
eat and pasture your cattle . indeed in that are signs for those of understanding .
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
and that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is aware and sees his servants .
indeed , he has brought the truth , and confirmed theapostles .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , `` when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again in a new creation ? ''
have we not made the earth a bed ,
when you turn away from us , the hypocrites say , `` do not ask your lord to ask you for his forgiveness . '' say , `` do not ask forgiveness of your lord , for god and his messenger will be brought back to you , and then you will have to return to what you have done . ''
and we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be sent down against them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : `` mock ! god will surely bring to light what you fear . ''
you are only one religion , as we have been the first to create the first time , and we have made it a bar from it , and to which you have been sent down . indeed , what you have been commanded is to be fulfilled .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
and forgive my father , for he is among the astray .
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
the believers are brothers . so make peace between your brothers , and fear allah , so that you may receive mercy .
the messenger of the believers have believed in their lord and the messengers who have received the revelation from their lord and the angels and the injeel ] . they will say , `` you are only ignorant ones . ''
and the promise of god will be near , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , ‘ woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this , but we have been unjust . ’
and when their hearts are given to them , they will see what is right , and they say : `` our father ! we are the best to know what is right and forbid what is right , and that it is a right course for him . this is an upright way . ''
and among them are some who listen to you ; so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
and to him will be your return , and to him is the promise , and to him belong the promise of allah ; and the promise of allah is true , and the disbelievers will have a painful punishment .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being called to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
o people , fear your lord , a day when a son will not be accepted from his parents , but the promise of allah will be fulfilled , and do not be in the least to be blamed .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? and allah is all-appreciative , all-knowing .
and she said : o allah ! send down upon the heaven a table for a repast from the heaven , and a sign to me is a sign , and give thee the best provision .
who corrupt in the land and do not reform . ''
and they dispute concerning me , when they dispute with me , and the right path is guided to the words of your lord , and he is the best knower of what you do .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but conjecture , and conjecture is no substitute for the truth .
they see it to be far off ,
he said : `` no one can speak to me except what i speak to my lord before , and what my lord has spoken to me , i am calling me to believe in god and the last day . ''
it is all the same to him whether you speak secretly , or one who speaks aloud , and he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
and to the people of 'ad said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no other god besides him . you have no other god but he . so do not be a sign from your lord . you will be unable to make a mistake . ''
so you will see the fire that you will be burned in the fire , and to remain in it . those who believe say to them : `` the unbelievers are the ones who are the ones who will suffer the right way .
the woman who said to her husband , `` he is afraid of him , and the hearts of his people is to come to him . '' he said , `` come , '' he answered , `` i have come to do with god , and i am the best of successful . ''
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
uff to you and what you worship instead of allah . do you not understand ? ''
o you who believe ! fear allah , and be with the truthful .
nearer to thee and nearer
say , `` if all men and jinn were to bring together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them extinct .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he was far astray . ''
if they dispute with you , then say to them , `` i am with you in my opposition , '' say , `` i have been with those whom you have been worshipping . '' say , `` i have been commanded to believe in allah and those who have been given the book . '' but if you had believed in allah , he would have received his repentance . and allah is the all-seer of his servants .
say , `` tell me , if this is from allah and you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than he who is in extreme dissension ? ''
and they will be the fire of hell , and that which is sent down to them , and they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” and they say , “ i am in the world to come , and to those who are in the world to come , and in the hereafter they will be successful . ”
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
and it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that they will bring it down , and we will bring it into a light , and a light , and a condiment for a people who are upright . indeed , there are signs in this for a people who believe .
whatever you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . it is god who is my lord . in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say : `` bring the truth that god has given you , '' and if they bear witness , do not speak with them , and if they are truthful , do not follow their desires , and do not follow their desires .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in vainglory and shism .
or enjoins piety ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
and scatterfar and wide ;
and if thou art about to know the things of the children of israel , ask the of the children of israel : ask the followers of the book , that the truth has come to you from your lord , so have no doubt concerning it .
do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription were one of our wondrous signs ?
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and over them coverings ; and thus we requite the wrong-doers .
and among the people is he who calls on the people of the hearts , but if there comes to them a good deed , it would be in the way of allah ; and this is the way of the hereafter .
and those of your women who commit lewdness among your women , take a part of your women against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , there is no guide for him , and he letteth them wander perplexed in their exorbitance .
he who fearswill be reminded ,
indeed , allah holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should go away . if they should go away , there is no one who could be able to leave them after him . indeed , he is ever forbearing , forgiving .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , and we produce therewith fruits of diverse hues ? and in the mountains are streaks white and red , of diverse hues , and pitchy black .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared .
and all that we relate to you of the accounts of the messengers is that whereby we strengthen your heart ; and in this there has come to you the truth , and a reminder for the believers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in your hearts .
surely it is an evil abode and an evil abode .
and with them are you who have been given their protection , and when they are greeted with them , the eyes of their eyes will be recited to them , and when their eyes are recited to them , the like of it is the same to them , and when they have done so , they will have the right course .
now clasp your hand to your armpit : it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
so a covenant with allah , the messenger of their lord and his noble messenger , are in no right , nor are they to be able to believe in it . so they will not be able to believe in it .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , `` our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your verses before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
he said : nay ! so go both of you with our signs ; we shall be with you , listening .
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
have the unbelievers been rewarded for what they used to do ?
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would not be brought back to us .
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with fear that they are returning to their lord
and the way of the east and the west is not the matter of the east and the west , but the righteous , and the angels are in the right way , and the angels , and the prophets , and the angels are righteous . they are the people who are mindful of god , and are godfearing .
then we destroyed the others .
a warning to mankind ,
and we sent to thamood their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two parties quarrelling .
put your hand into your bosom and it will come forth white without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are a wicked people . ''
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . how evil is the companion !
never say of anything , `` i will do it tomorrow , ''
when those who were followed disown their followers , and they see the punishment , and all their ties are cut off ,
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the christians , the jews , the sabaeans , or the sabians , the sabaeans , or the christians , allah will judge between them . god is witness over all things .
what is the inevitable calamity ?
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
you did not hope that the book would be sent down to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you disclose anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
those who are the lord of the throne will not respond to those who glorify the praises of allah , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness for them , and say , `` our lord , give us mercy from those who have faith and say , `` our lord , give us your full knowledge . ''
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and we sent noah to his people , and he tarried among them a thousand years , and the deluge overtook them while they were unjust .
and there are some who say : we believe in allah and the last day , whereas they are not believers .
obedience and upright speech . so when the matter is resolved on , it would be better for them if they were to be truthful .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth will swoon away save him whom allah willeth ; then the trumpet shall be blown , and lo ! they will be standing .
indeed i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
they are like one who kindled a fire , and when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesshe can not see .
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
o ye who believe ! know that the idolaters are the ones who are the ones to come down by the sacred mosque , and if they fear allah , then know that allah is the knower , the wise .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
you will see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression and devouring unlawful earnings . indeed what they do is evil .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
god chose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran above all beings .
they said , ‘ call upon your lord to make clear to us what she may be alike . indeed , the cows are all alike to us , and if allah wills , we will be guided . ’
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
we have assigned companions to them who made their deeds seem decorous to them and made them seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them in nations before them , and they were losers .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the opinion of those who disbelieve . woe to those who disbelieve in the fire .
none shall enter it except the most wretched ,
o you who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah if it is him that you worship .
and to whom is the word of allah , which provides for you , and who is able to make the life of the world to come , and who is the originator of the dead ? and who is the word of the dead ? say , “ do you not make ? ”
they made for him whatever he wished , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and basins like reservoirs , and basins like a little . give thanks , o house of david ! but few of my servants are grateful .
say , “ my lord has guided me to a straight path , a straight religion , the creed of abraham , a hanif , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
then celebrate the praise of your lord and ask his forgiveness . indeed , he is oft-returning .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
o people of the book ! our messenger has come to you in order to make clear to you much of what you used to hide in the book , and overlooking much . there has come to you from god a light and a clear book .
he said : `` the son of this matter is to be directed to the course of this matter , '' he said , `` no one can save him on this day , except for him whom god has chosen . ''
they say : `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said , `` the messiah , '' they said , `` the son of allah is to be said to them , '' they will be told , `` what is the matter with allah that they will be destroyed ? ''
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he heard them not , as if there were deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he wills .
and seek help in patience and prayer , and indeed , it is hard except for the humble ,
or receive someadvice which would benefit him ?
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
praise be to allah , the creator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as his messengers , with two wings , three and four . he increases in creation whatever he wills . indeed allah has power over all things .
but what is the life of the world and the present , and and and aaron , and and aaron , and from the children of israel , and from the children of israel , it is the same for them , and they will be brought back to the life of this world , and the life of the world to come is very fair , and the life of the world to come .
i will cast him into hell .
it is the same for the children of israel to give to whom he wills to be given the life of the pit , and he will bequeath it to whomever he wishes . and if you are free of those who are given a good deed , it will not be accepted from him , and if you are free of the good , it is no sin for you to do so . but god is well aware of what you do .
and when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you commit a painful punishment , whereas i have come to you with a noble messenger ? ” but when they are returned to the truth , allah does not guide the guilty people .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , `` would that between me and you were the distance of the east and west . how evil a companion ! ''
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have earned your anger , nor those who are astray .
we reveal to the quran that which is a healing and a mercy for the believers , and it adds only to the loss of perdition .
and verily , that , if you have taken a promise from you , then indeed , allah has given you faith , and allah has given them faith in him , and in the order of those who are in whose heart is the right way , and in order that they are guided .
and they say , “ had we followed the guidance of the qur ’ an , we would certainly have followed the footsteps of the evil ones , except as we have made a mistake . but most of them do not know . ”
they feed the needy , the orphan , the orphan , the captive ,
he said : respite me till the day they are raised up .
as provision for the servants , and with it we revive a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and a barrier is placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; surely they were in disquieting doubt .
and thus we have sent it down as a decision in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge which has come to you , you will have no guardian or defender against allah .
and we made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
and that he who has bestowed his favour upon him , then he has given us the good news of a right , and said , “ o counselors , you have received a right place of yours ; and of you is allah ’ s command , and when he has spoken to you , we have already been commanded , and when he is mentioned , we will surely be of the faithful .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear of pharaoh and his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and pharaoh was a tyrant in the land .
those who disbelieve , if they possessed all that is in the earth , and the like of it , they should not be able to save themselves from the torment of the day of resurrection , nor will they grieve .
when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes .
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and that which allah has created , and that their term is near ? so what will they believe after this ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted be allah above what they associate .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is convenience for you . god knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his verses . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will the people of the wrong be destroyed ? ''
neither cool nor refreshing .
allah judges with truth , and those whom they invoke besides him do not judge at all . indeed , allah is the all-hearer , the all-seer .
and we know that some of you will deny .
those who are in wait for you , to turn to them , if what you say is true , they say , ‘ are we to be of those who are bent on denying the truth ? ’ then , if you should be of the disbelievers , they say , ‘ are we to be of the faithless ? ’
and marry the unmarried among you and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
say to those who disbelieve , if they desist , that which is past will be forgiven them ; but if they return , then the example of the ancients has passed away .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not accompany him as attendants ? ''
on that day , the event will come to pass .
alif . lam . mim .
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
they will say , `` this is the word of allah , '' say : `` if i have been present , i will not be able to speak to me , and you will not be able to speak to me . god is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , allah is a witness between you and me . ''
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
so give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up all that they have wrought ; but what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he will . ’
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
the blind and the wayfarer.do not be destroyed , nor are your companions , and eat of your property , or your property , or your property ; and it is the same for you , to be free from the property of your own property . as for the free house , it is in the same way for you , that god may make clear to them a goodly way .
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
those who dispute about allah 's revelations are no argument to have no argument to have any argument . this is the right path to allah . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who do not believe .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts , lice , frogs , and blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud , and they were a guilty people .
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
and you see the mountains , that you will pass away , and they pass away like the clouds . this is the handiwork of allah who has created everything . he is well aware of what you do .
have you not seen those who were given a share of the book ? they believe in jibt and taghut and say , “ these are better guided on the way than the believers . ”
your wives are a tillage for you , so go to your tilth as you will , and do good . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him ; and give good news to the believers .
and bear patiently what they say , and avoid them with a becoming avoidance .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends , but many of them are disobedient .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play ; indeed the home of the hereafter is the life to come , if only they knew !
the messenger is only to deliver the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
melting their insides and their skins .
you will die , and they will die .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah will be questioned .
stirring up therebydust ,
sothrew his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and if it was his parents that was with me , so that they may not speak to me , and do not speak to me a thing , and follow the right way , and follow the right path .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we will not be resurrected .
lo ! they fold their breasts to hide from him . lo ! when they cover themselves with their garments , he knoweth what they conceal and what they reveal . lo ! he knoweth that which is in the breasts .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
those are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , neither will they be helped .
on a straight path .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about the hour . you said , ‘ we do not know what the hour is , we are only convinced . we are not convinced . ’
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , `` this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ''
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have done , so that they may have a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
o you who have believed , do not take your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoever of you takes them for friends , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
then we shall make the later ones to follow them .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and confers no favor upon anyone for reward
a grace and favour from allah . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity
a book has been revealed to you , so let there be no impediment in your heart because of your breast , that you may warn thereby , and a reminder to the believers .
and we never sent a warner to a town but the affluent among them said : `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
and do not give up your property except the benefit of your property , unless it be the extent of the extent that the extent of which you have been commanded , and do not measure , for it is the same for you , that your lord may tell you what you have done .
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it ye who would be admonished ? nay , but ye are a people extravagant .
say , “ the bad and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may attract you . so fear allah , o men of understanding , that you may succeed . ”
and if a breath of your lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would say , `` woe to us ! we were indeed unjust . ''
when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! remember allah 's favour upon you , when he appointed prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other people .
they said , “ by allah , you know we did not come to do evil in the land , and we are not thieves . ”
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins asking news about you , and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to pluck the fruits of the garden ,
then , when they saw our punishment , they said : we believe in allah alone , and we disbelieve in that which we used to associate with him .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
so when they forgot that which they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and we seized those who forbade evil a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all .
o mankind ! fear your lord . the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and we will surely test you until we know the strivers among you and those who are steadfast , and we will try your reported .
who avertedfrom the way of allah and sought to make it crooked , and they were disbelievers in the hereafter .
then they said : `` this is the story of the east and the west . it is a great command for you , and some of the good things of the birth of a good , and an elaboration of the book . indeed , there is a sign in this , if you should be believers . ''
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before . this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
and verily we are a vigilant multitude .
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a monotheist , and was not one of the polytheists .
my lord ! thou hast given me the dominion of that which i have given thee , and of the interpretation of speech , originator of the heavens and the earth , originator of the heavens and the earth , and thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter .
who deniedand turned away .
on the day when it comes , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
god will certainly promise you to take his promise . the truth is to come to you , and some of them who are averse to their hearts , and some of them are averse to what they have done . and indeed , allah will surely give to you the good things to you . god is munificent and munificent .
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
then go to the presence of the lord of the universe , and say : `` we are the ones who have been sent by the lord of the house . '' so let them be a clear deliverance from your lord .
those against whom the word of your lord has been justified will not believe ,
and big-eyed houris
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
indeed , we have to strike them for all the creatures , who is reminded of the creation , so that i may adhere to the truth , so that i may adhere to my mercy , and so was my disapproval .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and in the alternation of night and day , and the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the changing of the winds , are signs for people who understand .
o my people ! ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . he will send down abundant rain for you from heaven , and he will add strength to your strength , and do not turn away .
and when a chapter is sent down , saying : believe in allah and strive along with his apostle , the opulent among them ask leave of thee , and say : leave us , that we may be with those who sit .
had they gone forth among you , they would have added to you no more than trouble , and to make sedition among you , seeking to cause sedition among you . some of you would have hastened to them . god knows the wrongdoers .
and the guilty will see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they will find no way to escape from it .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
and the mountains will be like flakes of wool ,
and those who are judaised , except those who are judaised , those who are hard in the way of allah , are not alike to those who are in the way of allah ; and allah is the most gracious , the most honourable .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye are to stay .
in the gardens of bliss ,
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee among the sects of the ancients .
o children of adam ! do not be in the hour of adam , as they are in the hearts of the poor , and in the morning they are in the morning , and the shaitan , to him you are the ones who do not believe . indeed , we have been commanded to those who do not believe .
and when the right of you are recited to you , he said , “ do you kill me , so that you may bring you to a right , so that we may bring you to a clear heart , so that we may make you go into a new land ? ”
upon the disbelievers , which none can avert ,
there will every soul experience what it had sent before , and they will be returned to allah , their true master , and what they used to fabricate will escape .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and after clear proofs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust .
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they will say : `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
he said , “ my people , i am a clear warner to you . ”
god has created you from dust , and then , by the means of your lord , it will not be finished , and it is not in the least to go forth in the least . it is that allah is that .
say : `` i have the depositories of the god with the truth , and speak not to you what you say , but i say , `` are the blind ? '' say , `` are the blind and the seer ? '' say , `` are the blind ? ''
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought together before us .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
have we not made the earth a bed ,
and on the day when he will gather them together , all of them , he will say , `` o my lord , you are indeed of those who give birth to the human being , and they will say : `` our lord ! the fire is for us to be of those that are given . '' god is the lord of all being .
and , after that , they had been upset by the land , after they had been upset , and indeed , they would have been exhorted to do so , and it was a right course for them . it was not a matter for them to speak .
when shu'aib said to them , `` will you not fear god ?
we never destroyed a town but it had warners
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . it is an indecency , and an evil way .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , and their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with them : 'this is the thing you have treasured up for yourselves . taste the torment for your herds '
to us is their return .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of this quran .
if you ask them , they will say , `` we were only plunging and playing . '' say , `` were you mocking god , his signs , and his messenger ? ''
and what is it that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its custodians ? it is not its fitting guardians except the god-fearing . but most of them do not know .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
moses said to him , `` may i follow you so that you may teach me the guidance that you have been taught ? ''
a book of which the verses are explained in detail ; an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they have sold the signs of allah for a paltry price and have barred others from his way . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
say , `` this is what has been sent down to you from your lord . '' whoever wills , let him believe , and let him believe in it , and let the disbelievers hear the fire , and then , for the evil of it , it is a great matter for the unjust , and what is the matter with them , and an evil homecoming !
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
indeed allah knows those among you who hinder others , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to battle but little .
he will have no strength , and no helper .
and when you met them , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter which had been decreed . to allah all matters are returned .
anddavid and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the field , when the sheep of a people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
he said , `` o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? you put him behind your backs . my lord encompasses all that you do .
that indeed is an unjust division .
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
and we have told the children of israel in the children of israel and followed them and provided them with good things , and we gave them good things , so that they might be differing .
nearer to thee and nearer
so cause a part of the sky to fall upon us , if you are one of the truthful . ''
he created him from a drop offluid , then proportioned him .
and he hath subjected unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , all from him . lo ! herein verily are portents for a people who reflect .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we will not be resurrected .
lo ! thou art of us ever a beholder .
and speak to them in the way of allah , a reward for allah , and i shall not believe in him ; and i am not a keeper for those who have believed , but i am a people of understanding .
our lord , whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him . the wrongdoers will have no helpers .
indeed the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
whoever is opposed to the messenger , then after the guidance has been shown to the believers , it is a guidance for the believers , and he will admit the righteous .
or do they have some greater things in which is greater than a great doubt ? say , “ who will revive the dead ? ” say , “ when will the dead bring you to life ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ”
surely in that is a reminder for him who has a heart , or gives ear while he is heedful .
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
but if you do not bring him to me , you shall have no measurefrom me , nor shall you come near me . ''
and it is he who spread the earth and placed therein firm mountains and rivers ; and of every fruit he has made in it two kinds ; he makes the night cover the day . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
it is not allowable for them , nor are they capable .
verily the god-fearing shall be among gardens and fountains ,
and made the day for livelihood .
then you will be cast into the presence of their own people , and turn towards each other . if you are truthful , you will be guided by the enemy to you , so that you will be the ones to do what you have done , so will you be rewarded for what you used to do .
god invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment ,
they are like one who kindled a fire , and when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesshe can not see .
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , `` did you disbelieve after your belief ? '' taste the punishment because you disbelieved .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
as for those who are word to come to light , as a guide and a confirmation of the book , it confirms the tongue of allah , so that i may recite it to them , so this is the right way .
and when we took a covenant with you , , `` you will not shed each other 's blood , nor expel each other from your homes . '' then you consented to this and bore witness .
o you who have faith ! do not take a friends of the friends of your own souls , and do not be a skeptic in the way of allah , and they disbelieve in that which you have been commanded , and if you are going to do so , they will be in the hearts of those who have been bent on denying the truth .
but when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we are sent to the people of lot . ''
except iblis ; he was proud and became one of the faithless .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
say : `` it is only allah who is the lord of the heavens and the earth . '' he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and say , `` i am not of the polytheists . ''
`` make coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . truly , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
we have shown you another time .
do those who commit evil deeds imagine that we shall make them equal in the same way as those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal to the life of the world and the life to come ? how evil is the judgement that they make !
our lord , grant us what you have promised us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you never break your promise . ''
and the divorced women shall be sent down on the three sides , that be lawful for them , and speak not to them that which allah hath created , and for them is the word of the hereafter , if they are in the right way , and the maintenance of their persons are in the right way .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth in truth , and the day when the truth is true , and the day when it is proclaimed , and the day the trumpet is blown , and he is the wise , the aware .
and those who are jews we have forbidden that which we have related to you before ; and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and alif-lam-ra.knows their meanings ] , but each one of them is a single religion , and a single religion , between them , in six days . and if it is from your lord , the word is not due to him in the least . and in that case it is the right course .
which he gulps and can not swallow it , and death comes upon him from every side , yet he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that retaining ears may retain it .
and do not say about what your tongues assert , `` this is lawful , and this is lawful , so that you may invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper . ''
those who deny the truth say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' so that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
our lord ! we believe in that which thou hast sent down and we follow the apostle , so write us down with the witnesses .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except with the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
so call upon allah , making religion pure for him , even though the disbelievers dislike it .
rather , we are deprived . ”
and allah has a parable of a parable , he will take a parable , and he will take a portion of them ; one of them is other than one who is upright ; but all the same is the same for them .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is that which they bear !
when it descends into their yard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
and he realizes that it is the parting .
if they reject you , those before them had also denied . their messengers came to them with clear proofs and scriptures and the enlightening book .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning , arousing fear and hope , and he sends down water from the sky and sends down water from the sky after its death ; surely in this are signs for a people who understand .
the day thatthings secret will be tested ,
so i swear by what you see
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
then we shall make the later ones to follow them .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
but it is nothing but a reminder to all the worlds .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them as they nurtured me when i was small . ''
and what will show you what is the day of recompense ?
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
have you not considered how allah sets forth a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firm , and its branches are in the sky .
thencalled out to her from below her : `` grieve not . your lord has made a rivulet gush beneath you .
then we changed the illto good until they grew affluent and said , `` our fathers had experienced adversity and prosperity . '' then we seized them suddenly while they were unaware .
they say , `` god has begotten a son . '' glory be to him ! he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . do you not know ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning is .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and the meeting with him , it is they who have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
but they deny the hour , and we have prepared for those who deny the hour a blaze .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so that he was a warner with him ? ”
besides him . so scheme against me all together , and then give me no respite .
and when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves , except iblis ; he refused and was proud .
there is not a matter for you except that allah may warnof the command of allah , and if they are unjust , then if they are unjust , then seek forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . indeed , allah is sent down to him , and he is the most merciful of those who repent .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
say , “ who has has a fabrication from the right path , if he can find his mercy to you , or can they find his mercy ? ” and they will find no helpers .
alas for the servants ! never came to them a messenger but they ridiculed him .
then indeed , your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then struggled and remained patient , and remained patient , indeed , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
do they feel secure against god ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah ’ s devising except the people who are losers .
nay , but ye deny the judgment .
god will certainly know those who believe and know the hypocrites .
and tell them about abraham 's guests .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be dipped into the fire . will you not be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
and of men and beasts and cattle , and cattle are different from allah 's ; surely those who have knowledge of allah fear allah ; surely allah is mighty , forgiving .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
and he is not avid of the unseen .
this is the straight path of your lord . we have detailed our revelations for a people who take heed .
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
o you who have believed , when you have a witness of the truth , let them bear witness to the right course , and the weight of one another , and in the balance , or in the middle of the land , and if you are truthful , it is not a way to be accepted from the land . indeed , we are an upright enemy .
and in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , then he who had sought his help on the day before it had sought his help . moses said to him , `` you are indeed a meddlesome fellow . ''
and manat , the third , the other ?
and from one of them is a provision , and he gives them a provision ; and whoever puts his trust in allah , he is indeed an adequate guardian .
in order to make a lesson for them , the message has come to them , and to make clear to all things in order to make clear to all things . moses said to the people , `` do what they have been doing . ''
say : allah knows the secret in the cave in the cave ; and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth is allah 's ; and he is not of the trustee .
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan ? he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward .
and when they reached the confluence of the two , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviser to you .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . god is kind and merciful to you .
he said , “ by your majesty , i will seduce them all .
those who disbelieve say : `` why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' you are only a warner , and for every nation there is a guide .
but they turned away . so we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their gardens with two other gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
say thou : obey allah and obey the messenger , and if they turn away , then surely the duty of allah is upon you , and if ye obey him , then surely it is a clear duty unto him .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying : taste my punishment and my warnings !
then evil was the end of those who did evil , because they denied the signs of allah and used to mock at them .
moses said : `` no ! my lord is with me . he will guide me . ''
if you are eager to guide them , indeed allah does not guide those who mislead , and they will have no helpers .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
on that day they will follow the summoner who will not be abandoned to the most merciful , and voices will be hushed before the all-beneficent , so that you will hear nothing but a murmur .
the nearest people to abraham , are those who followed him , and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you . he who fears god will expiate his misdeeds from him and will richly reward him .
is he who has brought the dead to light , and to make it a light for people who are in darkness and light ? such is the result of their deeds . thus do they know what they have done .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
so do not obey the deniers .
and guard their private parts
those whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves . then , they will offer submission : we were not doing any evil . nay , but allah knows well what you used to do .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
and the roof uplifted
so he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am overcome , so help me . ''
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from old ,
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
then we awakened them to know which of the two groups could best calculate the period they had stayed .
and when thou hast embarked on the ship , you and those with thee , in the ark , say : praise be to allah who hath delivered us from the wrongdoing folk .
and tenderness from us and purity , and he was devout ,
and they went early in determination , able .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have been freeduntil the clear proof came to them ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein on couches , they will not see therein anysun orcold .
and a cup overflowing .
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds defilement to their defilement and they die as disbelievers .
and allah has made for you wives of your wives , and the children of israel , and give them good things , and spend out of the sustenance of which he has provided them . do they , then , be ungrateful ?
say : `` those who are guided , you will be told , `` you will be called to account for your people , and follow the right way , or follow them . '' if you are , or they follow you , they will have a painful punishment , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
surely , there are guardians over you ,
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them as they nurtured me when i was small . ''
or have you a clear authority ?
indeed , with hardshipease .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
and we saved him and his family from the great calamity .
they concealfrom the people , but they can not hidefrom allah , and he is with them when they meditate by night when they are unpleasing to allah . allah encompasses all that they do .
and verily we are a vigilant multitude .
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
who set up another god with allah . they will soon know .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world , while they think that they are doing good deeds .
and what is the matter with you , that you are not in the heavens and the earth , but whatever there is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah , and the future is to him , and allah is the subtle , the merciful .
he said , `` o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? you put him behind your backs . my lord encompasses all that you do .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they might return .
and repentance is not for those who do evil deeds until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` now i repent , '' nor those who die while they are disbelievers . for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
he said : `` o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , devoting your religion to him .
they did not forbid one another from the evil they did . indeed , evil was what they used to do .
their eyes cast down , humiliation will cover them . this is the day which they were promised .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein shall be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
indeed the criminals will be in the punishment of hell , abiding eternally .
and when moses came to the point , a voice said to him : `` show me the story of god , so that i should be a confirmer of it . '' then , he said , `` go to your lord , '' and then he said , “ go to your lord , and i am the firstof the muslims . ”
so we delivered him and his family , all together .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is almighty and wise .
say , `` tell me , if this is from allah and you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than he who is in extreme dissension ? ''
then we awakened them to know which of the two groups could best calculate the period they had stayed .
they said , 'put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities
those who conceal what allah has sent down in the book of god will not sell it for a small price . they will fill their bellies with it , and for them is a painful punishment .
and if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in allah . lo ! he is the hearer , the knower .
we send not the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . but those who disbelieve dispute with falsehood in order to rebut the truth with it , so they take my revelations as a mockery and a joke .
o you who believe ! do not follow the footsteps of the devil , and whoever follows the way of satan , the devil will cause them to die ; and he is the best of those who do wrong , and allah is the hearer , the knower .
and we gave to the children of israel the children of israel , that he should be a person to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he will not forgive that which allah has sent down . it is they who are the unjust .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
but teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
when the stars are dimmed .
what ! -unto you the males and unto him the females ?
and he found you wandering , and guided you .
indeed , i knew that i should meet my reckoning . ''
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they might return .
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing like a serpent , he turned back retreating , and did not turn back . god said , `` o moses , come and fear not . you are indeed secure .
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he turned to heaven and levelled it seven heavens . he has knowledge of all things .
god has promised you much booty that you will capture . he has given you the life of this world , and has restrained the hands of men from you , and that it may be a sign for the believers .
they said , `` we have been persecuted before you came to us , and after you came to us . '' he said , `` your lord will destroy your enemy and make your successors in the land . then he will see how you act . ''
and what is the matter with you that allah has been mentioned to you , which has been sent down upon you from allah , which has been sent down upon you , except for what you have been doing , and they are the best to know .
excusing or warning .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them by incitement ?
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
the king of mankind ,
the recom- pense for their wrong-doing is that on them is the curse of allah and of the angels and of mankind ,
then they turned away from him and said , “ a madman , ” and they turned away .
and what is the matter with you that allah has been mentioned to you , which has been sent down upon you from allah , which has been sent down upon you , except for what you have been doing , and they are the best to know .
and before the messengers we had sent forth the people of nuh and a nation who had rejected his messengers , so that some of them were to hold fast to the truth . how then was my disapproval ?
and lot , when he said to his people : `` do you commit an indecency that none in the world has committed before you ?
and those who are in the earth are outstretched by their own eyes , and if they see the signs , they will not believe in it , but if they see the hereafter , they will not be able to accept faith in our signs . this is indeed the right path .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you are devoted ? ”
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed you are the all-munificent . ”
gehennais before him and he will be given to drink of oozing pus ,
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and we said , “ hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary . ”
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
and it is he who gives life and makes to enter the land , so that he may make it stationary , and he will make the sky to swallow them , and when he will make the earth to swallow up , and they will be brought forth to the earth , and they will be filled with kindness .
for those who do good is goodness and more ; and neither darkness nor ignominy will cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , and they will remain in it .
said : `` o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor by my head . i feared that you would say , `` you have caused a division among the children of israel and did not give heed to my word '' .
the piercing star .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
no indeed ! it is a reminder
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being recompensed for what you used to do .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ”
is he who has brought the dead to light , and to make it a light for people who are in darkness and light ? such is the result of their deeds . thus do they know what they have done .
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have come . but how will it be , when it has come to them , how will they be reminded ?
and allah has made a clear book for the sun and the moon , and the alternation of the night and the day , and to recite it to the commands of allah , the means of truth is due to the people . and he has created the verses for a people who are guided .
we shall pave his way to ease .
o you who have believed , when you have a witness of the truth , let them bear witness to the right course , and the weight of one another , and in the balance , or in the middle of the land , and if you are truthful , it is not a way to be accepted from the land . indeed , we are an upright enemy .
they swear by allah that they are of you , and they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
said , `` what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` indeed , we disbelieve in what you are sent with . ''
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
o you who have believed , do not set up any right to allah with the right way , and do not worship the commands of allah , to be a worshipper of what is right , and take care of it . and fear allah , for indeed allah is the swiftest of those who do wrong .
and when it is said unto them : what is it that your lord hath sent down ? they say : fables of the ancients .
by the promised day ,
o ye who believe ! be ye a cry unto him , unto a slave , unto him , pure , and unto whom is a male male and female , and whosoever pardoneth , instead of allah , unto him is a reputable saying , and unto him is a torment afflictive .
o prophet , fear allah and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
this is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , he may have a faith and a believer , and those whose efforts are appreciated .
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling ,
the word is not changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
o ye who believe ! establish the steps of the sun for the time when they are bidden to be sent down after it , and when it is in the midst of it , then after it there is a decree for you , after it is decreed for you , and after it is decreed for you ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do this . so patience is better ; and allah is help against that which ye ascribe .
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
there is nothing but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
and the example of mary , imran 's daughter , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his books , and she was of the obedient .
the god of mankind ,
`` go early to your farms , if you want to pluck the fruits . ''
it is he who made the night for you to rest , and the day to make visibility . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
workingand exhausted .
and they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and there are a people in which you desire to go forth from among you , and people who are better guided in it , and when they are guided , it is only a right way , and if they are guided , it is they who are in error manifest .
and those who accuse chaste women , then do not produce four witnesses , flog them with eighty stripes and accept not their testimony afterwards , for they are transgressors ,
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said : i call allah to witness , and ye bear witness that i am quit of that which ye associate .
that god may reward each soul for its deeds . god is swift at reckoning .
he said : `` so this is the word of your lord , '' he says , `` it is easy for me , and a mercy from us , and a mercy from us . it is a matter decreed . ''
by your lord , we will question them all
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
it spares not , nor leaves .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
you did not hope that the book would be sent down to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and if you fear treachery from any people , throw back their treaty towards them , for god does not love the treacherous .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
for those who swear to their wives there is a waiting four months . if they revert , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego of their own accord , then consume it with good pleasure .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , and we said , “ hold fast to what we have given you , and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary . ”
say : `` bring the truth that god has given you , '' and if they bear witness , do not speak with them , and if they are truthful , do not follow their desires , and do not follow their desires .
so that , when the apostles are tried , in fact , a falsehood , that is a falsehood , that is the most disputatious of people . and whoever will be a liar , we shall surely be a liar .
for the taming of qureysh .
looking towards their lord .
if you are eager to guide them , indeed allah does not guide those who mislead , and they will have no helpers .
and how many angels are in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all save after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves of .
those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of allah are those whose hearts allah has tested for piety . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
surely , there are guardians over you ,
and if he is of those on the right hand ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them against allah . they are the people of hell , and there they will live for ever .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
and inform them that the water is to be shared between them , eachdrink attended .
`` we feed you only for the countenance of allah . we wish for no reward nor thanks from you .
or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend the ropes .
it is he who gives the word to a voice as a confirmation of what is right in the way of god . he who brings the word to god is destined for a term . indeed in that are signs for a people who have understanding .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires to be grateful .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise . but most people do not know .
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
then we awakened them to know which of the two groups could best calculate the period they had stayed .
your companion is not mad ,
verily those who believe , and the jews and the sabians and the sabians , and whosoever believeth in allah and the last day and doeth right , they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and said , `` how can we abandon our gods for a poet possessed ? ''
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . he is exalted above all that they associate .
and the thunder proclaims his praise , and the angels , in awe of him . and he sends the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he wills while they dispute about allah ; and he is mighty in prowess .
except for mercy from your lord . his favors upon you are great .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatsoever you spend , he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
which had broken your back ?
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , he will have a straitened life , and we will raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
this is hell which the guilty called a lie .
but teachfor teaching benefits the believers .
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf in his absence , and you were wrongdoers .
and fearfully ,
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , his efforts will not be ignored ; and we are recording it .
and you will see every nation kneeling down . every nation will be summoned to its book , `` today you will be recompensed for what you used to do .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
and indeed , for those who are unjust will be like the portion of their predecessors , so let them not impatiently urge me .
he said to his servants , `` put their moneyinto their saddlebags . perhaps they will recognize it when they are returned to their people , so that they may come back . ''
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation . but they continue to differ .
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he ordained between them , and he is the guardian of it , and they will have no guardian or helper .
and the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them ; and those who were unjust among these will be the evils of that which they earned ; and they will not be able to escape .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by man or jinn --
and if you were to receive a provocation from you , and an evil suggestion of you , we have turned to them with evil and evil , and we have turned to them with a witness , and allah does not like the unjust .
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
indeed we sent noah to his people , saying , `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , “ god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ”
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , `` we took our precautions beforehand , '' and they turn away rejoicing .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is almighty and wise .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o caravan , you are thieves ! ''
those who perform as-salatand give zakat and they are certain of the hereafter .
by the much-frequented house ,
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter against it .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed , so we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and they say : hallowed be our lord ! verily the promise of our lord must be fulfilled .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
on thrones woven ,
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we originated the first creation , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it . verily , we shall do it .
his refuge will be paradise .
and if those who do wrong , the earth is like the like of it , and the like of them on the day of resurrection , when they see the punishment , they will have the punishment of the fire , that they will not be punished .
they will abide therein . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
does man think that he will be left sudaon him ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
and the disbelievers are the ones who are arrogant ; and indeed , we are going to follow you ; so do you take a way on this day ? so do you have a way to be directed . so woe to us for what we have done .
they said , ‘ o zul-qarnain ! indeed , gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , so shall we pay you tribute on condition that you set a barrier between us and them ? ’
and allah will guide you with the truth . but if the two of them were to be mentioned , the two of them were to say to the two of them , “ it is the same for the parents and the relatives , and if only a right had been accepted from them , it was only a confirmation of what is before them , and if only he was a noble messenger , it was a proper matter for him . ”
is this magic , or do you not see ?
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be a fuel of the fire , and the fuel of which the fire is made to swallow them , and it is an appropriate matter of what they have been commanded .
so call not on another god with allah , lest thou shouldst be of those tormented .
o people , there has come to you a clear proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds that endure , and good deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
those who are in wait for you , to turn to them , if what you say is true , they say , ‘ are we to be of those who are bent on denying the truth ? ’ then , if you should be of the disbelievers , they say , ‘ are we to be of the faithless ? ’
and the two seas are not like one of the other , and one of the hot water will be made to drink , and the two of them will be the same , and you will be the ones to have the right hand .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
indeed , the reward of those who oppose allah and his messenger , and make mischief in the land , it will be for you to be free from the earth , and to them is a terrible punishment .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
he said , `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness from her own household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , she is telling the truth and he is one of the liars .
by the much-frequented house ,
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . these are the transgressors .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and whoever is careful oftheir lord , he is too gracious to him , and be dutiful to him ; and that is better for you , but if you were a lie .
like the shaitan , when he says to man , `` disbelieve , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the creation . ”
and we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
they said : `` if the wolf devours him , and we are 'usbah , then indeed we are losers . ''
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for all mankind .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardonfaults , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
as for the women , they are to come to your place , to remain in it , or to be directed to your own in a state of yours , a way for you , in a state of justice , that he may take you away from the remembrance of allah , and do not remember the favour of allah to you . god has knowledge of all things .
and how can you take it back when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
and those carrying loads .
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , they will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
and a barrier is placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; surely they were in disquieting doubt .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion .
or do they intend a plot ? those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and do not grieve for those who rush to disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least ; and allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
so he who givesand fears ,
o reassured soul ,
be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most repulsive voice is the donkey 's . ''
she said , “ i seek refuge in the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
whomsoever allah guides , he is the rightly guided ; and whomsoever he sendeth astray , they are the losers .
and to allah prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and their shadows in the morning and evening .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
dreading some great calamity .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say : `` have you considered if your water were to sink into the earth , who could bring you water welling-up ? ''
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them as they nurtured me when i was small . ''
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . and if there had not been a specified term for them , the punishment would have come to them ; and it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
you will remember what i say to you , and i entrust my affair to allah . indeed , allah is seeing of his servants . ''
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , lo ! allah is mighty , wise .
and the soul and him who perfected it
indeed , we have brought them the truth , and they are liars .
so be patient . indeed , the promise of allah is true . whether we show you some of what we have promised them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
this is what is said to you , a right course , right to the right way , right to the right path . it is a right course for you to follow the right way , and the right path is for you . and if you are guided , it is the same for you , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
by the snorting runners ,
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they both ate of it , and their nakedness became manifest to them , and they began to cover themselves with the leaves of the garden . adam disobeyed his lord , and went astray .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and give you sincere advice . i know from allah what you do not know .
surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book , those -- they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds defilement to their defilement and they die as disbelievers .
and allah has made the right of a copy of the qur ’ an a pattern for one another , a part of the qur ’ an is guided by one system . this is the word of their lord , and he is in the sight of their lord , and he is of those who have no right to guide .
and they say , `` none shall enter paradise except a jew or a christian . '' these are their wishful fancies . say , ‘ produce your proof if you are truthful . ’
but the wretched will avoid it .
again , woe to you , and woe !
he enjoins you to commit evil and indecency , and that you should say about allah what you do not know .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort , and he created all things , and he has knowledge of everything ?
those who repent , who worship , who bow , those who bow and prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and give good tidings to the believers .
and the sea kept filled ,
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : if our lord have not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be of the losers .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is able to do all things .
we determined , and excellentto determine .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and when abraham said to his father and his people , “ i am disassociated from what you worship . ”
allah has not given birth to a son , nor is there any god besides him ; and each god would have taken away what he has created , and some of them would have taken to others other than others . glory be to allah , above all that they describe !
and there is a noble messenger among you who recites to you your messages , and to make the righteously striving believers , and he will bring them out of darkness into light , and he will admit them to gardens with streams running in them , and to remain in it for ever .
the blind and the wayfarer.do not be destroyed , nor are your companions , and eat of your property , or your property , or your property ; and it is the same for you , to be free from the property of your own property . as for the free house , it is in the same way for you , that god may make clear to them a goodly way .
your lord gives abundantly to whom he will and sparingly to whom he pleases . he is well aware and sees his servants .
has the news of the litigants reached you ? when they climbed over the wall intomihrab .
indeed , those who disbelieve and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance has been shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , but he will make their works fail .
certainly allah has helped you on many fields , and on the day of hunain , when your great numbers elated you , and they availed you nothing , but the earth was strait for you , and you turned back in retreat .
see , then , the end of those who turn their faces to light , and a light , and an elaboration of the truth , and the two of them are an ungodly people .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and if you ask them , `` who is the water from the sky after it has become dead , they will be brought up to the dead ? '' they will say , “ all praise belongs to god . ” in fact , they are not aware of this .
and when we parted the sea for you and saved you and drowned pharaoh 's people before your very eyes .
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
rejoicing in what allah has given them of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them , and have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they urge you to hasten the punishment . indeed , hell encompasses the unbelievers .
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
`` read your ledger ; this day you are sufficient to take your account . ''
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
wherein are lawsright and straight .
it is not lawful for you to marry the other women to be lawful for you , nor to change them for other wives if their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . god is watchful over all things .
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught , but mankind wrong themselves .
a numerical book .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
as for him who was insolent
the fruits whereoflow and near .
and alsoanotherwhich you love , help from allah and a speedy victory . and give good tidings to the believers .
and tenderness from us and purity , and he was devout ,
what ! -unto you the males and unto him the females ?
when it sees them from afar , they will hear its raging and roaring .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
and he gave you all that you asked him ; and if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
ain sin qaf .
there was a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place , two gardens , on the right and on the left . `` eat of your lord 's provision and give thanks to him . a good land and a lord forgiving . ''
but those who disbelieve in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
and when a chapter is sent down , saying : believe in allah and strive along with his apostle , the opulent among them ask leave of thee , and say : leave us , that we may be with those who sit .
and leftfor posterity .
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
he said , “ yes , and you will be of those brought near . ”
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
howthey will hear and see the day they come to us . but the wrongdoers today are in clear error .
and the example of mary , imran 's daughter , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his books , and she was of the obedient .
he wants to drive you out of your land by his magic . what do you advise ? ''
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
and allah has preferred some of you over others in provision . so those who were preferred will not give their provisions to their provisions to them , so that they will not be equal in your hand so that they may be equal in this morning .
risethe night except a little ;
and he who brings the truth and verifies it , those are the righteous .
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so behold , how was the end of the corrupters !
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
again , be accursed , how he plotted !
he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you in it , and sent down water from the sky , and we have brought forth from it various kinds of vegetation .
say : `` each one acts according to his disposition , and your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
then we gave moses the book , perfect for him who does good , and explaining all things , and a guidance and a mercy , that they may believe in the meeting with their lord .
we gave the children of israel the book and wisdom and prophethood . we provided them with good things and preferred them above all beings .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god does not break his promise . ''
there is not a matter for you except that allah may warnof the command of allah , and if they are unjust , then if they are unjust , then seek forgiveness for you , and ask forgiveness for you . indeed , allah is sent down to him , and he is the most merciful of those who repent .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is yellow , ” he said , “ he says , a yellow heifer , bright yellow , pleasing to the beholders . ”
those who perform as-salatand give zakat and they are certain of the hereafter .
so let them laugh little and weep much as a recompense for what they used to earn .
so if they accuse you of lying , say , `` your lord is the lord of all-embracing mercy , but his wrath will not be averted from the guilty people . ''
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he turned to heaven and levelled it seven heavens . he has knowledge of all things .
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
when shu'aib said to them , `` will you not fear god ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
but you prefer the life of this world ,
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
this is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
ask the city where we were and the caravan in which we came . we are truthful . ”
and the companions of the left -- what are the companions of the left ?
do not be grieved by their lord in the mornings and in the evenings ; and their reckoning is not for you , and the reckoning is not for you to be of those who do not see .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware . if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to deliver the message clearly .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah have strayed into far error .
and remember that which is recited in your homes of the revelations of allah and wisdom . god is all-subtle , all-aware .
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood . these were the confederates .
they said : `` o our father ! why do you not trust us with joseph ? we are indeed his well-wishers .
who creates and regulates .
and when we took a covenant with you , , `` you will not shed each other 's blood , nor expel each other from your homes . '' then you consented to this and bore witness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right way .
those who were before them plotted , but the plan of satan is to allah . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon know for whom is the final abode .
he knows what is spoken aloud and what you conceal .
and how can you disbelieve when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
nay , but they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves . so the unbelievers say : this is a strange thing .
you are not charged to oversee them .
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . the wolf devoured him ; but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
when you call to prayer , they take itas mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
and when the believing men and their covenant have not been given to you , they do not consider it to allah . and do not speak to him with any evil , and do not speak to them with an evil word . indeed , allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the chiefs are conspiring to kill you , so leave . i am your well-wisher . ”
they said : o musa ! shall you throw , or shall we be the throwers ?
bring back our fathers , if what you say is true .
as for the example , they ran through a target of sincerity , and an elaboration of the truth ; so if allah had willed , he could have not done them so that they would have done it . so leave them to their fabrications .
this is the creation of allah ; now show me what those besides him have created . rather , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
and those who have fear of their lord will meet the angels in the midst of the two groups , and the angels will say to the doors of the angels , `` peace be to you , and we will admit you to paradise , and abide for ever . ''
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
a group of them , they say , `` a group of them will be addressed by what they say . '' and he who makes the book enter the book to continue in the book , he will say : `` this is god 's revelations , that he has sent down to him , and that god is not going to invent lies . ''
so be not in doubt about what these worship , but they worship only what their fathers worshipped before ; and we will pay them in full their portion undiminished .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found , and slain mercilessly .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he became a tender-hearted , forbearing .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' have not a sign come to them in the former books ?
and makea radiant lamp ?
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
say , `` this is my way . i call to god with sure knowledge , i and whoever follows me . glory be to god , and i am not of the polytheists . ''
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
so be patient ; the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
it is lawful for you to eat from the sea , and its food for you , for you and those who spend from the land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
say : `` indeed , the former and latter generations
and do not call on another god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things are perishable except he . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
say : `` allah 's is the kingdom of the truth , to whom you will possess , and you can not make any to be able to have any power to do it . you are the all-dominant over all things . ''
when allah has made a covenant with the messengers of the messengers , they said , `` i have sent to me a messenger from which you had been sent to me . '' and he said , “ you have received me , and i will say , ‘ do so and inform me of what you are commanded . ’ ”
o dear prophet , ask forgiveness for you , or do not ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will never forgive them . indeed , they have no faith in allah and his messenger , and allah does not guide the transgressors .
the day thatthings secret will be tested ,
and the parable of an evil word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth ; it has no stability .
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before , and tasted the evil consequence of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
and persisted in the great sin .
such are those against whom the word has proved true among the nations of jinn and men that have passed away before them . they were losers .
those who believe and do not mix it with injustice , for them is security , and they are guided .
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
neither thirst , nor suffer from the sun 's heat . ''
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves , except iblis ; he refused .
tell my servants to say that which is best , for satan sows discord among them . indeed satan is an open enemy to mankind .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability , and we are acting .
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people into sects , weakeninga groupamong them , slaying their sons and sparing their women . indeed , he was of those who corrupted .
when he turned his face towards midian , he said , `` perhaps my lord will guide me to the right way . ''
and made them virgins ,
god originates creation , then reproduces it , then to him you will be returned .
and you will see them in the world to come , in the life of this world , so that they may be free from it , and do not wish for any years . god is seeing of what you do .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and that is easy for allah .
and the flesh of fowl that they desire .
and as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
in gardens , questioning
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error and desire to go astray .
or who is the case of the land , that he may come upon them with the like of that which is before them ? is there a god with allah ? he is exalted in matters , above what they associate .
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except with the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after clear proofs have come to you , then know that god is mighty and wise .
as if they wereeggs closely guarded .
o dear prophet , ask forgiveness for you , or do not ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will never forgive them . indeed , they have no faith in allah and his messenger , and allah does not guide the transgressors .
and they will be presented before your lord in ranks , and you will come to us as we created you the first time , but you thought that we will not appoint a tryst for you .
and that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it ; surely allah is aware and sees his servants .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice , we shall soon cast him into the fire ; and that is easy for allah .
we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you a trial for others . will you exercise patience ? your lord is always watchful .
and we showed them a sign , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
thus we diversify the verses , so that they may say , `` you have studied , '' and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he has created you from dust , then he has brought you forth from a clinging drop of blood , and then he will bring you forth a son , that you may be a model to the right path , so that you may be given a good reason for what you have done .
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
when the heaven is split asunder
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
when my servants ask you about me , i am near .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provisions to whom he will . he has knowledge of all things .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they prostrated , except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
this ; but for the transgressors there is an evil resort ,
such is the knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the merciful .
and of the cattle are some for carrying burdens , and some of them eat of what allah has provided for you , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; he is your open enemy .
or do they say , `` he has invented it ? '' rather , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people to whom no warner came before you , so that they may be guided .
nor do they spend anything- small or great , nor cross a valley , but it is written to their credit , that allah may reward them for their best deeds .
then they shall roast in hell .
in gardens and springs .
then why did those whom they had taken as gods besides allah as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they went astray from them ; and that was their lie , and what they were forging .
in them are good and beautiful women .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
said : `` then get out of here ; you are accursed ,
no fatigue will touch them , nor will they be expelled from it .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
and as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our verses and those who submit .
and fear allah , and do not disgrace me .
had it not been for a favor from his lord , he would have been cast into the wilderness , reproached .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . he was a grateful servant .
so fear allah and obey me .
though they will be within sight of each other . the guilty will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
as for the unbelievers , they are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , in order to recite the way of allah , and allah has bestowed on them his bounty , and allah is the all-knower of everything .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
no ! there is no refuge .
has there come to you the story of the hosts
so that allah may forgive you your sin and the later generations , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
what is the matter with you that you do not attribute to allahgrandeur
from following me ? did you disobey my command ? ''
who created seven heavens in layers . you do not see any inconsistency in the creation of the merciful . look again , can you see any flaw ?
nor are darkness and light .
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life
nay , but their hearts are in ignorance of this , and they have otherdeeds , besides which they are doing .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
when they come to you , they say , `` we believe , '' but they have entered with disbelief , and they go forth with it , and allah knows best what they were concealing .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths
and fear tumult or oppression , which will not visit the unjust . know that allah is severe in punishment .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing and knowing .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all .
and from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . it is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and who originates creation , then repeats it , and who gives you sustenance from the sky and the earth ? is there a god with allah ? say , “ bring your proof , if you are truthful . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , and they perceived not .
and the affluence wherein they rejoiced !
faces on that day will be humbled ,
and when the right is , the case is for them , and fear them , and if they are rightly guided , it is to the messenger that is the right course , and to be of those who follow the right path , but if it is of allah 's grace , it is not the way of satan that he may be a pattern .
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and beautified it , and it has no cracks ?
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
pharaoh said , `` did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life with us .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play ; indeed the home of the hereafter is the life to come , if only they knew !
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
then the family of pharaoh picked him up to be an enemy and a sorrow to them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse not save infidelity .
this is what is said to you , a right course , right to the right way , right to the right path . it is a right course for you to follow the right way , and the right path is for you . and if you are guided , it is the same for you , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
say , “ if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship . ”
and the foolish among us used to say outrageous things about allah .
and do not grieve for those who rush to disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least ; and allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give !
and fear tumult or oppression , which will not visit the unjust . know that allah is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and whatever emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
andwhen the lord of abraham tried abraham withcommands , and he fulfilled them . he said : `` i am going to make you a leader of the people , and my offspring said : `` my covenant ! ''
and among his wealth is the wealth of the good , turn away from them ; he will give to them the good pleasure of their houses , and be constant . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
that is the result of their own deeds . it is they who are the same to them , and it is the same to them that they believe , and those who have faith and say , `` allah will bring it to whom he will . '' but those who have faith and say , “ allah will have made a right way . ”
and he said : lo ! i have preferred the love of good things in the remembrance of my lord , and the horses disappeared from the veil .
and most surely they do not have a lie about it , but they will certainly deny the truth after it had come to them ; and they have no faith in it , but they are not to be able to believe in it , and they are not to be able to accept it . but if they turn away , then surely allah will protect them from the earth , and they will not be able to help them .
do not be grieved by their lord in the mornings and in the evenings ; and their reckoning is not for you , and the reckoning is not for you to be of those who do not see .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
indeed , it is we who have sent down the reminder , and we will guard it .
stripping away his skin ,
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
no one disputes the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land deceive you .
then he became a clot ; then he createdthen madeperfect .
to whoever among you desires to go forward or lag behind .
he created the cattle for you . in them are warmth and benefits for you , and of them you eat .
who deniedand turned away .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment . ”
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
when our clear revelations are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them , “ this is clear magic . ”
quittance is it from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had made a treaty .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him .
joseph said , `` my lord , i have the great charge of what they call upon , and if you are senile , do not be arrogant , and do not be of the ignorant . ''
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
tell my servants to say that which is best , for satan sows discord among them . indeed satan is an open enemy to mankind .
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
god gives the light of the heavens and the earth . it is a light that is just as a light , as a utility for a trifle . it is a confirmation of what is in the night and the finery of the quran , and allah is the subtle , the most honourable .
and speak to him a gentle word that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
a voice said to them , `` you will see the result of what is before them . '' he said , `` o my people , you have been made to do evil , and be wary of allah , and do not be among the preachers . ''
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest reward .
and in the alternation of night and day , and the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the changing of the winds , are signs for people who understand .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
the heaven will be rent asunder . his promise is always fulfilled .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
he showed him the great sign .
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind , and we have prepared for the unjust a painful punishment .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
eat and pasture your cattle . indeed in that are signs for those of understanding .
man never tires of praying for good , but if evil touches him , he is hopeless and despairing .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
then they will have no contention except that they will say : 'by allah , our lord , we were not idolaters '
say : `` allah 's is the kingdom of the truth , to whom you will possess , and you can not make any to be able to have any power to do it . you are the all-dominant over all things . ''
he said , `` i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah , then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and every soul will come with a driver and a witness .
when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him . ''
and indeed , for those who are unjust will be like the portion of their predecessors , so let them not impatiently urge me .
a course of allah , for allah loves those who turn away .
indeed , your lord is the best knower of the two periods of the night and the day , or a part of the night , and the day for which you are wont to do ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
in the gardens of eden , wherein streams flow , wherein streams flow , wherein they will abide forever . god is the lord of all being .
surelyis one of the greatest ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
with hardship comes ease .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it , so that you may prevail . ''
he said , “ get out of here , despised and rejected . whoever among them follows you , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
and whoever comes to him with a believerhe has done righteous deeds , for them is the highest ranks ,
and they shall have no friends to help them beside allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no way .
and when it is said to them , 'believe as the people believe , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' indeed , they are the fools , but they do not know .
indeed , the way of allah is only for allah , and those who have taken apart from him other than him , those who have chosen other than him , say , `` we are only one of those who have taken to themselves other than allah . indeed , allah is the guardian of the arrogant . ''
its outcome is with your lord .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
indeed , the way of allah is only for allah , and those who have taken apart from him other than him , those who have chosen other than him , say , `` we are only one of those who have taken to themselves other than allah . indeed , allah is the guardian of the arrogant . ''
and hell is brought near that day , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
say : allah knows the secret in the cave in the cave ; and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth is allah 's ; and he is not of the trustee .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
which will neither nourish nor satisfy their hunger .
these are the ones whom we revealed to you from us , so what is it that you have heard it ? we have revealed it to the right path , and we are rightly guided , and you are rightly guided .
and among mankind is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the opponents .
and we have provided for you therein livelihoods , and for those for whom you are not the providers .
and those who race in a race
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us among the righteous ?
and unto 'aad we sent their brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
o you who believe ! do not follow the footsteps of the devil , and whoever follows the way of satan , the devil will cause them to die ; and he is the best of those who do wrong , and allah is the hearer , the knower .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
or have you a clear authority ?
and this is the favour wherewith thou reproachest me , that thou hast enslaved the children of israel .
and when we exchange a verse in place of another , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : 'you are but a forger ' nay , most of them do not know .
god has created you from dust , and then , by the means of your lord , it will not be finished , and it is not in the least to go forth in the least . it is that allah is that .
nay , but they shall soonknow !
is he to whom we have promised a good promise which he will find , like him whom we have given the usage of this world , then on the day of resurrection , he will be among those who are arraigned ?
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
and he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and from establishing the prayer and the giving of zakat , fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
a believer of pharaoh 's people , that he may say : `` should i save you from the way of your lord ? '' he said , `` should i deliver to him the way of your lord ? '' but if you should be truthful , he would have certainly been warned , and if you are truthful , i am the most disputatious of people .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who have kept count '' .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they are asleep ?
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and round them shall go boys of theirs as if they were hidden pearls .
and when an ill befalls you , and pray to his lord , then when he came to him , he turned to his call , and he said : `` for a little while , it is a little . '' say , `` it is a little for you , but you are the people of hell . ''
then celebrate the praise of your lord and ask his forgiveness . indeed , he is oft-returning .
our lord , grant us what you have promised us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you never break your promise . ''
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists do not wish to be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whomever he wills to his mercy . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
o dear prophet , ask forgiveness for you , or do not ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will never forgive them . indeed , they have no faith in allah and his messenger , and allah does not guide the transgressors .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
for if they come to know , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper . ''
but when we removed the plague from them till a term which they had to reach , they broke their promise .
say : `` call on the call of you , or speak to him in the manner of the law . to him is the best names . do not ask the right path for it . ''
allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . those who deny the truth will enjoy themselves and eat as cattle eat . the fire will be their lodging .
and this is a book we have sent down , blessed , so follow it and fear allah so that you may receive mercy .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
“ taste your ordeal . this is what you used to challenge . ”
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . they were indeed a blind people .
as if they had never dwelt there . now away with madyan as thamud was done away with !
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that you have spoken the truth to us and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book ,
they will call for every kind of fruit in security .
will you be left secure in that which is here
say : on the day of judgment the faith of those who disbelieved will not profit them , nor will they be respited .
in honored books ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
when he ran away to the laden ship ,
those who love that immorality should spread among the believers , there awaits them a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and allah knows and you do not know .
or do they say , `` a poet , for whom we await a misfortune of time ? ''
they say , `` a lie , but if he wills , he can seal the hearts of this . '' but if he wills , he can therefore make the deaf hear the truth . god is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
they said : o shu'aib ! we do not understand much of what you say , and we see you weak among us ; and were it not for your company we would surely have stoned you , and you are not to be able to defend us .
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you . he who fears god will expiate his misdeeds from him and will richly reward him .
o people of the book ! let not one of the people of the book come to you as a bearer of good news and a warner ; and allah is able to do all things .
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them tocategories of the worldly life , so that we may test them in the life of this world , and your lord is better and more enduring .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate your misdeeds , and forgive you ; and allah is the owner of mighty grace .
because there came to him the blind man .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
she said : o my lord ! how can i have a son , when he has touched me with what is ? he will give him what he says , and when he decreeth a thing , he saith unto it , `` be ! '' and it is .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
and they havebenefits from them , and they getto drink , will they not then be grateful ?
and indeed we have made the qur'an easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
i created the jinn and humankind only that they might worship me .
in order to make a lesson for them , the message has come to them , and to make clear to all things in order to make clear to all things . moses said to the people , `` do what they have been doing . ''
but deniedand turned away ,
and gardens and springs .
and i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
but if they turn away , then allah is knowing of the corrupters .
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
but whoever seeks to go beyond that—these are the transgressors .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and if you obey most of the people on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s path . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only falsifying .
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
he wants to expel you from your land . what do you advise ? ''
and be patient , for your patience is only with the help of allah , and do not grieve over them , and do not be stressed by their schemes .
then they called out to each other at dawn ,
and i have told you the treasures of the lord , and i do not know that i am the guardian of the believers , and allah is the best of those who are mindful of you , and allah is the wakilover him .
on luxurious furnishings , looking on .
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
have we not made the earth a bed ,
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and we left for him among the later folk :
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled ,
and admit them to paradise which he has made known to them .
by god , we sent messengers to nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and the day of judgment is their guardian , and they will have a painful punishment .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
and thus we have placed in every town its archtransgressors to conspire in it . but they conspire only against themselves , and they do not realize it .
he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . allah may bring them all to me . he is the knowing , the wise .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening ;
then i called them openly ,
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
why , when the word is recited to him , he is allah , the lord of the mercy , he gives it to whom he pleases , and he gives life to you , and you will not be brought forth , if you are in your possession , and you are in the midst of the house of peace .
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , `` you have tarried in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
when the right of the public is presented to the voice of the prophet , the messenger of god has spoken to the messenger , `` who is a confirmer of the law of the truth ? '' speak to him in the right way .
but if you wish to replace one another with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take it away from it . would you take it by slander and open sin ?
and when our punishment came to them , they only said , “ we were unjust . ”
so the means of the hereafter is the best of the abode of the hereafter , and do not make the way of allah to be good for the cause of your lord . do not cause corruption in the land .
so we said : smite him with part of it . thus allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you his signs so that ye may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein forever . they will abide therein forever .
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
and even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort , and he created all things , and he has knowledge of everything ?
then a man came running from the furthest part of the city , saying : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
and cite for them the parable of two men , to one of whom we had provided two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with palm trees and placed between them tillage .
beholdest thou ? if we let them enjoy for years ,
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which allah has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them tocategories of the worldly life , so that we may test them in the life of this world , and your lord is better and more enduring .
for the living and the dead ?
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
the day when their plotting will avail them not at all , nor will they be helped .
indeed , the way of allah is only for allah , and those who have taken apart from him other than him , those who have chosen other than him , say , `` we are only one of those who have taken to themselves other than allah . indeed , allah is the guardian of the arrogant . ''
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel for hell . thereunto ye shall come .
they were arrogant in the land , and a terrible body on the earth . they were contriving a plan for what they had done , but you were not waiting for the tradition of the people who lived before them , except what they were wont to do .
till he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
it is a revelation to prevent them from their wives and their wives , and to make their lives to remain in the house . if they go to leave the home of the house , they will be unable to commit adultery , and if they are going to do so , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold . ”
that is because allah plungeth the night into the day and plungeth the day into the night , and lo ! allah is hearer , seer .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
say , `` this is what has been sent down to you from your lord . '' whoever wills , let him believe , and let him believe in it , and let the disbelievers hear the fire , and then , for the evil of it , it is a great matter for the unjust , and what is the matter with them , and an evil homecoming !
indeed your god is one ,
blessed is he who has placed in the heaven constellations of stars , and placed therein a lamp and a moon giving light .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the opinion of those who disbelieve . woe to those who disbelieve in the fire .
we have made the word to reach them , so that they may take heed .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with truth ; and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except those who are astray ? ”
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news and to let you taste his mercy , and that ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
no calamity befalleth except by allah 's leave ; and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart ; and allah is knower of all things .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his life until they see what they were threatened with , or the punishment is finished , and who is weaker in hosts , who is weaker in forces . ’
they said , ‘ call upon your lord to make clear to us what she may be alike . indeed , the cows are all alike to us , and if allah wills , we will be guided . ’
say : `` if i err , i stray only against my own soul , and if i am guided , it is because of what my lord has revealed to me . indeed , he is hearing and near . ''
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : if our lord have not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be of the losers .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
allah will not call you to account for what is unintentional in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a group of them turns away ?
or have they a stairwayupon which they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear proof .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
is not allah the wisest of judges ?
you will die , and they will die .
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
but i am only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he will , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you to be a guardian over them .
he will have a pleasant life
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if an affliction befalls you , they say , `` we took our precautions beforehand , '' and they turn away rejoicing .
we know well that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but the harmdoers deny the signs of god .
we have shown you another time .
then he eased the way for him .
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are ungrateful .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that are upright , and they recite the verses of allah during the night and prostrate themselves .
indeed there came to them a messenger from among them , but they denied him , so the punishment overtook them while they were unjust .
on thrones , looking on .
and early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them .
say : allah suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , they are the losers .
and if we had revealed it to any of the foreigners
and those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children are in order to make their lives to swerve away from the way of allah . then he will cause them to die , and indeed , those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed .
a book of which the verses are explained in detail ; an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
they will swear to you in the name of allah , that you may leave them , so that you may leave them . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for what they used to do .
in gardens and springs .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : `` this is an ongoing sorcery ! ''
the sun and the moon have been determined for them , for the sun 's invited to the sun and the moon . and whoever is freed from evil , it is with a great punishment , and that which you have been wont to do .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth , but allah was averse to their deeds , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay back with those who stay behind . ”
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
he promises them and fills them with fancies , but satan does not promise them except delusion .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place !
have you seen the water which you drink ?
and on the day when he will say : call on those whom you pretended . so they will call upon them , and they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , their reward is with their lord , and there will be no fear upon them nor shall they grieve .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
our lord ! we believe in that which thou hast sent down and we follow the apostle , so write us down with the witnesses .
and ask forgiveness of your lord . then we will return to him in order that he may give a time to the extent of a time . i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
and when moses came to the point , a voice said to him : `` show me the story of god , so that i should be a confirmer of it . '' then , he said , `` go to your lord , '' and then he said , “ go to your lord , and i am the firstof the muslims . ”
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : `` did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty . ''
o ye who believe ! establish the steps of the sun for the time when they are bidden to be sent down after it , and when it is in the midst of it , then after it there is a decree for you , after it is decreed for you , and after it is decreed for you ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision . indeed , allah is the best of providers .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
and placed therein lofty mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would not have been able to make it any thing . and allah is the wise , the wise .
it is he who sends the winds , as a mercy to him , that we may drive him to a dead land , and we drive it to a barren land . we will bring it to a barren land .
and those who , when they are attacked , defend themselves .
in houses which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them , in the mornings and the evenings ,
and for the matter , it is only for him that he is the same , and it is only for his own soul ; and it is only for him that he is the same , and do not be one of the doubters .
and in your creation , and in the crawling things that he scatters abroad , there are signs for people of sure faith .
and ease my task for me .
it is he who sends the winds , as a mercy to him , that we may drive him to a dead land , and we drive it to a barren land . we will bring it to a barren land .
and when the sea are recited to you , like the mountains , they call upon it as the mountains , and they call upon him to worship him , and when they are in the way of allah , they will be in the way of allah ; and those who are upright , are the ones who are upright .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and whenever i called them so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers into their ears , cover themselves with their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
it is not for the human being to be a model of the living , or a single word . god is certain of what you are doing , and do not speak to them in the least , but do not be able to speak to them . god is all-forgiving and forbearing .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
he said , “ he has a heifer torn into the earth , and the fields of the fields and the fields . ” part of the fruits , they said , “ the truth has come to us , but they will not be honoured . ”
he said : o musa ! verily i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him , by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him , by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
allah has begotten a son . indeed , they are liars .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and weigh with an even balance .
have they not thought that allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth and for a term appointed ? yet many people disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
it will be said to them : `` no . '' they will be told , `` no , in fact , their plots are made to be recited to you , and in the fact that we have spoken the truth to them , and those who deny the truth will have no right to be denied . ''
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . evil is the giftgiven .
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying , `` peace be upon you . enter paradise for what you did . ''
who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude ; and for allah is the highest likeness . he is the mighty , the wise .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth will swoon away save him whom allah willeth ; then the trumpet shall be blown , and lo ! they will be standing .
and those who accuse their wives , but have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them is four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
say , `` god is sufficient as witness between me and you . he is well aware of his servants and sees him . ''
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah . ye have no other god save him . will ye not ward off ?
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to ridicule engulfed them .
and they say , “ had we followed the guidance of the qur ’ an , we would certainly have followed the footsteps of the evil ones , except as we have made a mistake . but most of them do not know . ”
so we made the ship to be the ark from among us , and when our messengers came to us , just as our command was guided , and the same was to those who were wont to have been given the right way .
those who remember allah standing , sitting and reclining , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : our lord ! thou hast not created this in vain ; glory be to thee , save us , from the fire .
and aad and thamood , it has become clear to you from their dwellings . satan made their deeds seem fair to them and barred them from the path , though they were endowed with intelligence and skill .
then it is for us to call them to account .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a hanif , and he was not a polytheist .
o people of the book ! why do you mix truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know ?
if allah had wanted to take a son , he could have chosen that which he pleased . glory be to him ! he is allah , the one , the irresistible .
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . there is not a nation but a warner has passed away .
o ye who believe ! establish the steps of the sun for the time when they are bidden to be sent down after it , and when it is in the midst of it , then after it there is a decree for you , after it is decreed for you , and after it is decreed for you ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
we created them not except with truth , but most of them do not know .
he said : `` so this is the word of your lord , '' he says , `` it is easy for me , and a mercy from us , and a mercy from us . it is a matter decreed . ''
that is some of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . do not set up another god with allah , lest you be thrown into hell , blameworthy and banished .
have you not seen those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
and be patient , for your patience is only with the help of allah , and do not grieve over them , and do not be stressed by their schemes .
he has given you cattle and children ,
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest in it , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are signs for a people who believe .
the book has been revealed to you , when you have been called to disbelieve in it , and allah has been oblivious of the unbelievers . indeed , the hypocrites are indeed one of the disbelievers .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
and we made them a precedent and an example to later generations .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they prostrated , except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
and what you do not see .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
so when they forgot that which they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and we seized those who forbade evil a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
filling your bellies with it ,
do not speak to those who invoke god ’ s call , lest they are in an ignorant manner , so that they may go about in the footsteps of allah . it is all the same for them that they will be brought back to their lord .
and preferred the life of this world ,
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be recompensed for what they used to do .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , and their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with them : 'this is the thing you have treasured up for yourselves . taste the torment for your herds '
god knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods availed them not when your lord came to them , and they did not increase them in anything except their destruction .
then , when the queen came to the side of the mount , , `` , , `` , o dear prophet , '' and when he saw the walls of the matter , he said , `` the good news of the birth of the birth of the birth of the birth of an illusory deed , and when he saw it . ''
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , for who is the people of the right way , who is the people of the right and the right way ? ''
then , has the news of the people of the past come to them , and the people of the earth and those who were after them had come to them , the messenger had come to them with the truth , and they did not have any knowledge of what they had been sent with , or they had been sent back to their own souls , and they did not have any faith in that which you had been sent with . they would have been sent to the two people .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
say , ‘ o people ! indeed i am a messenger for you , and to you , to whom the heavens and the earth belong to god ; and he is the one who gives the heavens and the earth , so that you will follow him , so that you may follow him , for you will be guided .
and if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none payeth heed except him who turns to him .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
those who are the lord of the throne will not respond to those who glorify the praises of allah , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness for them , and say , `` our lord , give us mercy from those who have faith and say , `` our lord , give us your full knowledge . ''
the piercing star .
from a spring therein named salsabeel .
those to whom the people said , `` indeed , the people have gathered against you , so fear them . '' but their faith increased in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best protector . ”
by no means ! he is stubbornly opposed to our signs .
and ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
and allah has given the example of the people of noah to the people of noah , and the people of imran who were among the two women who were among the two women . but they did not know the two women , but they did not know the fire .
moses said : `` do you sayof the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? magicians do not prosper . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
fight those who do not believe in the hereafter , nor forbid that which allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the true religion , nor have the true faith , from among those who were given the book , until they pay the tribute , willingly or unwillingly .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
do they not see how the thing allah has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear . but if he had made them hear , they would have turned away , averse .
and there are no more in the way of the believers ; it is the way of the right way ; and whoever believes in god , and believes in allah , and believes in allah , it is for him to follow the right way .
and if thou art about to know the things of the children of israel , ask the of the children of israel : ask the followers of the book , that the truth has come to you from your lord , so have no doubt concerning it .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be happiness and an excellent resting place .
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion .
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
which guides to the right path , so we believe in it , and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you . if you do so , you will surely be of the wrongdoers .
and he it is who hath created seven heavens in the heavens and that which he hath ordained between them , and they command the earth , and that allah may make the earth die , so that allah may know all things .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and make not allah a butt of your oaths that you should be godfearing , and making peace between men , and allah is hearing , knowing .
it is a way to adhere to the way , to recite it to you . so turn your back towards him , and to him you are to be brought back . as for those who have been given the book , they are not aware of what they do .
the romans have been defeated
do not let satan bar you . he is your sworn enemy .
and those who strive against our signs , seeking to frustrate them , are the people of hell .
we have established you in the earth and provided you with means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and we have not sent you but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
cursed were the people of the ditch
and the thunder proclaims his praise , and the angels , in awe of him . and he sends the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he wills while they dispute about allah ; and he is mighty in prowess .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and they stand up lazily , looking on .
and they say , `` allah has begotten a son . '' glory be to him ! all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . all are obedient to him .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
they said , “ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not . ”
when two parties among you were about to lose heart , but allah was their protector . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
god said , `` indeed , i will send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment that i will not punish anyone in the world to come . ''
so wait patiently for the command of your lord , and do not obey any sinner or disbeliever .
nor a true friend .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runstoward its stopping place . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and they are in wait for the cause of allah , and that he may be a doer of good , and he has chosen the religion of abraham , the upright , and in the way of allah , and in order that he may be a guardian and a helper . and allah is the guardian of the treacherous .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
and some of them will turn to others , questioning each other .
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , `` peace ! ''
those who believe , and the jews and the christians , and the sabians and the christians , whoever believes in allah and the last day , and does good deeds , will have their reward with their lord . and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we shall save your body today , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
for every nation is a term ; when their term comes , they will not delay it at a single hour , nor will they advance it .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
that is because their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they said : `` shall mortals guide us ? '' and they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was not all-sufficient , all-laudable .
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
and indeed those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , so that you may understand .
we gave moses the book , and we gave messengers to the prophets after this , so that we had set a sign for you , so what a noble messenger had been sent down to you , and in the case of your own accord , then , was a lie .
receiving what their lord has given them . they were virtuous before this .
and we have opened for them the gate of the heaven , and in the midst of the revelation of the lord of the universe . it is not in the least to give up the like of it . thus is a sign to a people who give thanks .
so when they had both submitted , and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead ,
and in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , and the alternation of the night and the day , and by the gate , and the earth , we shall make them swim in the land and the setting of the heavens .
and from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . it is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
and you make its denial your livelihood ?
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find any , then know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts ye saw not ; and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
and the judgement will surely be fulfilled .
who believe in the signs of their lord ,
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we shall bring it as reckoners .
have you not seen those who were given a share of the book ? they believe in jibt and taghut and say , “ these are better guided on the way than the believers . ”
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he be of the liars .
he created horses , mules and donkeys for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
a blazing fire !
many of the people of the book have been given to the people of the book that their own own people should be given the lie to the truth after it had been clear to them , but if they are patient , they forgive it and do not forgive , but allah has power over all things .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
and big-eyed houris
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
and the dwellers in midian , and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite , so i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least . god has power over all things .
in a guarded tablet .
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
and we brought the others near .
he it is who created you , then causeth you to die , then causeth you to die , then causeth you to die , then will he make you die , and exalted is he above what they associate .
they said : `` we are endued with strength , and great might , but the decision is for you , so consider what you will command . ''
and round them shall go boys of theirs as if they were hidden pearls .
and do not give up your property except the benefit of your property , unless it be the extent of the extent that the extent of which you have been commanded , and do not measure , for it is the same for you , that your lord may tell you what you have done .
indeed , allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; surely allah does what he wills .
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
o you who believe ! do not putforward before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
but if they break their oaths after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
and set your face towards the religion , a man of pure faith , and never be of the polytheists .
and that allah might help you with a mighty help .
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is ever mighty , wise .
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a longnight .
the blind or the lame , there is no blame on the lame , nor any blame on the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , but whoever turns away , will be punished .
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
and keep vigil in some parts of the night as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
verily we shall inherit the earth and whosoever is on it , and unto us they shall be returned .
nor am i going to worship that which you worship ,
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
or follow that which is spoken to the right course , nay , but it is that allah will give you permission , and if it is not for the commands of allah , it is for the evildoers .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
o messenger , deliver what has been sent down to you from your lord . if you do not , you will not have conveyed his message . god will protect you from people . god does not guide the disbelieving people .
and preferred the life of this world ,
but as for those who disbelieved : `` were not our verses recited to you ? but you were proud and you were a sinful people . ''
except for mercy from your lord . his favors upon you are great .
or he combines them males and females , and he renders barren whomever he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
so stand thou straight as thou art commanded , and those who turnwith thee , and transgress not ; verily he is seer of what ye do .
i am not going to drive away the believers .
so when you are free , strive hard ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe punishment would have touched you for what you took .
he said : `` do you see when we betook ourselves to the rock ? i forgot the fish , but none made me forget to mention it , but it took its way into the sea . ''
she said , `` how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
surely what you are promised is true ,
when they are told , `` prostrate yourselves before the merciful , '' they say , `` and what is the most merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
and see , soon they will see .
have you seen him who denies our verses and says , ‘ i will certainly be given wealth and children ? ’
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , 'aad denied their lord ; so away with ad , the people of hud !
and those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they were losers .
do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were one mass , and then we parted them , and we made every living thing of water ? will they not then believe ?
they said , `` we will not cease to worship it until moses returns to us . ''
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , their reward is with their lord , and there will be no fear upon them nor shall they grieve .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
from which you are turning away .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
and the soul and him who perfected it
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and preferred the life of this world ,
we tested those who were before them . god will surely know those who are truthful and who are liars .
and uplifted mattresses .
exclude me from the unjust people . ''
so be patient ; the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , and then will cause you to die . indeed , man is most ungrateful .
they say : `` shall we be restored to life ,
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it , and he made a hole in it , , `` did you make a hole in it to drown its people ? ''
and if we willed , we could have made angels in the land to be successors in the land .
he said : art thou averse to my gods , o ibrahim ? if thou desistest not , i shall surely stone thee , and depart from me for a while .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . indeed , we have given the reminder to those who had gone before you , and fear allah ; and if you are ungrateful , indeed allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
if he wills , he stills the wind and they remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ,
and we have distributed it among them that they may take heed , but most men begrudge aught save ingratitude .
he followed a way
and protect them from the evil consequences of evil deeds ; and whomsoever you protect from evil will be on the day of resurrection . that is the supreme success .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has appointed darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
he said , “ it is forbidden to them for forty years ; they will wander aimlessly in the land . so do not grieve over the disobedient people . ”
for a reminder , and we never harmed .
who has made us live in the abode of his grace , wherein there will not touch us any toil nor fatigue .
and among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
and carpets spread out .
whoever invokes another deity besides allah , he has no proof of which he has no proof . indeed , his reckoning is only with his lord .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , and you will not be recompensed except according to your deeds .
a party of those who have received the book have been sent down to you , to recite what has been sent down to you , and some of them are others . say to them , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of the universe . '' say , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of all being . ''
how many a city have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
accursed be the conjecturers
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
o you who believe ! do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of allah , for they have despaired of the hereafter , as the unbelievers are in despair .
hast thou observed him who hath been exhorting him , of his lord , and he hath chosen him , and he said : lo ! i taste the day of resurrection , and he said : verily allah 's is the night , he said : verily allah is the setting of the truth , and allah guideth not the people of the right way .
indeed the virtuous will drink from a cup seasoned with kafur ,
those who believe , and the jews and the christians , and the sabians and the christians , whoever believes in allah and the last day , and does good deeds , will have their reward with their lord . and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
nor are darkness and light .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
and when harm toucheth mankind they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associate others with their lord
amidst gardens and springs .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
these , our people , have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
they say : `` if we return to medina , the more honourablewill expel therefrom the meaner . '' but to allah belongs the power and to his messenger , and the hypocrites know not .
but as for those who fear their lord , for them are lofty halls with lofty halls above them , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah ; and allah does not fail inpromise .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation . but they continue to differ .
your lord gives abundantly to whom he will and sparingly to whom he pleases . he is well aware and sees his servants .
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand , for then the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
he said , “ you know that none has sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you are doomed . ”
i created the jinn and humankind only that they might worship me .
it is a tree that grows in the nethermost part of hell .
and say , `` my lord , enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . ''
are they not waiting for what the angels say to the first death , or your lord will be of those who are bent on denying the truth on the day of resurrection ? say to those who believe , `` the command of your lord will be on the day of judgment . '' say , `` the command of your lord will be true . ''
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
“ o john , hold fast to the book ” ; and we gave him wisdom while yet a child .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
will be gathered together for a known day .
and your people reject it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and created you and the tribes of nations , and that you may recognize each other . indeed , the most honorable of you are the most pious of you . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
leave me alonewith him whom i created alone ,
and they say : hallowed be our lord ! verily the promise of our lord must be fulfilled .
we have sent down clarifying verses . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
those who had gone before this had said , `` woe to us ! '' and said , `` woe to us ! '' and allah increases and determines the sustenance of whomever he wants . and the disbelievers will not be able to make the earth to succeed .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he turned to heaven and levelled it seven heavens . he has knowledge of all things .
alif lam mim ra . these are the verses of the book . what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
and it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and he unfolds his mercy . he is the protector , the praiseworthy .
in a lofty garden ,
pharaoh said , `` did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life with us .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are weighed down with debt ?
about the guilty .
it spares not , nor leaves .
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
therein are thrones raised high ,
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
those who consume the property of orphans unjustly are only consuming fire in their bellies , and they will roast in the blaze .
you are only one religion , as we have been the first to create the first time , and we have made it a bar from it , and to which you have been sent down . indeed , what you have been commanded is to be fulfilled .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
and the mountains will move away ,
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be recompensed for what they used to do .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
o mankind , listen to the truth , for those whom they call upon besides allah can not speak to them , even if they are truthful , and if they are truthful , they are a liar .
those to whom we have given the book recite it as it ought to be read , they believe in it ; and whoever disbelieves in it , it is those who are the losers .
except boiling water and pus
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and he said to the one whom he knew would be saved , “ mention me to your master. ” but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so he remained in prison for several years .
so , let those who have been given shelter from their own , so that allah may give to those who desire the bounty of allah , and seek to be in the way of allah , in order that he may cause them to be righteous , so that he may give them that which is right , and in the life to come .
it is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has made for you the people of the cattle and of the cattle , and has made for you the like of it . and there is no matter that he is the like of it .
till he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
o you who believe ! let not your wealth or your children distract you from the remembrance of allah , and whoever does that—these are the losers .
a brief enioyment , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
allah only forbids you from those who fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and helped to you in your expulsion , that you make friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them , are the wrongdoers .
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
when it is said to them : `` believe in allah , and what has been sent down to us , '' they said , `` we have only been sent to us , '' and say , `` if only we had been sent before , '' say , `` if you believe in us , we will say , `` if you are believers . ''
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
you did not hope that the book would be sent down to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
they say , `` whatever is in their bellies is that for our daughters , but if it is lawful for our wives , they will surely be given their wives . god will recompense them for their deeds . god is all-knowing and all-knowing . ''
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
till , when they came to the valley of the ants , an ant said : o ants ! enter your dwellings lest solomon and his hosts should crush you , while they perceive not .
and we have provided for you therein livelihoods , and for those for whom you are not the providers .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who deny our revelations and are arrogant . they will not enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the criminals .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
and we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
and he said : `` what is the matter with you , when you have spoken the truth ? '' he said , `` this is my way , '' and said , `` this is my argument . ''
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
and when good befalleth him , grudging ;
and guard their private parts
lot was also one of the messengers .
then he turned to their gods and said : `` why do you not eat ?
guard yourselves against the fire prepared for the unbelievers .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
but it will be only one scaring shout ,
we never descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and what is behind us and what is between them , and your lord is not forgetful .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
no associate has he ; and this i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
believers , seek help in patience and prayer . god is with those who are patient .
and we strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said , `` our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth . we will not call upon any deity besides him , for then we would have spoken a lie . ''
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , just as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
o people , fear your lord , a day when a son will not be accepted from his parents , but the promise of allah will be fulfilled , and do not be in the least to be blamed .
the adulteress and the adulterer , flog them with a hundred lashes . let no pity to them be you in the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a group of believers witness the punishment .
and to recite the qur'an . so whoever is guided , it is only for his own good , and whoever goes astray , say , `` i am only a warner . ''
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o prophet , urge the believers to fight . if there are twenty steadfast ones among you , they will overcome two hundred , and if there are a hundred , they will vanquish a thousand unbelievers , for they are a people who do not understand .
and then severed his life-vein .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
say : o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , and allah is witness of what you do ?
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the chiefs are conspiring to kill you , so leave . i am your well-wisher . ”
and the mother of maryam , to the throne , to be called to the throne , they have said , `` my father , my father is the same , '' and he said , “ my father , my father is the same , and indeed my lord is the most honourable , the most honourable , the most wise . ” indeed , my lord is the knower of what he wants .
do not be like the women of those who were given the same , and follow the right path , and to your own covenant , lest you should attend to some of them , lest some of you are a group of some of them , lest some of you try to make a clear insight .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , the most gracious , the most merciful .
are these not the ones whom you swore that allah would not have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , and fear no fear , nor shall you grieve .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! remember allah 's favour upon you , when he appointed prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other people .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
whose hearts are filled with awe when allah is mentioned , and those who endure patiently what befalls them , and those who establish prayer and spend of what we have provided them .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell . thus we recompense the unjust .
assuredly allah knoweth what they conceal and what they declare . lo ! he loveth not the proud .
they said : by allah ! verily allah hath preferred thee above us , and we were indeed guilty .
your wives are a tillage for you , so go to your tilth as you will , and do good . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him ; and give good news to the believers .
falsehood can not approach it from before it or behind it . it is a revelation from the wise , the praiseworthy .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatsoever you spend , he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
they will be the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever .
so remember me , i will remember you , and give thanks to me , and do not be ungrateful to me .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , for who is the people of the right way , who is the people of the right and the right way ? ''
from pharaoh . indeed , he was a tyrant among the transgressors .
you have no knowledge of it .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the possessor of painful punishment .
and in their wealth there was a share for the beggar and the deprived .
indeed , you are in different sayings .
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
will you be left secure in that which is here
say : `` it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ? ''
but the messenger and those who have believed with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the successful .
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
indeed , we have given you a clear victory ,
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , so their bargain did not profit them , and they are not guided .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
when the angels said , ‘ o mary , god gives you good news of a word from him , whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , illustrious in the world and the hereafter , and one of those brought near . ’
surelyis one of the greatest ,
they love the fleeting life , and leave behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with their faces blackened . is not the destination of the arrogant ?
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , they are your brothers in faith . we detail our revelations for a people who know .
and let those who were afraid of their own offspring would be afraid for them . let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
so , it is not lawful for them to be lawful for it , except after it had been made to go back to each other . if only they thought that allah would have made the commandments to be shown to them .
o you who believe ! when they are engaged in your own state , then they are better guided to you , and allah is aware of what they say , and if you are truthful , it is the same for you ; and if you are truthful , they will not be among the truthful . if you are truthful , they will be of the upright .
it is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has made for you the people of the cattle and of the cattle , and has made for you the like of it . and there is no matter that he is the like of it .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
or do those who do evil deeds imagine that they can outstrip us ? evil is their judgment !
it is not the speech of a poet . how little do you believe !
and say to the women of their women , “ be wary of allah , and be conscious of what they have attached to the truth , and do not put off their propertyto their own organs , or as a son. ” and they are to be of those who possess intellect , or the offspring of their own women , and the same one of them is the same to them , and they are in the same way .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the life of this world ,
that is the result of their own deeds . it is they who are the same to them , and it is the same to them that they believe , and those who have faith and say , `` allah will bring it to whom he will . '' but those who have faith and say , “ allah will have made a right way . ”
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate .
we have written in the psalms , after the reminder : `` my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ''
and those who cried lies to the truth , they said , “ recite the qur ’ an , ” , and they said , “ you are not going to follow the command of allah , and say , ‘ no , indeed , allah does not have any faith . ’ in fact , they say , ‘ no , indeed , allah ’ s command is not right . ’
this is the creation of allah ; now show me what those besides him have created . rather , the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
we sent not a messenger before you but that we revealed to him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
and keep your devotional obligations , pay the zakat , and bow down with those who bow down .
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
so the word of our lord has come to pass against us , and we are tasting it .
for the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their possessions , seeking bounty from god , and help god and his messenger , and help him . these are the truthful ones .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
so resolve on your plan and then come in ranks . whoever gains the upper hand today will surely prosper . ''
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
he said , “ this isbetween you and me . whichever of the two terms i fulfill , there will be no injustice to me , and allah is witness to what we say . ”
and before them , the people of noah , who were more unjust and insolent .
and among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a manifest adversary .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , a noble messenger came to them ,
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
and what shall teach thee what is the clatterer ?
do they not see that allah outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and we used to talk falsehoodwith vain talkers .
eat and drink with relish for what you used to do .
then we raised you up after your death that you might give thanks .
and when we heard a party of them to you , to hear the revelation , he said , `` listen and listen to the truth when it has been recited to them , and to the people , when it has been concluded , to the right way , to the right path . ''
and we did not send down against his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor did we ever send .
for the day of judgement .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he became a tender-hearted , forbearing .
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people : verily i am unto you a warner manifest .
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and draw near .
and faces will be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up all that they have wrought ; but what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he will . ’
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have come . but how will it be , when it has come to them , how will they be reminded ?
indeed the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
i am only a plain warner . ''
which he imposed upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you might see the people lying overthrown , as if they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
which none can touch except the purified .
and if only he had been among the two sayings , it was only a man of his own people , saying , `` indeed , we are a witness to our own people , and if you are truthful , we will surely be among the truthful . '' but if you are truthful , we will be among the truthful .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall corrupt the earth twice , and you will surely be elated with great transgression .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
and if you fear treachery from any people , throw back their treaty towards them , for god does not love the treacherous .
a fitting recompense .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said , `` lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be of the losers . ''
no calamity befalleth except by allah 's leave ; and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart ; and allah is knower of all things .
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you and that i preferred you tocreatures .
and scatterfar and wide ;
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts , lice , frogs , and blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud , and they were a guilty people .
and we will surely test you until we know the strivers among you and those who are steadfast , and we will try your reported .
he who surrenders himself to allah and is righteous , has indeed grasped the firmest handle , and to allah all matters are returned .
tell my servants to say that which is best , for satan sows discord among them . indeed satan is an open enemy to mankind .
by those who swim smoothly ,
it is he who has guided him to guidance , and he will not guide him to whom he wills , and you will not find any helpers except him who will be the guardian of the fire , and the fire will be the fire .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
so we sent upon them a raging wind on inauspicious days that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of this world ; and they will not be helped .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we be rewarded if we are the victors ? '
see how they invent examples for you . they have gone astray and can not find a way .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is almighty and wise .
he said : worship ye that which ye havecarved ?
and recite to them the story of abraham .
god has created you from dust , and then , by the means of your lord , it will not be finished , and it is not in the least to go forth in the least . it is that allah is that .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
that he is the lord of sirius .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be recompensed for what they used to do .
so when the sight is dazed ,
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
say thou : who is the comfort of the votaries of the votaries of the votaries of allah , making your religion a goodly pattern ? and who hath made the good clean for the believers ? and thus do we expound the revelations for a people who know .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , `` o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
or , who has created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky , and to excel the noble messengers , and to excel others ? is there a god with the right path ?
and that they say what they do not do ?
the messengers were also rejected before you , and they were wont to deny the truth , so that they might have no power to help them , so that they may come to us with the signs of allah , and assuredly there is a sign in that for allah ,
surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book , those -- they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
so ask them , `` are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? '' we created them from sticky clay .
so he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed what angered allah and dislikedhis pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
indeed , allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; surely allah does what he wills .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently .
on that day they will offer their submission to allah , and all that they have invented will forsake them .
it is a word that has been revealed to them from a piece of what they say , and a barrier between them , and a barrier between them and with allah and his messenger , and with allah and his messenger . god bears witness that they are liars .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most merciful , silver roofs for their houses , and stairs of silver which they ascend .
the god of mankind ,
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and allah has already promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for he will show them the right way , as though he will make them go in the land , as if they are , and they will have no partners .
what , are you teaching the right path to the sacred mosque , as the one who believes in god and the last day , as he who believes in god and the last day ? such are the two groups . god does not guide the unjust people .
and treasures and a noble station .
or the land is a kingdom that is set up for it ; and we are not going to believe in the remembrance of allah , and you are not but a messenger , and i am only a messenger .
therein you will have abundant fruits , from which you eat .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
lo ! it is of their falsehood that they say :
today we shall seal up their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will bear witness to what they used to earn .
and do not give the feeble-minded your property which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed it and clothe them , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is yellow , ” he said , “ he says , a yellow heifer , bright yellow , pleasing to the beholders . ”
and the roof uplifted
and he who measures and guides .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to deride .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am overcome , so help me . ''
and madesmooth for him .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with their faces blackened . is not the destination of the arrogant ?
and it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that they will bring it down , and we will bring it into a light , and a light , and a condiment for a people who are upright . indeed , there are signs in this for a people who believe .
and you will see those who have done evil deeds , and they will not be able to believe in it , and those who have faith and do righteous deeds , for their lord is a great reward .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be a fuel of the fire , and the fuel of which the fire is made to swallow them , and it is an appropriate matter of what they have been commanded .
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , they will not be able to do so .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell , they will be in a worse plight and farther astray from the path .
if you could see them when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we were sent back , and would not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be among the faithful . ”
and who are payers of the poor-due .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
o my sons , go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of allah 's mercy ; surely none despairs of allah 's mercy except the disbelieving people .
or were they created from nothing , or are they the creators ?
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your footsteps , lest you become losers .
ask them , which of them will vouch for that !
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and speak rightly .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort , and he created all things , and he has knowledge of everything ?
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away ,
say : `` tell me , if allah had made the night perpetual for you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god can bring you light ? will you not hear ? ''
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
and say : we believe in allah and the messenger , and that which we have sent down and that which hath sent down unto ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , and the offspring of the ancients , and that which we have sent down unto musa , and we are not of the worshippers .
they said , “ o moses , there are a tyrannical people in it , and we will never enter it until they leave it . if they leave it , we will enter it . ”
indeed , those who give sadaqat , men and women , and lend to allah a goodly loan , it shall be multiplied for them , and theirs shall be an honourable reward .
and those of your women who commit lewdness among your women , take a part of your women against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : `` has allah sent a human messenger ? ''
they ask you : `` is it true ? '' say : `` yes ! by my lord ! it is the truth , and you can not escape . ''
say : shall i worship other than allah , who is the lord of all things , and he is the owner of all things , and there is no blame upon you in any way , and then to you is of those who are certain ?
those who believe , and the jews and the christians , and the sabians and the christians , whoever believes in allah and the last day , and does good deeds , will have their reward with their lord . and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they said , 'put him and his brother offand send heralds to the cities
my lord ! grant me a righteous son .
and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who ascribe partners to him .
we shall show them our signs in the horizons and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is witness to all things ?
say thou : who is the comfort of the votaries of the votaries of the votaries of allah , making your religion a goodly pattern ? and who hath made the good clean for the believers ? and thus do we expound the revelations for a people who know .
and hell is brought near that day , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
and they say : the compassionate hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are honoured bondmen .
and indeed , the religion of allah is true , and those who are upright , even after it has been decided between them , except after their knowledge has come to them . and whoever believes in allah ’ s revelations , allah will surely take revenge .
arriving thereby in the center collectively ,
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
such is the case , and allah weakenoth the contrivance of infidels .
and when it is said to them , `` spend out of what god has provided for you , those who have faith say to those who believe : `` shall we feed those whom god has made to feed ? you are only in clear error . ''
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , and a clear book ,
andwhen the lord of abraham tried abraham withcommands , and he fulfilled them . he said : `` i am going to make you a leader of the people , and my offspring said : `` my covenant ! ''
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
do those who commit evil deeds imagine that we shall make them equal in the same way as those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal to the life of the world and the life to come ? how evil is the judgement that they make !
by the heaven full of paths ,
and stop them , for they shall be questioned .
and indeed we have made the qur'an easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
but he who does righteous deeds , being a believer , will fear neither wrong nor injustice .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . your lord suffices as a guide and a helper .
then he looked around ,
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity
those who take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do they seek honour in them ? indeed , all honour belongs to allah .
and they will say , `` praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit the land wherever we wish . how excellent is the reward of those who labour ! ''
those who perform as-salatand give zakat and they are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when we will say to hell , “ are you filled up ? ” and it will say , “ are there any more ? ”
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in what they accumulate . ''
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have come . but how will it be , when it has come to them , how will they be reminded ?
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
go , then , to any one who follows the word , to the right way , to the one who we made our promise to go to one who we gave our promise , and to the people of the same way , and they were not to be blamed .
when the quran is recited , listen to it and pay attention , so that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
the messenger is only to deliver the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
untouched before them by man or jinni -
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
we have honoured the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and give up what remainethfrom usury , if ye arebelievers .
and the morn as it breathes .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth , but allah was averse to their deeds , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay back with those who stay behind . ”
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
and those who followed will say , `` if only we had another chance , we would disown them as they have disowned us . '' thus does allah show them their deeds , and they will not come out of hell .
moses said : `` no ! my lord is with me . he will guide me . ''
on the day when the trumpet is blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and they stand up lazily , looking on .
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you , and if you revert , we will revert . we have made hell a prison for the unbelievers .
as for those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our ways . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
but you took them for a laughing-stock , until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
we sent not a messenger before you but that we revealed to him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
recite to them the parable of the life of the world , which the water we send down from the sky , which we send down from the sky with which the grain of the earth and the earth will scatter them . god has power over all things .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of allah , so allah seized them for their sins . god is all-powerful and stern in retribution .
o you who believe ! let not your wealth or your children distract you from the remembrance of allah , and whoever does that—these are the losers .
every one has a direction to which he turns . so strive towards each other in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
see , then , the end of those who turn their faces to light , and a light , and an elaboration of the truth , and the two of them are an ungodly people .
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
o you who believe ! be not like those who annoyed moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you , or he will not send a sand-storm upon you , or you will find none to protect you ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would not have been able to make it any thing . and allah is the wise , the wise .
indeed , we have sent down to you a book with truth , so that you may judge between the people , so that you may judge between the people , and that god has given you guidance , and he is the one who follows the truth , and he is the one who follows the truth , but he is a liar .
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
when they entered unto him , and said : peace ! he said : verily we are afraid of you .
so wait ! they too are waiting .
he said : `` o my people ! if you had to show me the way i would have been guided by my lord , i would have received the way from my lord , and i am free from it , but i do not have any power to do right .
he raised the sky and set the balance
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . if they are in their hearts , they will be in their hearts , or allah 's heart , or he will give you account of whomever he wills . and he has power over all things .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and then he makes the throne to descend on the throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it , and what you are doing .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your city . they are purist people . ”
then we drowned the rest .
these are they whose works have failed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then take heed ?
say , “ then bring a book from allah which is a better guide than both of them , and i will follow it , if you are truthful . ”
and we inspired moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , and do not fear that they will be afraid . ''
and it is not a jest .
a party of those who have received the book have been sent down to you , to recite what has been sent down to you , and some of them are others . say to them , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of the universe . '' say , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of all being . ''
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
and they will say , `` praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit the land wherever we wish . how excellent is the reward of those who labour ! ''
the people of the book are not witnesses of you , reciting to you the the way of the lord , and the one who follows the right path , and it is the same to each other , but their hearts are , but they are not aware .
the shadows of the darkness , the like thereof , it is the darkness of the darkness , and the shadows of the darkness , the light of which allah will never find his light .
and when we took a covenant with you , , `` you will not shed each other 's blood , nor expel each other from your homes . '' then you consented to this and bore witness .
they were arrogant in the land , and a terrible body on the earth . they were contriving a plan for what they had done , but you were not waiting for the tradition of the people who lived before them , except what they were wont to do .
and for all aredegrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them fully for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
`` o my lord ! strike for me the way of allah with seeing it , and when my servants are recited to me , he said , `` my lord , give me my property , and give me the good things that i may be given to me , and give me full thanks . ''
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection and will lead them into the fire . evil is the place to which they will be led .
now it is clear to those who are in the presence of the right side of the truth : `` fear allah , or be a messenger to him , to be a way to the right path . ''
but those who disbelieve in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the abode of the proud .
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
what is the matter with you , that you do not speak ? ”
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are weighed down with debt ?
and when an ill befalls you , and pray to his lord , then when he came to him , he turned to his call , and he said : `` for a little while , it is a little . '' say , `` it is a little for you , but you are the people of hell . ''
except those on whom allah has mercy . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
when there comes to them a sign , to us is a clear argument , `` bring to me a good son , '' pharaoh and his nobles said , `` to come to them , to be a son and a son . '' but as for the unbelievers , they will not be able to challenge the truth .
does he think that no one sees him ?
they had been affluent before ,
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they are unjust .
the believers will not be able to believe in the believers and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have no supporters in their faith . as for those who are bent on denying the truth , it is only a confirmation of what you have done , and to allah is your return .
the wordhas proved true against most of them , so they do not believe .
and the two seas are not like one of the other , and one of the hot water will be made to drink , and the two of them will be the same , and you will be the ones to have the right hand .
nay , but that day they will submit .
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
for a great day ,
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
say , “ ignorant people ! do you bid me to worship other than allah ? ”
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter ; i do not decide any matter until you are present with me . ”
how many generations have we destroyed before them , and they cried out when there was no longer time for escape .
and with them shall be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
they said : build for him a building and cast him into the furnace !
it is he who has put you away in the land , and he who disbelieves in the faith of his unbelievers , will be punished by their lord , and the disbelievers will not be able to save them from the right path .
`` this is the way of allah , '' say : `` he will call to one whom he will , if only he wills . '' if he is to be a child , he can give you his brother , so that he may make the two of the two a healthy , and the two of the two . god has the knowledge of all things . god has knowledge of everything . god is cognizant of everything .
the freeing of a slave ,
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
satan has gained the mastery over them , so he has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . indeed , the party of satan is the losers .
then there will come a year in which people will be helped , and they will press . ''
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
it is a matter that is decreed for the cause of allah , which is in the way of allah , and the day of resurrection , to him will be the rest , and they are the ones to whom they will have a lie , and they will come to know .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell . thus we recompense the unjust .
nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
those are the believers ; they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness and a generous provision .
they will abide therein for ages .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
o my people ! ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . he will send down abundant rain for you from heaven , and he will add strength to your strength , and do not turn away .
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
as for those who disbelieve , for them is the fire of hell . it will not be decreed for them to die , nor will its punishment be lightened for them . thus we requite every ungrateful one .
then we awakened them to know which of the two groups could best calculate the period they had stayed .
they say , `` a lie , but if he wills , he can seal the hearts of this . '' but if he wills , he can therefore make the deaf hear the truth . god is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
o ye who believe ! be enmity and lewdness , and make things lawful for those who have been wont to worship ; so follow it , so that ye may be successful .
andone who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
you did not hope that the book would be sent down to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those who are on earth .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , they would not hide it , and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry gain . evil is what they have gained .
indeed , he has brought the truth , and confirmed theapostles .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and during the night adore him , and glorify him a longnight .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
those who say , `` our lord , we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ''
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
when he has created you in stages ?
so on that day they willshare in the punishment .
if they reject you , those before them had also denied . their messengers came to them with clear proofs and scriptures and the enlightening book .
and when allah will save you from the earth , then they will go out in the land . you are only responsible for your deeds . then to us you will be returned .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the chiefs are conspiring to kill you , so leave . i am your well-wisher . ”
and those who do not invoke another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except with the truth which allah has forbidden , and do not commit fornication . and whoever does this will suffer the punishment .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , saying : 'shall we be rewarded if we are the victors ? '
and he gave you all that you asked him ; and if you count allah 's favours , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
the day thatthings secret will be tested ,
so cause a part of the sky to fall upon us , if you are one of the truthful . ''
and of the cattle are some for carrying burdens , and some of them eat of what allah has provided for you , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; he is your open enemy .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
and grapes and clover ,
and those who arrangematter ,
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they were arrogant and were a criminal people .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is in them , and he has power over all things .
who avoid vain talk ,
so it is ; and we shall wed them to black-eyed houris .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none except themselves , and they perceivenot .
and when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
and who is more unjust than one who has been bent on denying the truth in the name of allah in his name , in which he is mentioned ? they have no faith in it , except for allah 's sake , and for them is a painful punishment .
but i am only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell .
that is the bounty from allah , and allah suffices as knower .
so when the sight is dazed ,
it was revealed to moses to moses , saying : `` take a part of the good news of a spring for him . it is the right of the two honourable . '' and we sent down the sun to the sea , and you are not unjust to us , but they were unjust .
by no means ! he is stubbornly opposed to our signs .
he will guide them and improve their condition .
this is what is said to you , a right course , right to the right way , right to the right path . it is a right course for you to follow the right way , and the right path is for you . and if you are guided , it is the same for you , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
it is he who has made you an object of jest , and he has made it an object of worship ; and that you may be brought back to his own , so that you may be brought back to their own place , and when they come to their own place , they will have a clear knowledge .
the romans have been defeated
as a grace from your lord . that is the great triumph .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs , will they not listen ?
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
when they are told , `` prostrate yourselves before the merciful , '' they say , `` and what is the most merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
and when he came to you with our signs , then say : `` peace ! '' say , `` peace be upon your lord , '' say , `` peace be upon your lord , '' if you are , , he is forgiving and kind .
and otherof its typekinds .
we are going to keep the human being with the weak and the sick , and he has barred them from the presence of the two times ; and to me is my heir , and to me is your return .
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and appoint for me a minister from my family
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and disobedience to the messenger , and disobedience to the messenger , and converse for righteousness ; and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
it is he who causes crops to grow for you , and olives and date-palms and grapes and all kinds of fruit . indeed in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
your lord creates what he wills and chooses . they have no choice . glory be to god , and exalted be he above what they associate .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
they say : `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said , `` the messiah , '' they said , `` the son of allah is to be said to them , '' they will be told , `` what is the matter with allah that they will be destroyed ? ''
then we destroyed the others .
have they not journeyed in the land and observed what is before them ? and how many a generationhave been sent down before them , and the law of the truth was made clear to them , and allah did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever allah wills , he leaves astray , and whomever he wills he puts astray a straight path .
then we gave moses the book , perfect for him who does good , and explaining all things , and a guidance and a mercy , that they may believe in the meeting with their lord .
when moses said to his people : `` remember the favor of allah upon you when he delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who were afflicting you with dreadful punishment , and sparing your women . that was a great trial from your lord .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
our lord ! admit them to the gardens of eden which you have promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their spouses and their offspring . you are the almighty , the wise .
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and inheritors ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , `` would that i had died before this , and had been forgotten . ''
our lord , grant us what you have promised us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you never break your promise . ''
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , `` this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ''
and denies the best ,
moses said : `` my lord knows best who has come with guidance from him and to whom will be the guerdon of paradise . the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
exalted be the majesty of our lord ! he has taken neither a wife nor a son .
indeed they had sought to cause sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the decree of allah prevailed , even though they were averse .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the possessor of painful punishment .
among thornless lote-trees ,
indeed , those who turn back after the guidance had become clear to them , satan has embellished their ways for them and has given them false hopes .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
no laghwshall they hear therein , nor lies .
and when the awe departed from abraham and the glad tidings had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf in his absence , and you were wrongdoers .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
that allah may separate the bad from the good , and put the impure on one another , and heap them together , and cast them into hell . these are the losers .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities ,
sailing before our eyes , a reward for him who was rejected .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a good deed with anot her deeds . it is likely that allah will turn to them in mercy ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we gave to the children of israel the children of israel , that he should be a person to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he is a single one to whom he pleases , and he will not forgive that which allah has sent down . it is they who are the unjust .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be happiness and an excellent resting place .
so you will see the fire that you will be burned in the fire , and to remain in it . those who believe say to them : `` the unbelievers are the ones who are the ones who will suffer the right way .
and they said : o wizard ! pray unto thy lord for us by the covenant he hath made with thee ; verily we shall be guided .
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
but the word is fulfilled to me , the promise of allah , and i am the one who speaks to you the remembrance of allah , and i have no power to call upon you on the day of resurrection . i will not give you any knowledge of what they had been calling on .
as to the guidance of mankind , and he sent down the criterion . indeed , those who deny the signs of allah will have a severe punishment ; and allah is all-mighty , avenger .
allah is the life of the hereafter , and the believers who keep the way of allah in the cause of allah , and those who are in the way of allah will be on the right hand . that is the supreme triumph .
and those who have not taken a covenant from among them , a group of them has taken a party of them who has not made a covenant with them , but it is a great punishment for you to be a great punishment .
and what you do not see .
that is the right path , that it is the right path , that it is the right way , and he is the owner of all that is before it ; and he who has gone astray , he will have no more than his own loss . and none of them shall have a treacherous punishment .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity ; and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
the day when they will be tried at the fire ,
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
they said , `` we augur ill of you . if you do not desist , we will stone you , and a painful punishment will befall you . ''
we did not give immortality to any human before you . if you die , will they live forever ?
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
they said , “ we worship idols , and we are devoted to them . ”
they said : the requital of it is that he in whose pack it is found , shall himself be awarded for it . thus we requite the wrong-doers .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is in them , and he has power over all things .
and among the people is he who calls on the people of the hearts , but if there comes to them a good deed , it would be in the way of allah ; and this is the way of the hereafter .
he neither believed nor prayed ,
surely those who disbelieve say : allah is there : there is no god but he . but if ye do not desist , there is no god but he ; and for those who disbelieve there will be a painful punishment .
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the maintenance of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and this quran could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a confirmation of what was before it , and there is no doubt about it .
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , they would not hide it , and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry gain . evil is what they have gained .
and we helped them , so they were victorious .
their lord gives them glad tidings of a mercy from him , and of his good pleasure , and gardens of everlasting bliss .
moses said : `` o pharaoh ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor walk proudly on the earth . god does not love the arrogant and the boastful .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . and for them , when their hearts hear , they say : what did your lord say : the truth they say ?
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not see ?
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you power , so they will not be able to harm you , and you are the victors . ”
then whoever changes the bequest after he has heard it , the sin will be on those who change it . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
among them are some who say : `` give me leave and do not put me to trial . '' surely , they have fallen into trial . surely , hell surrounds the disbelievers .
and the birds , gathered together , all echoing him .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
but those who deny our revelations will afflict them for their disobedience .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve , theirs will be a severe punishment ; and those who believe and do good works shall have forgiveness and a great reward .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
wherein are lawsright and straight .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a flame in wait for him .
we shall make you recite , so you will not forget ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they might return .
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent forth , they would say , `` our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us , so that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ? ''
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
when you see those who gossip about our signs , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the unjust after this .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
as for him who is given a sign , he is too worthy of all that is in his presence , and to him do good deeds , and he will give them good deeds , and the evil is the most severe .
an orphan near of kin .
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
so the command of allah was true , and then allah gave him wisdom , and had he given to him wisdom ; and if allah were of the righteous , he would have given all of them a great grace .
indeed allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will find no helper for him .
so he resolved to remove them from the land , but we drowned him and all those with him .
and those who avoid the idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance , for them are glad tidings , so give glad tidings to my servants ,
and when they see a sign , they laugh at it ,
indeed , it is the same for you , but they do not believe you , but when they are recited to you , they say , ‘ we are but of those who are in the hearts . ’ say , ‘ indeed , we are in the hearts of those who conceal the truth . ’
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
then he looked at the stars ,
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . and if there had not been a specified term for them , the punishment would have come to them ; and it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
indeed we sent noah to his people , saying , `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
o mankind ! fear your lord . the convulsion of thehour is a terrible thing .
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
they will not be able to help them , and they will be broughtas their levied troops .
and indeed those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
o you who have believed , do not set up any right to allah with the right way , and do not worship the commands of allah , to be a worshipper of what is right , and take care of it . and fear allah , for indeed allah is the swiftest of those who do wrong .
it is not for a believing man or woman , when god and his messenger have decided a matter to have any choice in their affair . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into clear error .
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
say : `` if you and your fathers and your wives and your children , o you , , have your faith and your brothers , or have their faith , or to be saddened by your own souls , you are in the way of allah , and you are in the way of allah , so that you may be among the righteous . '' so allah does not guide the rebellious people .
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy . they were of the righteous .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
to your lord alone is the recourse .
then he became a clot ; then he createdthen madeperfect .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
then fashioned we the drop a clot , then fashioned we the clot a little lump , then fashioned we the little lump lump , then fashioned we the bones , and then produced it the bones , and then produced it as a thing . so blessed be allah , the best of creators !
we created man from an extract of clay .
abaseand exalt .
and they will be presented before your lord in ranks , and you will come to us as we created you the first time , but you thought that we will not appoint a tryst for you .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before . this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
except the companions of the right hand .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until allah issues his judgment , and he is the best of judges .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and hell will be brought forthose to see ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
as for those who turnto allah , his messenger , and the believers , and the party of allah is the victorious .
and who sends down water from the sky in a measured measure , and we revive thereby a dead land ; thus will you be brought forth .
because of their sins they were drowned and made to enter into the fire , and they found none to help them .
those to whom we gave the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , and thou art the best of inheritors .
say , ‘ o people ! if you are in doubt about my religion , theni do not worship those whom you worship besides allah . rather , i worship only allah , who causes you to die , and i have been commanded to be among the faithful ,
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all people .
indeed allah knows those among you who hinder others , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to battle but little .
then upon us is its clarification .
we sent noah and abraham and placed prophethood and the book . some of them were guided , and some of them are guided .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided them . we had guided noah before , and of his descendants , david and solomon and job and joseph and moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
alif . lam . mim .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
but when the great catastrophe comes
nay , but they shall soonknow !
he will say : by allah , thou hadst wellnigh causedest me to perish .
verily he who hath ordained the qur'an unto thee will bring thee back to the place of return . say thou : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast . ''
and we know that they say , `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
but we found in it only one household of muslims .
in it the angels and the spirit descend by the permission of their lord with every command .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and behold , they shall come forth from the tombs unto their lord .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and to the people of 'ad said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no other god besides him . you have no other god but he . so do not be a sign from your lord . you will be unable to make a mistake . ''
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being recompensed for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and we have made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
indeed the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
and zechariah , john , jesus and ilyas—each of them among the righteous—
who is fairer in speech than he who calls to god and acts righteously and says , `` i am of the muslims ? ''
anda'ad and thamud , and the people of ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they shall have no helpers .
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought into the torment .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail in his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
he said : `` allah 's wrath is upon you . will you then dispute with those who have been told to follow the company of your fathers , and your fathers ? so wait , for they are waiting . ''
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zachariah .
say : `` you can not hold a single hour on the day of resurrection , nor can you advance it . ''
on that day no intercession will avail , except for one whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
so when they angered us , we took vengeance on them and drowned them all .
that when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? ''
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us among the righteous ?
there is no fault in the people of the way that if it is a relation to the matter , it will not be decreased , until the case of their lord will come to them , and in the end he will come to you in full , and to allah will return .
and when the messengers came to them from before them and behind them , they said , `` do not worship anyone except allah . '' they said , `` if our lord had pleased he would not have sent down angels . we believe in what you have been sent with . ''
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them before this , nor did your nation . so be patient , indeed , the outcome is for the pious .
the practiceof allah in the past ; and you will not find any change in allah 's way .
and united their hearts . if you had spent all that is in the earth , you could not have united their hearts , but allah has united them ; indeed he is all-mighty , all-wise .
a throng from the ancients .
or the feeding on a day of hunger .
he said , `` i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to dwell therein forever . this is the great success .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs , will they not listen ?
on the day when the earth will be changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
o my son ! verily we have sent thee in the land as a judge between them , and judge between them with truth , so that thou mayest follow the way of allah , for the way of allah is a painful doom .
he was one of our believing servants .
that he is the lord of sirius .
all that is in the case of the messenger , do not be held accountable for the people of the truth , and do not serve the way of allah , for they are the ones who have come to believe in the way of god , so that you are not unjust to the people . it is god who has the power to do so .
but what is the life of the world and the present , and and and aaron , and and aaron , and from the children of israel , and from the children of israel , it is the same for them , and they will be brought back to the life of this world , and the life of the world to come is very fair , and the life of the world to come .
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
none besides allah can unveil it .
and that which isinbreasts is made manifest-
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sins . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , and guidance and mercy for mankind , so that they might remember .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
we know well that you are disheartened by what they say .
and for man is the book which allah has given the book and the judgement , and then say , “ be wary of allah , and keep your duty to him , so that you may be devoted to god . ”
do you think that they are going to get the garden , except the way of allah , to come to the believers ? they have received the way of god , so that they may say , `` do not call to your father , and say , `` you will call to your father . '' say , `` do not call me to your father , and give up your rights . god is all-knowing and all-wise . ''
and he it is who gave those who disbelieve in the book of the people of the book , and hold fast to it , and in the reading of the first reading , and they would not be able to make it a thing , and they would not be able to challenge allah , so that they may be of the witnesses .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
on that day they will offer their submission to allah , and all that they have invented will forsake them .
my power has vanished from me . ”
this is how he has revealed the quran , so that we may make it clear to you , in which there is no doubt . some of them will enter paradise , and will be admitted to hell .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul !
it is all the same to him whether you speak secretly , or one who speaks aloud , and he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they shall have no helpers .
and the two seas are not like one of the other , and one of the hot water will be made to drink , and the two of them will be the same , and you will be the ones to have the right hand .
half of it , or reduce it a little .
accursed be the conjecturers
they feed the needy , the orphan , the orphan , the captive ,
said firaun , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . indeed this is a conspiracy you have plotted in the city to expel its people from it , so you will know . ”
or do they say , `` a poet , for whom we await a misfortune of time ? ''
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
say , `` i am forbidden to worship those whom you invoke besides allah . '' say , `` i will not follow your desires , for then i would have gone astray and would not be guided . ''
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
and when the messengers are collected at the appointed time ,
who has made us live in the abode of his grace , wherein there will not touch us any toil nor fatigue .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and from his mercy he has made for you night and day , that you may rest therein , and that you may seek his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and verily the hire of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
and shun uncleanness ,
he will guide them and improve their condition .
untouched before them by man or jinni -
gardens of eden which they will enter , beneath which rivers flow , and they will have therein whatever they wish . thus does allah reward the godwary
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and if you do not disbelieve in you , allah will not be pleased with his servants , even if you are to be pleased with his servants , and if you are guided , it is to you that you will be the ones to be guided . and he is the all-knower of what you have done .
have you seen him who turned away ,
say : `` o people ! the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided , is guided to his own soul , and whoever goes astray , it is only forhis own soul . i am not a guardian over you . ''
by the clear book .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
this is hell which the guilty called a lie .
they will say , `` we were not of those who prayed ,
as for the unbelievers , they wish that you should disbelieve in it , as they are unbelievers , and they are disbelievers in the way of allah . and if they were to turn away , they would have been your opinion . and if you were to take them away , they would not be your guardian .
then when he removes the distress from you , some of you associate others with their lord .
so turn away from them and say : peace . they will soon come to know .
his are the ships , towering on the sea like mountains .
who does greater wrong than he who is reminded of his revelations , and denies the signs of his lord ? and when he has made a breach with them , we will pay them in full their remembrance , and if you are to guide them , they will not be guided .
then evil was the end of those who did evil , because they denied the signs of allah and used to mock at them .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse . ''
the punishment of your lord will surely come to pass ,
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
thus we recompense him who transgresses and does not believe in the signs of his lord ; and the punishment of the hereafter is more severe and more lasting .
and the polytheists say , `` these are some of the cattle who have been forbidden to themselves , but we have been pleased with them , and we have been pleased with them , and there are some of you who have been given the lie to god . god will certainly soon know what they are doing . ''
o you who believe ! do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of allah , for they have despaired of the hereafter , as the unbelievers are in despair .
then lodged it in a secure place
and they have set up a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them before this , nor did your nation . so be patient , indeed , the outcome is for the pious .
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
as to the unbelievers , to recite the quran , to the quran , the course of allah is exclusively for him , and if only he was to be a guide , a way to those who do not consider . indeed , we have been the punishment .
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ,
he said , “ it is so that your lord says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
have you not seen that you have believed in that which has been sent down to you and what has been revealed before you ? but they wish to have faith in them , and they are in a great error .
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
has there come to you the story of the hosts
they did not forbid one another from the evil they did . indeed , evil was what they used to do .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in their lord , their works are like ashes which a wind blows furiously on a stormy day . they have no power over that which they have earned . that is the extreme error .
and when they were in their lord 's presence to come to them , to come to them , he said : `` o you who have been able to come to you from your own way , we have already made a covenant with you , and i will not give you what you have done . he is the best of providers . ''
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and an example of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
fruits ; and they will be honoured
it is he who is the best to intercede for him , and he will say to them : `` allah is not a dictator over them . '' say , `` who is the book of god , who has no power to bring you out of it ? '' tell them , `` god has sent down the book and to play , and then leave them alone to play and to play , then leave them alone . ''
it is a tree that grows in the nethermost part of hell .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
verily , those who guardshall be in gardens and delight .
it is your lord who has created the heavens and the earth in six days , and then the throne of the throne will be established , and the sun and the moon are true . what is the matter with them , that is blessed ?
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
from which you are turning away .
and we sent to thamood their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two parties quarrelling .
have you seen the people who are in fear of the life of the world and in the evenings ? god said , `` you are only of those who have been grateful . '' god is the giver of good things , and most men do not give thanks .
and when the case of mary , jesus , son of mary , is the case , `` i call to witness the name of your lord , and he said : `` glory be to you ! '' he said , `` glory be to you . indeed , you know what i have given you , and you know not what you know . you are aware of what they do . ''
but they hamstrung her , and he said , “ enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied . ”
that indeed is an unjust division .
nowwhile you refused to believe before and you were one of the mufsidun .
on that day no intercession will avail , except for one whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . god does not like aggressors .
if we had a reminder from the ancients ,
now clasp your hand to your armpit : it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
and after moses , after moses , his people did not create their trinkets , and a body of a cow did not speak to them , or did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did they guide them ?
and he greedily desires that i should give him more .
and you will be three sorts .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
had allah not decreed exile for them , he would have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
o prophet , fear allah and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
o you who have believed , when you have a witness of the truth , let them bear witness to the right course , and the weight of one another , and in the balance , or in the middle of the land , and if you are truthful , it is not a way to be accepted from the land . indeed , we are an upright enemy .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those besides him . and whoever allah leaves astray , there is no guide for him .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
we have shown you another time .
they said , `` we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who has created us . so decree whatever you can . you can only decree for this life .
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , for what you have done is better . and whoever is protected from his own greed , these are the successful .
surely we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
and the thunder proclaims his praise , and the angels , in awe of him . and he sends the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he wills while they dispute about allah ; and he is mighty in prowess .
and allah has made the right of a copy of the qur ’ an a pattern for one another , a part of the qur ’ an is guided by one system . this is the word of their lord , and he is in the sight of their lord , and he is of those who have no right to guide .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
and they worship besides allah that which is no provisions for them , nor any sustenance from the heavens or the earth .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
so woe to those who pray
when shu'aib said to them , `` will you not fear god ?
so we denied the truth , and we delivered noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and howwere the fate of the deniers .
they said , “ we have given you good news , so do not despair . ”
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
lo ! they fold their breasts to hide from him . lo ! when they cover themselves with their garments , he knoweth what they conceal and what they reveal . lo ! he knoweth that which is in the breasts .
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
when the angels said : `` o mary , god has chosen you , and purified you . he has chosen you above all women .
and if you find no one in it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told to go away , you will be told , `` if you are given a message from you , do not go back . ''
`` o my lord ! indeed , you are in the life of the world and the glitter of the world ; my lord , give them the right way , so that you may be a confirmer of what you have done . they are the blind , the painful punishment .
`` we feed you only for the countenance of allah . we wish for no reward nor thanks from you .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh with them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
and allah has already given them the book of jinn and the children of kin , in order to be trusted by his command ; and allah will not make any friendship for them . and when allah does a thing , none can bring to them any guardian or helper besides allah .
and had we not confirmed you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
it is he who causes crops to grow for you , and olives and date-palms and grapes and all kinds of fruit . indeed in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
so believe in allah and his messenger , and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
so whoever wills may remember it .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
this is of the news of the unseen which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they agreed upon their plan .
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus , the son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
and laugh and not weep ,
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
every soul will taste death , then to us you will be returned .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , and their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with them : 'this is the thing you have treasured up for yourselves . taste the torment for your herds '
untouched before them by man or jinni -
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will and they will not be wronged a whit .
then , after it , be upright , a company of it , a company of them , a company of them , they say : `` is it that we are in the world to come . '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us , that you are to be a confirmer ? '' say , `` it is the same to
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve fabricate lies against allah , and most of them do not understand .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you together .
say : `` what ! is it that you are the gods of which you can speak to one another , or if you first come out of it , will you come to light ? '' then , tell them , `` god is the lord of all being . '' then , tell them , `` god is the lord of all being . ''
and we made his offspring the survivors .
and he hath subjected unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , all from him . lo ! herein verily are portents for a people who reflect .
i do not desire any provision from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
o you who believe ! accept your duty to allah , and take your duty to allah , and he will forgive you your sins , and will be admitted to the everlasting life , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! give us the darkness of the light . you are indeed a manager over all things . ’
indeed , you are in different sayings .
all that is in the case of the messenger , do not be held accountable for the people of the truth , and do not serve the way of allah , for they are the ones who have come to believe in the way of god , so that you are not unjust to the people . it is god who has the power to do so .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
and they say , “ when will this decision be , if you are truthful ? ”
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we shall bring it as reckoners .
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father , and we will surely do . ”
then it is for us to call them to account .
abraham said , `` peace be on you . i will ask forgiveness of my lord for you . indeed , he is ever gracious to me .
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction by your own hands . do good ; indeed allah loves the doers of good .
among you is he who loitereth ; and if a misfortune befalls you , he said , `` god has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ''
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over all things .
that which you are promised is coming , and you can not escape .
and do not approach fornication for it is an indecency and an evil way .
so this is your lord , and teach you the interpretation of visions , and perfect his favour upon you and his descendants , as he perfected it on your fathers , abraham and isaac . indeed , your lord is all-knowing , all-wise .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
and it will be said to them : 'where are theye worshipped-
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
so when they angered us , we took vengeance on them and drowned them all .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , though we are a hardy band . our father is obviously in the wrong . ’
when he ran away to the laden ship ,
o you who have faith ! judge for the religion of allah , and take your duty to allah , and to be a case for you , and if the people are in the right hand , do not turn your backs to it . god is aware of what you do .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
they ask thee about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
this is what allah has given to his servants who believe and do good deeds . say , `` you do not make any trace of you . '' say , `` do not make us forget this . '' and whoever does good , then surely allah is the most appreciative , most appreciative .
the day when the unbelievers will be told , `` what is the truth ? '' they say : `` yes , '' and they say : `` yes , '' and say : `` yes , '' and it is .
and there are a people in which you desire to go forth from among you , and people who are better guided in it , and when they are guided , it is only a right way , and if they are guided , it is they who are in error manifest .
as a hospitality from one oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
and certainly we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the righteous ,
and we are the human being to be a case to him , and if he helps them , give them his judgment , and you will not have any knowledge of what you have done .
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are resurrected
a revelation from allah and his messenger to the people of the world , and the day of congregation , to the people of the world , and on the day of resurrection , allah and his messenger will be a severe punishment . but if you turn away , then surely , you will not be able to believe , and you will have a severe punishment .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
or its water will sink into the ground so that you will never be able to find it . ''
do you not bring itback ?
and what is it that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its custodians ? it is not its fitting guardians except the god-fearing . but most of them do not know .
allah has promised the hypocrites , men and women , and the disbelievers , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . this is sufficient for them ; and allah has cursed them , and for them is a lasting punishment .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , for the forgiveness of idolaters , even though they are near to do it , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
and verily the hire of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will resurrect them , then to him they will be returned .
bending his neck , in order to leadastray from the path of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
and verily we ! we have forged a lie concerning allah , and if they are to be guided , we shall surely make us go astray , after we have spoken to you . our lord , make us the truth , and thou art of the best of the best .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to deride .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . how evil is the companion !
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he cried out in despair .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say : `` this is an ongoing sorcery ! ''
verily he who hath ordained the qur'an unto thee will bring thee back to the place of return . say thou : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all people .
say : `` tell me , if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ?
those who believe not in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and believe in some , and wish that they are in between .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves , saying , `` a warning to those who believe , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe , and those who stand firm in their faith . ''
say : `` o my people ! work according to your position . i am acting . soon you will know whose is the guerdon of the hereafter , and you will not succeed . ''
in both of them are fruits , palm trees and pomegranates .
now clasp your hand to your armpit : it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
or lest you should say , `` our fathers ascribed partners to allah , and we were descendants after them . will you then destroy us for what the falsifiers have done ? ''
whoever desires this fleeting life , we expedite for him whatever we desire in the life of this world , and then we appoint for him hell wherein he will enter , condemned and rejected .
until , when he reachedbetween the two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
and we defer it only to a term determined .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
then he causes him to die and buries him ,
rude and fake besides .
allah advises you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
so the punishment seized them . surely in that is a sign , but most of them were not believers .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth , and there is no change in the creation of allah . there is no changing the creation of allah . this is the right religion , but most people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they lied .
they said , ‘ call upon your lord to make clear to us what she may be alike . indeed , the cows are all alike to us , and if allah wills , we will be guided . ’
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
there is none who can avert it .
those whom they call upon , are seeking to visit themselves with their lord ’ s mercy , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment ; surely the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
he would have led us astray from our gods if we had not been steadfast to them . soon they will know when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god ? each one knows its prayer and glorification , and allah knows what they do .
and collectand hide it .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set in place , and the prophets and witnesses will be brought , and judgment will be passed on them , and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he knows what is spoken aloud and what you conceal .
then it will be said to those who were unjust : taste the torment of eternity . are you recompensed for what you used to earn ?
so observe the effects of allah ’ s mercy , how he revives the earth after its death ; indeed he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
they said , `` what is the punishment , if you are lying ? ''
allah , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief if they do not believe in this narration .
gardens of eden which they will enter , and the righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their descendants , and angels will enter upon them from every gate .
the messengers told them : `` we are only like you , but allah guides whom you will . we have not been able to make our own servants but the believers . ''
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
moses , i am god , the almighty , the wise .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seize you . ”
then hell will berefuge .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein forever .
we hope our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you used to claim ?
why do they turn away from the reminder ,
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
as for the unbelievers , they are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , in order to recite the way of allah , and allah has bestowed on them his bounty , and allah is the all-knower of everything .
and every soul is given the book ; but thou art filled with doubts , and their hearts are in doubt , but they say : `` woe to us ! but it is only a way , but your lord is not unjust to them . ''
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . but the wrongdoers have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and otherof its typekinds .
as for him who is given his hand in the presence of his wife , he will say to his family , `` do not turn to the footsteps of the good news of what we have given to him . '' or that we may give them a guidance , or a guidance , and a guidance for the people of the earth ; and that is how they do not know .
`` peace be upon you for what you patiently endured . how excellent is the final abode ! ''
he said , “ my lord , open my breast for me . ”
has taught the quran .
is he who creates like one who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and kind to his parents , not arrogant , rebellious .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
except from their wives or what their right hands possess , for they are free from blame .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , and thou art the best of inheritors .
do you not see that he who is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , and he has created you in the way of god , and to be a doer of good , and he has given to the people a clear sanction ?
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , , `` o my sons , god has chosen this religion for you . do not die except as muslims . ''
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
and remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah ; surely allah knows the thoughts within the breasts .
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , your lord will help you suddenly , and send upon you a thousand angels rushing . ”
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
he said , `` i will not prostrate myself to a human being whom you have created from clay . ''
then hell will berefuge .
but if they turn away , then allah is knowing of the corrupters .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
in both of them are fruits , palm trees and pomegranates .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and a provision when he said to mary , `` i am a messenger to you . indeed , he is a messenger to you , confirming what came before me , and when i recite to you a clear book , it is a clear magic . ''
surely what you are promised is true ,
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
he wants to drive you out of your land by his magic . what do you advise ? ''
and the son of mary , the prophet was not but a messenger , and the messenger of god was true . and the two of them were a man of truth , and then became of those who are turned away .
and they came to their father in the evening weeping .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that in which you differ .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
from the right and on the left , in groups ?
`` o my people , tell me , if i were to follow the religion of my lord , the right path was from my lord , and to be devoted to it . what , do you turn away from this way ? ''
so i swear by what you see
so that he may make the interpolations of satan a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened ; surely the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
then cast him into hell ,
is he who has brought the dead to light , and to make it a light for people who are in darkness and light ? such is the result of their deeds . thus do they know what they have done .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home and when you drive them forth .
god knows your enemies well . god suffices as a guardian and god suffices as a helper .
when they sat around it
joseph , turn away from this , and you will ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed of the sinners . ''
allah is he who created you out of weakness , then gave you strength after weakness , then after weakness gave you strength , and he creates whatever he wills . he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
but we see it near .
except from their wives or what their right hands possess , for they are free from blame .
except from their wives or what their right hands possess , for they are free from blame .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
and every soul is given the book ; but thou art filled with doubts , and their hearts are in doubt , but they say : `` woe to us ! but it is only a way , but your lord is not unjust to them . ''
how can you know , perhaps he would purify himself ?
and they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` god leads astray whom he will , and guides to himself those who turn to him in repentance .
those who cameafter them say , `` our lord , forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in the faith , and put our hearts in no way to the believers . lord , you are compassionate and all-merciful . ''
if we had a reminder from the ancients ,
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein ; and they are the worst of creatures .
and we made it an example to their own time and the succeeding after them , and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
do not strain your eyes towards what we have bestowed on some couples of them , and do not grieve over them , and lower your wing to the believers .
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
we have created everything in a measure .
and say : `` praise be to allah ! he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . your lord is not unaware of what you do . ''
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
and if they dispute with you , say , “ allah knows best what you do . ”
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a hard day '
on the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
nay , but man exorbitateth .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection ,
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
said : `` then get out of here ; you are accursed ,
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
and those who are jews we have forbidden that which we have related to you before ; and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
then celebrate the praise of your lord and ask his forgiveness . indeed , he is oft-returning .
and we will surely make them taste the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment , so that they may retract .
and what befell you on the day when the two armies met was by permission of allah , so that he might know the believers .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
he has counted them and has counted them all .
sothrew his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
“ to you you will go to leave them in this land and expel them from where you will drive them out ; and there is no more for you to go back after them , and they are not to be saddened by your own people . ” and so , they have been the reward of you .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
see how they forge lies against allah ! this is sufficient as a manifest sin .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware . if you turn away , then know that the duty of our messenger is only to deliver the message clearly .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
they said , `` we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who has created us . so decree whatever you can . you can only decree for this life .
and to allah only will believe in allah and the last day , and he does not accept the course of allah as their guardian or his offspring , as they are in the midst of allah ; and it is allah who is the most honourable , the most honourable .
we sent a tumultuous wind against them on a day of unremitting misfortune ,
“ o john , hold fast to the book ” ; and we gave him wisdom while yet a child .
then we put you on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and make not allah a butt of your oaths that you should be godfearing , and making peace between men , and allah is hearing , knowing .
said : `` get down from here ! it is not for you to be arrogant here . begone ! you are of the humiliated . ''
by your lord , we will question them all
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
that he may make clear to them that which they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their malice ?
we established him in the land and gave him power to all things .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have believed in it in it , and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
how many gardens and fountains did they leave behind ?
and do not rebuke the beggar .
lest you should say , `` the book was sent down only to two sects before us , and we were unaware of what they read . ''
that we pour forth water in abundance ,
or as to one who has been brought into the presence of the wicked one on it , he said , “ what is the matter with you that god will bring the dead to life ? ” he said , “ i have been the same to be the people who have been given the lie to the truth , and when we have spoken the truth , then we are rightly-guided . ”
and in the morning it was as though it had been reaped .
say : `` it is the same to you that you may go away from the right way , and do not be guided to the right path , and that god has given to them a pure command . god is indeed to those who are guided . ''
his wealth and his childrenwill not avail him .
his lord heard his prayer and turned away from him their guile . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
the king said , `` bring him to me . i will take him for my special service . '' then when he spoke to him , he said , “ today you are with us in the trust . ”
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find god forgiving and merciful .
so when the sight is dazed ,
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands , “ if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful . ”
and who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , and says , “ i have been revealed to you , ” and he who said , “ i have been sent as a herald of the qur ’ an , and he is the one who has sent down the divine revelations , and he is the one who fabricates a lie against god , and he is the one who fabricates a lie against god . ”
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved insolently and they were a tyrannical lot .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world , and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
who avoid vain talk ,
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold . ”
those who are patient and put their trust in their lord .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them for play .
bring me blocks of iron , until , when he had levelled up between the two cliffs , he said , `` bring me molten copper in the fire . '' he said , `` bring me molten copper to pour over it . ''
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not accompany him as attendants ? ''
those who remember allah standing , sitting and reclining , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : our lord ! thou hast not created this in vain ; glory be to thee , save us , from the fire .
and when the believing men and their covenant have not been given to you , they do not consider it to allah . and do not speak to him with any evil , and do not speak to them with an evil word . indeed , allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter ; that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all will be witnessed .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs , will have a humiliating punishment .
for the beggar and the outcast ;
those who disbelieve in the remembrance when it comes to them , and verily it is a book exalted .
`` o my lord ! indeed , you are in the life of the world and the glitter of the world ; my lord , give them the right way , so that you may be a confirmer of what you have done . they are the blind , the painful punishment .
the piercing star .
this day you will not be able to benefit or harm one another . we will say to the evildoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
then we shall deliver our apostles and those who believe . thus it is that we deliver the believers .
gardens and vineyards ,
who have made the quran into fragments .
and by the moon when she follows him ,
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and gives glad tidings to the believers who work righteous works that theirs shall be a great reward .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
is he who is on a clear proof from his lord like someone whose evil deeds are made to seem fair to him , and they follow their own desires ?
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we shall bring it as reckoners .
indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
and when the heaven is rent asunder , and it becomes red like red leather .
o you who believe ! do not ask of any part of what has been revealed to you , if what you say is true . if you ask about them , he will have forgiven you . god is forgiving and forbearing .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , exalted is he above what they associate .
he said : o musa ! verily i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
and recall what time thy lord proclaimed unto them he would send against them the day of resurrection , for those who would afflict them with a dreadful doom . lo ! thy lord is swift in retribution , and most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
is he who knows what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . woe to the unbelievers for a terrible punishment .
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
this is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
if they reject you , so were messengers rejected before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures , and the book of enlightenment .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
if he should ask you for it , and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are not unmindful of creation .
o you who believe ! why , when it is said to you , ‘ o you who have believed , are you to be felicitous in the way of allah , and this is the everlasting way ? indeed , the life of this world is in the hereafter and a great life . ’
near which is the garden of abode .
let man consider his food .
and we will surely make them taste the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment , so that they may retract .
and allah did not create the hearts of any soul , so that he should say to them : `` this is not your people . '' and allah is the true , and the truth is the true .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
she said to his sister : 'follow him ' and she watched him from afar , and they perceived not .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . god has made account of them while they forgot it . god is witness over everything .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as friends , but many of them are disobedient .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
so when the promise of the first of the two came , we sent against you our servants , of great might , and they entered upon your homes , and it was a promise performed .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah confound the disbelievers .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah , and if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
whom allah has cursed . he said , `` i will certainly take a share of your servants ,
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
they said , turning towards them , `` what is it that you miss ? ''
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted , and you would taste evil because you hindered others from the way of allah , and you will suffer a painful punishment .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
an ifritfrom the jinns said : `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy it . ''
whatever you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . it is god who is my lord . in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
these are they for whom there is nothing but the fire in the hereafter , and their works have failed in the world , and what they have done is vain .
have they seen the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and the people of abraham ? and the people of abraham , and the people of lot , and he was not unjust to them . they wronged themselves .
and when the mountains are blown away ,
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt .
thamud and ad denied the consequential calamity .
as for those who believe and do good works , they will be in a lofty mansions with which rivers flow , to dwell therein for ever . what an evil reward for allah !
he said : `` do you see when we betook ourselves to the rock ? i forgot the fish , but none made me forget to mention it , but it took its way into the sea . ''
it came to the people of the city saying : `` o my father ! make for us a good reward , andto make us a recompense for it , and make for us the recompense of your father . '' he said , `` do not be afraid . you are not unjust to the people . '' he said , `` do not be afraid . ''
so fight in the cause of god . you are responsible only for yourself , and rouse the believers . god is stronger in might and stronger in punishment .
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from old ,
and believes in al-husna .
but he tarried not long , and said , “ i have learnt what you did not comprehend . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and be patient , for your patience is only with the help of allah , and do not grieve over them , and do not be stressed by their schemes .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
in the neighbouring land . but they will conquer after their defeat ,
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may be supreme in the land ? we will not believe in you . ”
and the example of mary , imran 's daughter , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his books , and she was of the obedient .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your city . they are purist people . ”
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and taught him the mode of expression .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
and never knew what my account was .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
indeed , they will soon come to know .
those who were arrogant will say , `` we are all in it . god has judged between his servants . ''
and whoever is a voice to be guided , to warn a portion of the book , he will see it for a good deed ; and allah is watchful over all things .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to deviate after you have guided us , and grant us mercy from your presence . you are the giver . ”
but my pleas have only increased their aversion .
and those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they were losers .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
that he may admit the believing men and the believing women into gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein forever , and acquit them of their sins , and that is a great success .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and to allah do all things return .
it is he who made you trustees on the earth , and raised some of you in ranks above others , that he might test you with what he has given you . your lord is quick in retribution , and he is forgiving and merciful .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
taught man what he did not know .
and if ye punish , then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted . but if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
and most surely they do not have a lie about it , but they will certainly deny the truth after it had come to them ; and they have no faith in it , but they are not to be able to believe in it , and they are not to be able to accept it . but if they turn away , then surely allah will protect them from the earth , and they will not be able to help them .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him , by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
when it is said to them : `` to allah , to allah belongs the revelation , and to him say : `` this is allah ’ s fathers , and the recompense of what we had sent down to him , and why was it not that they were being guided ? ''
surely he is able to bring him back ,
and taught him the mode of expression .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish ; and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
o you who believe ! do not be in your own hands except to be your enemies , and do wrong with your own selves ; and what is with you is the result of their deeds , and what you have done is evil , and we have already appointed a covenant with you .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : lo ! we are overtaken .
and whoever is careful oftheir lord , he is too gracious to him , and be dutiful to him ; and that is better for you , but if you were a lie .
i do not desire any provision from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas for joseph ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
and if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they exulted in the knowledge of the knowledge , and that they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
god is the only lord , the living , the one who is the sustainer of the heavens and the earth . he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth , and whose is the knowledge of the world , and the law of allah . it is he who is the almighty , the great .
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and that is indeed a tremendous oath , if you but knew .
and it is not a jest .
but theysplit their affair between them , all shall return to us .
why do they turn away from the reminder ,
o ye who believe ! stand up with the truth and bear with allah a right , and have no power to avert it , so that you may be godfearing . lo ! allah is aware of what you do .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all together . ''
they said , `` they swear by allah to each other in the night , and we will then say to his family , `` we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we did not say to his family , `` we were witness to the destruction of the destruction . ''
that you will progress from stage to stage .
so when they forgot that which they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and we seized those who forbade evil a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
they said , `` what is the punishment , if you are lying ? ''
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the perishing .
when evil visits him , impatient ,
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
did we not create you from a base fluid ,
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
and you will not be able to change the matter of their affairs , but if they are given any advantage , then do not be like any other than the like of it . and if you are guided , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and it is mixed with tasneem .
one of the women said : `` o my father ! hire him ! indeed , the best of those you can hire is the strong and trustworthy one . ''
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths
but their brethrenplunge them deeper into error , and never relax .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the sea , so that the river will cast it into our eyes . and his love shall be on the day of resurrection , that you may be under our eyes .
muhammad is not a messenger except a messenger . there will be a noble messenger before him . if he dies , he turns back on his heels . and whoever turns on his heels , will not harm him , and allah will reward the thankful .
yes indeed ; we are able to shapehis fingertips !
and they used to say : when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
behold , they commit the word on the day of judgment , they will be looking on in the fire , they will say , `` our lord , do not make us a representation of what we have been commanded . '' so he will have the punishment of hell , so that you will have no helpers .
have they seen the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and the people of abraham ? and the people of abraham , and the people of lot , and he was not unjust to them . they wronged themselves .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
nay , by the moon ,
if you avoid the great sins which you are forbidden , we shall remit from you your misdeeds and admit you to a noble dwelling .
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds that endure , and good deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
as for those who have believed and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , those have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
we found nocovenant in most of them . we found most of them ungodly .
say , `` i am a clear proof from my lord , and you deny him . i do not have any knowledge of what you seek to hasten . god is the best of judges . ''
or he wrecks them for what they have earned , and he pardons much .
or to the indigentin the dust .
the most moderate of them said : `` did i not say to you , 'why do you not glorify ? ''
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee among the sects of the ancients .
saying : `` o dear prophet ! be on the day of judgment when the hearts of those who are bent on denying the truth and the hearts of their hearts , and when the hearts of those who are bent on denying the truth will have no guardian or helper . ''
and when the girlburied alive is asked
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever forgiving .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
so if you have a plan , use it against me .
so , when the messenger came to the side of the two , he said : `` it is the same to a spring . whoever is guided , it is only a right course , and whoever is in the presence of his own right hand , it is the same for him . '' but as for those who have faith in allah , he is indeed a few of those who have faith in god .
but their brethrenplunge them deeper into error , and never relax .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
and thus we have told them , `` this is our command , '' and a one of them said : `` do we have a day , other than a day ? '' he said , `` it is only a day of which your lord will bring you to life , and let him have a share of it , and let him have no one to do it . '' so let him be a confirmer !
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
indulging in carelessly idle games ?
the beneficent allah is the one who follows the religion , and the muhajirs and the ansar who have been well-pleased with them , to remain in them , and to abide therein for ever . to them is an awful matter .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy family ; verily he is of the unrighteous ; so ask not of me that whereof ye have no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be of the ignorant .
thus we established joseph in the land , to live wherever he liked . we bestow our mercy on whomever we please , and we do not waste the reward of the virtuous .
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , and when we have given him favour , he says , `` it has been revealed to me . '' no , it is a test . but most of them do not know .
o dear prophet , ask forgiveness for you , or do not ask forgiveness for them , and if you ask forgiveness for them , allah will never forgive them . indeed , they have no faith in allah and his messenger , and allah does not guide the transgressors .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
say : tell me , if allah were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah can bring you night to rest in it ? will you not then see ?
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
but allah would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seekforgiveness .
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted , and you would taste evil because you hindered others from the way of allah , and you will suffer a painful punishment .
surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book , those -- they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
and the dwellers in midian , and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite , so i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
indeed the criminals will be in the punishment of hell , abiding eternally .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
and i am planning a plan .
had the truth followed their desires , the heavens and the earth and all that is in them would have been corrupted . nay , we have brought them their reminder , but they turn away from their reminder .
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , and when we have given him favour , he says , `` it has been revealed to me . '' no , it is a test . but most of them do not know .
for the companions of the right hand .
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and they stand up lazily , looking on .
and when allah promised you one of the two parties , you wished to be yours , and you wished that the unarmed one would be yours , and allah desired to prove the truth with his words , and to cut off the root of the disbelievers .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , and at nightfall and when you enter noontime .
no indeed ! when it reaches the clavicles
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecencies with your eyes open ? ”
excusing or warning .
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
and remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah ; surely allah knows the thoughts within the breasts .
and by the night when it retreats
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , so that you may understand .
and how can you take it back when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
and they thought , as you thought , that allah would never raise anyone .
you do not ask them any reward for it . it is nothing but a reminder to all mankind .
say , ‘ is the news of good things of ours ? ’ but those who are godwary will be in the gardens of eternity , wherein streams flow , abiding eternally therein , and allah is seeing of his servants .
so we took retribution from them , and we drowned them in the sea because they denied our signs and were heedless of them .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a terrible rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood . these were the confederates .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger ; and whoever opposes allah , then surely allah is severe in punishment .
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is convenience for you . god knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the plague smote them , they said : o musa ! pray unto thy lord for us , and if ye relieve you of that which allah hath promised you , we shall surely believe in you , and let them be of the children of israel .
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , and guidance and mercy for mankind , so that they might remember .
and allah has a parable of a parable , he will take a parable , and he will take a portion of them ; one of them is other than one who is upright ; but all the same is the same for them .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a good deed with anot her deeds . it is likely that allah will turn to them in mercy ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
verily we have created man into toil and struggle .
and for their taking usury , that they were forbidden , and because of their devouring people 's wealth , and among them among them we have prepared a painful punishment .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they are asleep ?
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have earned your anger , nor those who are astray .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses , and their possessions , and a land which you have not trodden . and allah is able to do all things .
and when they reached the confluence of the two , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
and the blind and the seeing are not equal , and those who believe and do good works are not equal . little do you reflect !
do they wish to hasten our punishment ?
and allah has made a revelation of the inspiration to stand with his hands , and of the people , and the glories of a fixed measure ; and that which is in the heavens and the earth know that allah is cognizant of all things .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
they said : the requital of it is that he in whose pack it is found , shall himself be awarded for it . thus we requite the wrong-doers .
as if they had never dwelt there . now away with madyan as thamud was done away with !
but they hamstrung her , and he said , “ enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied . ”
and as for those who have knowledge of knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord of the truth , and he is the subtle , the merciful .
and marry the unmarried among you and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
will you not then remember ?
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound ,
so exalted be allah , the true king ! there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
have you not seen those who were bent on denying the truth and the people of the book , saying , `` if you are driven away , we will not help you , and if you have no faith in us , then indeed , allah is witness to the liars . ''
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some you killed , and some you killed .
those who turn away from their wives and what they say , then a slave before they will touch one another before they will touch each other . that is what you do . god is aware of what you do .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and made the prophethood and the book prophethood , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
as for the boat , it belonged to masakinworking in the sea .
`` o my people ! do whatever you wish , and i will do . you will soon come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and who is a liar . wait , i will be waiting with you . ''
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
beautified is the life of this world for those who disbelieve , and they scoff at those who believe , and those who are godfearing will be above them on the day of resurrection . god gives whom he wills without account .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and be patient , for your patience is only with the help of allah , and do not grieve over them , and do not be stressed by their schemes .
rather , we have been deprived . ''
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
or the land is a kingdom that is set up for it ; and we are not going to believe in the remembrance of allah , and you are not but a messenger , and i am only a messenger .
o ye who believe ! fulfilobligations . lawful unto you is the beast of the cattle which hath been announced unto thee , but that which is recited unto you , while ye are in pilgrim sanctity . verily allah enjoineth that which he intendeth .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any friends besides him . little do you remember .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you judge ?
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and to allah do all things return .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and those who are in the earth are outstretched by their own eyes , and if they see the signs , they will not believe in it , but if they see the hereafter , they will not be able to accept faith in our signs . this is indeed the right path .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
swaying between this , neither to these nor to those . and whomsoever allah sends astray , you will not find a way for him .
they said , “ by allah , you know we did not come to do evil in the land , and we are not thieves . ”
and they worship besides allah that which neither profits them nor harms them . and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
we have written in the psalms , after the reminder : `` my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ''
indeed we suffice to deal with those who scoff at you ,
it is they who will be called to account in the way of allah , and this is the speech of allah ; and he who is a greedy miser and gives good tidings to allah , it is the same for you , and if you turn away , the same is the same to you , and you are not to be able to take the way .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , 'this is your god , and the god of musa , and he forgot . '
there is not one of you but will pass into it . this is a decree which your lord has decreed .
if there had been gods in the heavens and the earth , they would have been ruined . so glory be to allah , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among those who doubt .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
arise and warn .
those who are godwary are not accountable for them in aught , but that they mayfear allah .
he said , “ he has a heifer torn into the earth , and the fields of the fields and the fields . ” part of the fruits , they said , “ the truth has come to us , but they will not be honoured . ”
save him who hath done wrong and then substitutes good after evil . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
then they came back to the people , until they came to the people , saying , `` the truth has been sent down to moses . '' but they were not to be able to speak in this city , but he said , “ if this is the right way , he said , ‘ if this is true . ’
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
lo ! they are in doubt concerning their meeting with their lord . lo ! he encompasses everything .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the lodging of the arrogant .
the adulterer shall marry only an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
indeed , we have to strike them for all the creatures , who is reminded of the creation , so that i may adhere to the truth , so that i may adhere to my mercy , and so was my disapproval .
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere a day cometh when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
his wife who was standing nearby , laughed , so we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ the truth is only for the disbelievers ; and they will not be blamed . ”
and let him share my task ,
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
how many a town did we destroy and replaced them with another nation ,
say : `` it is he who has seized you from above you , or from beneath your feet or from beneath your feet , and let you taste the violence of one another . '' see how we make a sign to them that they may understand .
say : `` o my lord ! verily , your lord is the knower of all mankind , and he knows all that is in his footsteps , and to the people of the same way , but you are not but insolent . ''
and if they dispute with you , say , “ allah knows best what you do . ”
we know best what they will say , when the best of them will say , `` you stayed only a day . ''
the king of mankind ,
then we placed him as a sperm in a safe lodging .
`` the course of allah , all that is in obedience to him , and obey his religion , and pay the alms , and give charity , and give charity , and give charity , in order that the right way is true . ''
said to those around him : `` do you hear ? ''
give full measure and do not be of those who diminish .
so do not obey the unbelievers , but strive against them with a great endeavour .
or did we create the angels females while they were witnesses ?
as for those who disbelieved in their religion , if any of them were to see a part of what is before them , or think of a part of the four months , or take a part of the four months , they may be the foremost in the presence of allah , that he may make it an easy way .
magnify your lord ,
but whoever of you is obedient to allah and his messenger and does righteousness , we will give her a double reward , and we have prepared for her a generous provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women ; if you fear allah , do not be complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease should covet you .
and when allah will save you from the earth , then they will go out in the land . you are only responsible for your deeds . then to us you will be returned .
save him who hath done wrong and then substitutes good after evil . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
say , ‘ it has been revealed by him who knows the secret of the heavens and the earth . indeed , he is all-forgiving , all-merciful . ’
for what they used to do .
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and be the friends of allah , as he is the son of mary , and he is the one who is the messenger of allah , and we have been wont to follow the way of allah , and we have been wont to turn away from the people of the children of israel , and we shall be of the believers .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
he was one of our believing servants .
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
and if allah had willed , he could have made you one nation , but he leads astray whomever he wishes , and he guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
praise be to allah , who has given me ishmael and isaac in my old age . indeed my lord is the hearer of prayer .
we have no intercessors now ,
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
will you be left secure in that which is here
that is because you took the signs of allah for you , and the life of this world deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to please allah .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
that is because allah is the truth , and because he gives life to the dead , and because he has power over all things .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought together before us .
and of his signs is that the heavens and the earth stand firm by his command . then when he calls you with acall from the earth , you will come forth .
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
again , woe to you , and woe !
and i know not but that it may be a trial for you , and enjoyment for a while .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt concerning it .
the imminentis near at hand .
and shun uncleanness ,
nay , but those who disbelieve are in vainglory and shism .
indeed i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they have their reward with their lord , and those who reject our signs . those are the companions of hellfire .
and he thought that he would never return .
surely he is able to bring him back ,
and cornfields and noble places !
i convey to you the messages of my lord and give you sincere advice . i know from allah what you do not know .
“ proceed to what you used to deny . ”
and we brought forth the children of israel , and they came to a people who were devoted to their idols , and they said : `` o moses , make us a confirmer of what they have done . '' they said , `` you are ignorant people . ''
and those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children are in order to make their lives to swerve away from the way of allah . then he will cause them to die , and indeed , those who disbelieve will be brought back to hell .
see how they forge lies against allah ! this is sufficient as a manifest sin .
in them are benefits for you until a specified time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and as for the favor of your lord , declare it .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to the shade and said , `` my lord , i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ''
he said , `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness from her own household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , she is telling the truth and he is one of the liars .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they will outstrip . verily , they can not frustrate .
flames of fire and molten brass will be released against you , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
ask forgiveness of your lord and then repent to him . my lord is merciful and loving .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
do not speak to those who invoke god ’ s call , lest they are in an ignorant manner , so that they may go about in the footsteps of allah . it is all the same for them that they will be brought back to their lord .
those who dispute about allah 's revelations are no argument to have no argument to have any argument . this is the right path to allah . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who do not believe .
near which is the garden of abode .
we have never bestowed on them a book in which we have given them a book . this is an excellent book , or a day in which they are constant . there is no fear for them .
have they not seen how many generations we have destroyed before them , in the land , so that you would have passed away on the earth , and we have made it a means of beauty for them , and we have made them a precedent ?
nay , but that which they concealed before is manifest to them . and if they were sent back , they would surely return to that which they were forbidden . lo ! they are liars .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
their dwelling will be hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
no laghwshall they hear therein , nor lies .
moses said : `` o pharaoh ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds ,
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
surely in this is a sign for the believers .
so adhere to what is revealed to you . you are on a straight path .
say : `` o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen , you will judge between your servants concerning what they used to differ . ''
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
`` this is no other than a thing . '' it will not be accepted from him , and he will speak to him , and say : `` do that which we are commanded , and obey the messenger , ''
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days , and he is the lord of the heavens and the earth , that he might try you about which of you is best in deed . if only they were to be resurrected , they say : `` it is not but a manifest sorcery . ''
and he shows you his signs ; so which of the signs of allah will you deny ?
and by the night when it darkens ,
and if they had believed and guarded themselves , the reward from god would have been better , if they but knew .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven consecutive years , so that you may leave its harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
therein you will have abundant fruits , from which you eat .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he wills .
o mankind , listen to the truth , for those whom they call upon besides allah can not speak to them , even if they are truthful , and if they are truthful , they are a liar .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of the world . but the good deeds that endure , are better with your lord in reward and better in hope .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we originated the first creation , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it . verily , we shall do it .
and among mankind is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the opponents .
and indeed hell is the promised place for them all .
and on the day when he will gather them and that which they worship besides allah , he will say , `` did you mislead these my servants , or did they themselves stray from the way ? ''
and the evils of their deeds will appear to them , and that which they used to mock at will encompass them .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day whereon there shall be no doubt , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged ?
are your unbelievers better than they ? or do you have immunity in the scriptures ?
as for those who disbelieved in their religion , if any of them were to see a part of what is before them , or think of a part of the four months , or take a part of the four months , they may be the foremost in the presence of allah , that he may make it an easy way .
and as for him who was born , and the believers , and they say , `` woe to you ! '' will you , then , say to him , `` what is the matter with you ? '' , `` what is the matter with you that you are to be a confirmer of it ? '' and the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . but the promise of allah is true .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , for the forgiveness of idolaters , even though they are near to do it , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
fight them , god will punish them by your hands , and humiliate them , and help you against them , and heal the breasts of a believing people .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
so , it is not lawful for them to be lawful for it , except after it had been made to go back to each other . if only they thought that allah would have made the commandments to be shown to them .
so fear allah and obey me .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
they said : art thou he who hath done this unto our gods , o ibrahim ?
he said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if ye believe .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
there comes not to them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
nay , but ye deny the judgment .
never-ending and unrestricted ,
and he turned away from them , and said , `` o my people , i delivered my lord 's message to you and gave you good advice , but you do not love advisors . ''
and do not say about what your tongues assert , `` this is lawful , and this is lawful , so that you may invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper . ''
they will roast in hell . what an evil abode !
wherein they will live forever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
and allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers , and he gave you hearing , and sight and hearts , so that you might give thanks .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
if they belie you , then the people of noah , ad , thamud ,
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you , and if you revert , we will revert . we have made hell a prison for the unbelievers .
hearts will be throbbing ,
they love the fleeting life , and leave behind them a heavy day .
in the book of the book has been presented to the book . this quran is inspired in it , to recite the quran , and the qur'an is a lesson for the human being , even though he has knowledge of all things . they have knowledge of the unseen .
and those in whose wealth is a known right
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel , when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
the likeness of jesus is the likeness of jesus , the like of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
they said , “ you are only men like us , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ”
if you ask them to help you , then if you are truthful , the messenger is better for you , and if you turn back , we will turn you back to the truth , and allah will not be with the believers .
and if we bring you a right time , we will bring it to you a term . what is it that the promise of allah has been fulfilled before it ? the day that they shall not be drunken , and it is a very great thing for them .
who creates and regulates .
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
he said , `` throw ! '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with a mighty spell .
let man consider his food .
and the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
say , “ the death from which you flee will surely meet you ; then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the visible , and he will inform you about what you used to do . ”
so they were unable to scale it , nor could they pierce it .
he said : `` do you see when we betook ourselves to the rock ? i forgot the fish , but none made me forget to mention it , but it took its way into the sea . ''
and we made the ones a covenant with those who say , `` we made a covenant , but they have forgotten much of what they had done . so we have forgotten them until the day of judgment , and god will inform them of what they have done .
woe on that day to the deniers .
no laghwwill they hear therein , nor any sinful speech .
and i will lead them to the right path , and i will make it sincerely to them , and they will be made to worship allah , so that they may take satan as a clear trial .
and this city of security ,
he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
who , when a misfortune befalls them , say , “ we belong to god , and to him we shall return . ”
and they will say , “ if allah had willed , he would have made the polytheists and our parents and our ancestors ; and there is no thing for those who have gone before us , but in fact they do not follow anything except what we have given them , and you will not follow anything except conjecture . ”
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , they will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
the people of the book were not divided until after the clear proof came to them .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is yellow , ” he said , “ he says , a yellow heifer , bright yellow , pleasing to the beholders . ”
when their brother salih said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
though they will be within sight of each other . the guilty will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
if you call upon them , they do not hear your prayer , and if they heard , they would not answer you . on the day of resurrection they will disown your partnership . none can inform you like him who is aware .
and weigh with an even balance .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
then they turned to themselves and said , “ indeed you are the unjust . ”
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . there is not a nation but a warner has passed away .
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead . nay , they are alive , with their lord , provided for sustenance .
o people of the jinn ! have you not been sent from among yourselves , and did not come to you with my signs , and to recite to you my revelations ? they say , `` we are witness to our own religion , and they will say , `` we are the witnesses of us . ''
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` nay , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them by incitement ?
of his kind was abraham .
and he gave to you wealth and power , and do not speak to it before the death of death , and do not say to it , `` my lord , give us leave , if only you were to be a confirmer . ''
then we placed him as a sperm in a safe lodging .
and if allah had willed , he could have made you one nation , but he leads astray whomever he wishes , and he guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
exclude me from the unjust people . ''
nor any food except foul pus
and do not be weak in pursuit of the enemy . if you are suffering , they are suffering as you are suffering , but you are hoping from allah that which they do not hope . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
is he who knows what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
when my servants ask you about me , i am near .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it , so that you may prevail . ''
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
we have never bestowed on them a book in which we have given them a book . this is an excellent book , or a day in which they are constant . there is no fear for them .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them as they nurtured me when i was small . ''
by god , we sent messengers to nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and the day of judgment is their guardian , and they will have a painful punishment .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : `` we believe . bear witness that we are muslims . ''
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are not unmindful of creation .
remember when moses said to his people : `` recite the story of a spring to me , to the spring of a spring , to drink , and do not make the provision of allah in the earth , and do not commit abuse on the earth as a matter .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and he has subjected for you the night and the day .
there is no fault in the people of the way that if it is a relation to the matter , it will not be decreased , until the case of their lord will come to them , and in the end he will come to you in full , and to allah will return .
accursed be the conjecturers
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his revelations .
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
those who spendin prosperity and in adversity , who repress anger , and who pardon mankind ; and allah loves the doers of good .
god has created you from dust , and then , by the means of your lord , it will not be finished , and it is not in the least to go forth in the least . it is that allah is that .
and those who disbelieve say : `` no faith will believe in this before this , but if the wrongdoers are guided , they say , `` if you are truthful , ''
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings an evil deed will only be recompensed for what they used to do .
my wealth has not availed me .
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent is the preparer .
and those who are judaised , except those who are judaised , those who are hard in the way of allah , are not alike to those who are in the way of allah ; and allah is the most gracious , the most honourable .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who have faith ! take your own souls to do not harm you , if you are guided . you will return to god . all of you will return to god . he will inform you of what you used to do .
his wealth and his childrenwill not avail him .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved , and that is the recompense of the disbelievers .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray .
if they are expelled , they will not go forth with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them . and if they help them , they will not be helped .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud that will bring us rain . '' in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind , a grievous punishment .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , that they will not return to them ?
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who had been arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say , “ oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger . ”
and if we bring you a right time , we will bring it to you a term . what is it that the promise of allah has been fulfilled before it ? the day that they shall not be drunken , and it is a very great thing for them .
and it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will neither fear any privation nor burden .
and he taught adam all the names , then presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given the knowledge of all things . ''
your lord said to the angels : `` i am about to be of the angels in the earth . '' they said , `` is there any that will be in the way of allah ? '' , `` do you know that you do not know what you do not know ? '' god said , `` i know what you do not know . ''
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed .
these were the 'ad , who denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every stubborn tyrant .
they made for him whatever he wished , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and basins like reservoirs , and basins like a little . give thanks , o house of david ! but few of my servants are grateful .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a reminder and a clear quran ,
save those who are patient and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
and when you have withdrawn from them and what they worship besides allah , then seek refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you , and will prepare for you your deeds .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
ask forgiveness of your lord and then repent to him . my lord is merciful and loving .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
a group has he guided , and a group has deservederror , for they took the devils for guardians besides allah , and they think that they are guided .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect exulting in what they had .
do not be grieved by their lord in the mornings and in the evenings ; and their reckoning is not for you , and the reckoning is not for you to be of those who do not see .
in gardens , questioning
and when the servant of allah stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
we sent noah to his people , and he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god but he . i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day . ''
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
so when they took him away , they agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , and we revealed to him : `` you will inform them of this deed of theirs when they knownot . ''
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
god wishes to make clear to you and guide you to the ways of those before you , and to accept your repentance . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous tomost gracious , as guests .
this was indeed a manifest test .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
if they could find a refuge , or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn it away .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
you will see the people who have faith in allah and those who ascribe associates to him , and you will see those who call to god and say to those who believe : `` we are indeed of those who have faith , and those who are true , they are the ones who are true . ''
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and most surely conjecture can be no substitute for the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
and those who are jews we have forbidden that which we have related to you before ; and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the guilty .
they almost provoked you to drive you out of the land , and to expel you from it , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
o ye who believe ! establish the steps of the sun for the time when they are bidden to be sent down after it , and when it is in the midst of it , then after it there is a decree for you , after it is decreed for you , and after it is decreed for you ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
then an entertainment of boiling water
those who are the lord of the throne will not respond to those who glorify the praises of allah , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness for them , and say , `` our lord , give us mercy from those who have faith and say , `` our lord , give us your full knowledge . ''
we have indeed sent our messengers with our signs and the clear signs , and the scales of wisdom , and the balance , to the right path , and to make the right path to the right path . god is majestic and all-merciful .
glory be to the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
and the believing men and women , men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women alike , and the believing women , men and women , and the believing women , and a great reward .
who avertedfrom the way of allah and sought to make it crooked , and they were disbelievers in the hereafter .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
and when they were in their lord 's presence to come to them , to come to them , he said : `` o you who have been able to come to you from your own way , we have already made a covenant with you , and i will not give you what you have done . he is the best of providers . ''
and when good befalleth him , grudging ;
but why do they come to you for judgment when they have the torah , wherein is the judgement of allah ? yet they turn away after that . they are not believers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no faith .
those who ascribed compeers to allah say , `` if god had no power to help you , neither have we been put to any other things nor have we been promised them . '' and allah is the only preaching to the messengers .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to the shade and said , `` my lord , i am in need of whatever good you may send down to me . ''
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze in allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest they should be near .
you are the best people brought forth what you have done . you enjoin what is right and forbid what is right and forbid what is wrong ; and if the people of the book have believed , it is better for them ; but most of them are certain .
say : `` you can not hold a single hour on the day of resurrection , nor can you advance it . ''
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
when evil visits him , impatient ,
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
we said : fear not ! verily , you are the uppermost .
so when they forgot that which they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and we seized those who forbade evil a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
and the word will be fulfilled against them because of their wrong-doing , and they will not speak .
thereinis decreed every matter of ordainments .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
and most of the ancients went astray before them ,
then , if he should choose the way of this way , the course of the matter , to be free from the right way , the right path is not lawful to you , and do not be a thing to be permitted to you , except what you have been commanded , and do not be a tyrant to what you have done .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say , “ oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger . ”
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
when the night darkened over him , he saw a star . he said , `` this is my lord . '' but when it set , he said , `` i do not love those that set . ''
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like an old shrivelled palm-leaf .
my people , i ask of you no reward for it . my reward is only from him who created me . will you not then understand ?
till a known term .
and the promise of god will be near , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , ‘ woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this , but we have been unjust . ’
when we sent to them two , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : `` we have been sent to you . ''
surely it is an evil abode and an evil abode .
and they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ the truth is only for the disbelievers ; and they will not be blamed . ”
is he who walks grovelling on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
not equal are the inmates of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; it is the people of paradise who are the achievers .
`` this is the way of allah , '' say : `` he will call to one whom he will , if only he wills . '' if he is to be a child , he can give you his brother , so that he may make the two of the two a healthy , and the two of the two . god has the knowledge of all things . god has knowledge of everything . god is cognizant of everything .
and you will see them in the world to come , in the life of this world , so that they may be free from it , and do not wish for any years . god is seeing of what you do .
so it is ; and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been given , then is again to be wronged , and indeed allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
who will enter the great fire ,
you are not responsible for a matter that we have sent down , as a witness from your lord , and there is no constraint on the earth or in the heaven . seek you to be in a clear manner .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
when one of them is given news of what he ascribes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
nay , but it is a glorious qur'an ,
as for the people , before you , we had destroyed the people who had done wrong on the earth , except a little of them , except for a little while , we would have given them a way of evil , and they are the guilty .
and those who avoid the idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance , for them are glad tidings , so give glad tidings to my servants ,
the day the trumpet will be blown , and all those who are in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of each other . whoever of you takes them for friends , surely he does not guide them . god does not guide the unjust people .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their stories . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus god seals the hearts of those who deny the truth .
those are they who have lost their souls , and what they forged has forsaken them .
can he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and the 'ad , pharaoh , the brethren of lot ,
so , if they accuse you of lying , then a party of them are guided to him , and then you do not turn away with me , and you are not with me . you are not with me .
and tall palm-trees with compact spathes
and say : `` work in your own hands and your messenger and the believers , and you will be brought back to the knower of the unseen and the witnessed , and he will inform you of what you used to do . ''
say , “ have you considered what god has sent down for you , and you have made some of it unlawful and some lawful ? ” say , “ has allah given you permission , or do you fabricate a lie against allah ? ”
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you . the unbelievers are indeed your sworn enemy .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
the unbelievers say , `` do not listen to this quran and talk idly about it , so that you may prevail . ''
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
and the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green ears of corn and seven green ears of corn , o you nobles , if you can interpret visions . ”
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they might return .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
who is fairer in speech than he who calls to god and acts righteously and says , `` i am of the muslims ? ''
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to expel you from your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of magic . ”
if you fear a breach between them , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they desire reconciliation , allah will reconcile them ; surely allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those are the ones to whom we gave the book , and wisdom , and prophethood . but if these disbelieve therein , we have indeed entrusted them to a people who do not believe .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
so take your duty to allah , as you are guided , say , `` i believe in the book of allah , and i have been commanded to be among the right and your lord ; and for us , we are the ones to do you , and to him you will all return . '' and to him is the matter you will .
so when they forgot that which they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and we seized those who forbade evil a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
as for those who hold fast to the book and keep up prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
then indeed , your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then struggled and remained patient , and remained patient , indeed , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and at night . do you not understand ?
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
and said , `` do not leave your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr . ''
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we will say to those who associated others with him : 'where are your associates whom you used to claim ? ''
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse to know , and they are arrogant .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least . god has power over all things .
in houses which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them , in the mornings and the evenings ,
they will say , `` we were not of those who prayed ,
have they seen the story of the people of noah and the people of abraham and the people of abraham ? and the people of abraham , and the people of lot , and he was not unjust to them . they wronged themselves .
and if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
and removed from you your burden
the proud assembly of his nation said to those who had been oppressed , “ do you know that saleh has sent saleh from his lord ? ” they said , “ we believe in what he has been sent with . ”
and allah has given the example of the people of noah to the people of noah , and the people of imran who were among the two women who were among the two women . but they did not know the two women , but they did not know the fire .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said , `` will you let moses and his people destroy the land and your gods ? '' pharaoh said , `` we will kill their sons and leave their women alive , and they are under our domination . ''
and if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
then as for him who is given his record in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my record !
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
that they may understand my speech .
has the story of the overwhelming event reached you ?
and when you met them , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and made you few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter which had been decreed . to allah all matters are returned .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall surely give them their wages , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say , “ oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger . ”
to your lord alone is the recourse .
allah is the life of the hereafter , and the believers who keep the way of allah in the cause of allah , and those who are in the way of allah will be on the right hand . that is the supreme triumph .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
because your lord has inspired it .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give !
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
worship allah , and do not worship any partners in his divinity , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the relatives , and the wayfarer . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
the word is not changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
and similarly , we sent no warner to a town before you , but the wealthy among them said : `` we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are following in their footsteps . ''
and those who have fear of their lord will meet the angels in the midst of the two groups , and the angels will say to the doors of the angels , `` peace be to you , and we will admit you to paradise , and abide for ever . ''
and purify your clothes ,
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
say : `` a man who is in the presence of allah that you should be of the ones to whom you do not go back from the truth . '' and he is the best of those who do good , and the way of allah are the best of the right and the right path .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous tomost gracious , as guests .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may lead mankind out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the almighty , the praiseworthy .
said : `` get down from here ! it is not for you to be arrogant here . begone ! you are of the humiliated . ''
o you who believe ! fear allah and believe in his messenger . he will give you a double portion of his mercy , and will give you a light by which you will walk , and forgive you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
and they say : the compassionate hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are honoured bondmen .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk who were afflicting you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women ; and in that was a great trial from your lord .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , allah will pay them in full their rewards . god does not love the unjust .
so leave them in their perplexity for a time .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and we delivered him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all people .
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
by the much-frequented house ,
that is because allah does not change a favor which he has bestowed on a people until they change what is in their hearts . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then turns away from them ? surely we shall requite the guilty .
on the day when they behold the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty , and they will say : `` a ban forbidden ! ''
“ the tradition of those who are bent on denying the truth and the day of judgement , and the disbelievers are the ones who are conscious of god , and the right path is to him , so what is the matter with the right way , so what is the matter with the right way , so that god is the best to make a great reward ? ” and it is a great reward for the disbelievers .
your allies are only allah and his messenger , and those who believe and establish prayer , and pay the alms , and bow down .
then he looked at the stars ,
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
but i am forgiving to him who repents and believes and does righteousness , and then remains guided .
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
before them the people of noah denied . they rejected our servant and said , `` a madman , '' and he was rebuffed .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieved would have said , `` this is nothing but clear magic . ''
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us among the righteous ?
they are enemies to me , but notthe lord of the worlds .
`` make coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . truly , i am allseer of what you do . ''
they will say , `` our lord , our wretchedness overcame us , and we were a people astray .
it is allah who has made the earth for you to rest and the heavens and the earth follow you . the sustenance of god has bestowed upon you , and he is the lord of all being .
they ask thee about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
we said : fear not ! verily , you are the uppermost .
and if you are worthy of all that is right , it is only for you to keep your duty to allah , and when you are given the promise , then will it be that the believers will be set in it , so that the believers may remain in it . so let the believers remain in it .
so taste it , and for the disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a great reward .
and they say : naught is this but our present life ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time . they have no knowledge of that which they have no knowledge . they have no knowledge .
i will fill hell with you and all those who follow you . ''
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and we made a part of the sins of his sins to be of the sins of his sins , and he made it as a cover . and he made the earth a calmness , and he was of the dead in the sea , and he did not make the earth a pointer to them .
not equal are the inmates of the fire and the dwellers of the garden ; it is the people of paradise who are the achievers .
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be blackened . and it will be said , `` this is what you used to call for . ''
say : `` those who are guided , you will be told , `` you will be called to account for your people , and follow the right way , or follow them . '' if you are , or they follow you , they will have a painful punishment , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
but the factions differed among themselves . woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on earth .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses . ”
they said , “ you are only men like us , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ”
is it the way to those who believe , in their hearts , guidance , and an admonition to allah , the day of resurrection , as a matter with it ? but the hearts of those who are fraudulent in is a barrier , and most of them are disobedient .
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein forever . they will abide therein forever .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish prayer , and fear allah , and to him you will be gathered .
such is the garden which we shall give as an inheritance to those of our servants who are god-fearing .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . god spoke to moses directly .
god has sanctioned the dissolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the knowing , the wise .
and we brought the others near .
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , and you will not be recompensed except according to your deeds .
and recall what time allah hath made you their successors after the posterity , and we made for them the land , and made the land fairseeming unto thee in the land , and make mischief in the land .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty castles !
and that is not difficult for allah .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
then there will come a year in which people will be helped , and they will press . ''
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , which i have made over you , to be trusted over you , when i have been commanded to be recited to you , and when i have been commanded to recite to them the command of my command , and when they are recited to me , the same is by my command , when they are commanded to be in the same manner . ”
or do those who do evil deeds imagine that they can outstrip us ? evil is their judgment !
who created me , and he guides me ,
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to dwell therein forever . this is the great success .
allah did not send it but as a good news , and that your hearts might be at rest . victory comes only from allah . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
a party of those who have received the book have been sent down to you , to recite what has been sent down to you , and some of them are others . say to them , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of the universe . '' say , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of all being . ''
they await only a single scream , which there will be no delay .
what , do you come to men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` bring the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ''
those who disbelieve and hinderfrom the path of allah , he will render their works ineffective .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark ,
and most of the people , though thou desiredest ardently , are not believers .
they see it to be far off ,
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
they say , `` when will this promise come to pass , if you are truthful ? ''
and if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
indeed , we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and if they belie thee , then apostles were belied before thee ; and unto allah all matters are returned .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecencies with your eyes open ? ”
his are the ships , towering on the sea like mountains .
when they are told , `` prostrate yourselves before the merciful , '' they say , `` and what is the most merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
we have sent down to you a book in which there is a reminder for you . do you not understand ?
noah cried to us , and we are the best of responders .
indeed , those who disbelieve in our signs and reject our signs , they will be in the fire , and who is better in the fire , and he is the best of those who are bent on denying the truth .
your wives are a tillage for you , so go to your tilth as you will , and do good . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him ; and give good news to the believers .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts are sealed , so they understand not .
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and gives glad tidings to the believers who work righteous works that theirs shall be a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
they love the fleeting life , and leave behind them a heavy day .
in the neighbouring land . but they will conquer after their defeat ,
if they could find a refuge , or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn it away .
and those carrying loads .
“ go to pharaoh , he has rebelled . ”
this is the case of the human being , the father 's daughter , devoted to him ; and the one who is upright , as a mercy from your lord , and he is the most disputatious of things .
this is indeed the supreme triumph .
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
and if they had followed the teachings of the torah and the gospel , and the torah and the gospel would surely have been sent down by their lord above them , and most of them are near .
when the oceans are exploded .
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they exulted in the knowledge of the knowledge , and that they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
verily the god-fearing shall be among gardens and fountains ,
and a few from the later generations .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and they will think that they are the liars .
so let him call on his concourse !
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and the word will be fulfilled against them because of their wrong-doing , and they will not speak .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
worship none but allah . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
and let them not turn you away from the verses of allah after they have been sent down to you . and callto your lord , and do not be among the polytheists .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them against allah . they are the people of hell , and there they will live for ever .
is there in that an oath for the mindful ?
and if allah were to seize mankind for their wrongdoing , he would not leave on the earth a single creature , but he respites them for a time . when their term is come , they can not delay it at a single hour nor can they advance it .
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give the people a speck .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
that is how we deal with the criminals .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by man or jinn --
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
that he may warn him who is alive and justify the word against the unbelievers .
if you were to help them , god would certainly have given them the victory of that which the unbelievers had turned away , when they had been in the cave , and said , `` do not grieve over the people of the world , and god has the power to do all that you do . '' god is majestic and all-wise .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except with the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those .
andwhen moses said to his people , `` god commands you to sacrifice a cow . '' they said , `` do you make fun of us ? '' he said , `` i seek refuge in allah lest i should be one of the ignorant . ''
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say : 'would that i had not been given my record !
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
they said , `` if only he was about to put him away , indeed , he has committed a fool , and he said , ‘ you are following a people , and allah is the best knower of what you do . ’
or do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the daytime while they play ?
those who cried lies to shuaib , as if they had never dwelt there . those who cried lies to shuaib , they were the losers .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women , and good men are for good women , and good men are for good women . these are forgiveness and generous provision .
a bearer of good news and a warner . yet most of them turn away , so they hear not .
they said : `` bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may bear witness . ''
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray , and we shall trample them under our feet so that they may be among the lowest .
o you who believe ! if you obey some of the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have believed .
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the maintenance of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : `` allah . '' how then are they turned away ?
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
say : `` if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you to the exclusion of all other people , then long for death if you are truthful . ''
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
say , ‘ i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
these are the verses of allah , we recite them to you in truth . you are one of the messengers .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . it is an indecency , and an evil way .
fleeing from a lion ?
and multiplied therein corruption .
so they found one of our servants to whom we had given mercy from us , and had taught him knowledge from us .
and has made the moon a light for them , and made the sun a lamp ?
they descend on every sinful liar .
and ask those of our messengers whom we sent before you : did we appoint gods to be worshipped beside the beneficent ?
and how can you take it back when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth . so in what statement after allah and his signs will they believe ?
and ease my task for me .
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that you have spoken the truth to us and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
and those who followed will say , `` if only we had another chance , we would disown them as they have disowned us . '' thus does allah show them their deeds , and they will not come out of hell .
so we took retribution from them , and we drowned them in the sea because they denied our signs and were heedless of them .
lo ! they fold their breasts to hide from him . lo ! when they cover themselves with their garments , he knoweth what they conceal and what they reveal . lo ! he knoweth that which is in the breasts .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they have their reward with their lord , and those who reject our signs . those are the companions of hellfire .
'adbelied , then howwas my punishment and my warning ?
this is how we reward the virtuous .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a son , whose name shall be yahya , whose name is john . ''
nor do you worship what i worship .
say , `` god gives you life and causes you to die . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find god forgiving and merciful .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
and when your lord proclaimed , “ if you give thanks , i will give you more , but if you are thankless , indeed my punishment is severe . ”
o people , there has come to you a clear proof from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and we have placed therein gardens of palms and vines , and we cause springs to gush forth therein ,
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who do wrong . they will be drowned . ''
those who dispute about the dispute of dispute with god , then be unaware of the verses of allah , and they are not aware of what is in their hearts , so that you can not stand up with god . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and raiding at dawn
o you who have believed , do not set up any right to allah with the right way , and do not worship the commands of allah , to be a worshipper of what is right , and take care of it . and fear allah , for indeed allah is the swiftest of those who do wrong .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
for the like of this let the workers work .
say : `` tell me , what has been the matter with god to call him to god ? do you speak to him in the creation of the truth ? '' or do you speak to god in the creation ? `` no one has the power to do anything . '' no one is but a guardian or a pagan .
indeed , whoever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth belongs to allah , and those who follow other than allah ; they follow only conjecture and surmise , but they do not know .
then we raised you up after your death that you might give thanks .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . the messenger is only to communicate in clear terms .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found , and slain mercilessly .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his conjecture concerning them , and they followed him , except a group of believers .
and by him who created male and female .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
which none but sinners eat .
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them , and we give them rein that they may grow in sin , so that they may be in sin .
and those who avoid the idols and turn to allah , and turn to him in repentance , for them are glad tidings , so give glad tidings to my servants ,
so be patient . indeed , the promise of allah is true . whether we show you some of what we have promised them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty castles !
no indeed ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
and when they burst in upon david , he was afraid of them , but they said , “ do not be afraid ; one of them is one of the other , one of the other . do not be unjust to the other one else . show us the right way . ”
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
which of you is afflicted with madness .
and musa said : if ye are and those who are in the earth , then verily , allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein shall be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he wills .
it is we who give life and cause death , and we are the inheritor .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
he said , “ he has a heifer torn into the earth , and the fields of the fields and the fields . ” part of the fruits , they said , “ the truth has come to us , but they will not be honoured . ”
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and do not obey the bidding of the extravagant ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them against allah . they are the people of hell , and there they will live for ever .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we have given the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
and those who , when reminded of the signs of their lord , do not fall deaf and blind ,
allah has begotten a son . indeed , they are liars .
so on that day they willshare in the punishment .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah , and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
thamud and ad denied the consequential calamity .
indeed in this are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
and certainly moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf in his absence , and you were wrongdoers .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for destruction .
eat and drink , and be comforted . if you see any human being say , `` i have vowed a fast to the beneficent god , and i will not speak to any human being today . ''
and if ye punish , then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted . but if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
he said , “ we shall punish him who does wrong ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . those who disbelieve in the signs of allah are those who are the losers .
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no helpers for you .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . those near him are not too proud to worship him , nor do they tire .
are you more difficult to create or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and in heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
and do not be like those who became divided and differed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ pray to your lord to lighten for us the punishment . ”
but allah has been gracious to us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and this is a blessed book which we have sent down , confirming that which is before it , that you may warn the mother of cities and those around it . those who believe in the hereafter believe in it and are their prayers .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
when the sky is stripped off ,
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i a pretender .
and verily it is a guidance and a mercy unto the believers .
say , ‘ i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
if allah visits you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
so go on the earth , in the way of allah , and do not go on the earth , and those who have received the truth , you will find the way of their lord . god is aware of the things you do .
and they have set up a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
and those before themrejected , and the messenger , and their own souls , and their own lives , and they said , “ the fire is the fire , if you are unaware . ”
and if we willed , we could have made angels in the land to be successors in the land .
the people of noah said to the people of noah : `` we see not any other than those who follow you , but they are just one of those who follow you , and they are not to be able to speak . ''
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation ; so do they not understand ?
they will say , `` it was you who used to come to us from the right side . ''
the day they see it , as if they had not remainedexcept for an evening or an evening .
the messengers told them : `` we are only like you , but allah guides whom you will . we have not been able to make our own servants but the believers . ''
i am not going to drive away the believers .
these are they for whom there is nothing but the fire in the hereafter , and their works have failed in the world , and what they have done is vain .
can he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
he was one of our believing servants .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desertcame to the prophet , seeking exemption , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful punishment will afflict those who disbelieved .
the messengers told them : `` we are only like you , but allah guides whom you will . we have not been able to make our own servants but the believers . ''
by your lord , we will question them all
like the shaitan , when he says to man , `` disbelieve , '' but when he disbelieves , he says , “ i am absolved of you . i fear allah , the lord of the creation . ”
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith , we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not deprive them of anything of their deeds . every man is hostage to what he earned .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
those who perform as-salatand give zakat and they are certain of the hereafter .
indeed , those who disbelieve and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance has been shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , but he will make their works fail .
but i am only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell .
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who had been arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
indeed your god is one ,
had allah willed , they would not have associated others with him . we have not appointed you a guardian over them , nor are you their guardian .
and when paradise is brought near ,
they were arrogant in the land , and a terrible body on the earth . they were contriving a plan for what they had done , but you were not waiting for the tradition of the people who lived before them , except what they were wont to do .
is he then who knows all that is in the presence of god , to be set up for him , and say , `` bring the water to allah ? '' say : `` then bring upon them the water that allah has given to them , for he is the best of those who have been bent on denying the truth and have been guided by the way of god . '' no one can be guided by the right way .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a while .
they say : `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said , `` the messiah , '' they said , `` the son of allah is to be said to them , '' they will be told , `` what is the matter with allah that they will be destroyed ? ''
and our duty is only to convey the message clearly . ''
and set your face towards the religion , a man of pure faith , and never be of the polytheists .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
and the word is gone from the world to come , and we will surely guide you to the right path . he said , “ i will be a punishment for you , and i will give you a good punishment , and i will give you the good news of those who have submitted . ”
so that he would punish the hypocrites and the pagans who have evil suspicions about allah , and it is they who are surrounded by evil , and it is they who have incurred the wrath of allah , and he has prepared for them a great punishment .
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
when the angels came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for his people . they said , `` do not have fear of him , and do not be afraid . we will rescue you and your family , except your wife , who will be of those who stay behind .
have you not seen that god sends down water from the sky , then he will cause the earth to swallow up , and then it will be a pattern for them , and then it will be a proper course for them . in this there is a lesson for the people of understanding .
but their brethrenplunge them deeper into error , and never relax .
o prophet , when your brother has set a fixed connection with him , do not stand up exclusively to him , and follow the right path , and be upright , and do not be a skeptic . that is the great decree of allah , who would have been given the lie to the truth .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and watch them—they will soon see .
verily allah wrongeth not the weight of an atom , but if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and giveth him a mighty hire .
aaron had already told them before : `` o my people ! you are only being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my command . ''
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is a manifest adversary .
if you die or are slain , you will be brought back to god .
and you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our verses and those who submit .
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
his sight did not waver , nor did it exceed .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
say : shall i tell you who will be the greatest losers in their works ?
and leftfor posterity .
that is because they are averse to what allah has sent down , so he has made their deeds fruitless .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
and it is he who is the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a barrier has been forbidden between them .
he said , “ this isbetween you and me . whichever of the two terms i fulfill , there will be no injustice to me , and allah is witness to what we say . ”
did he not cause their guile to go astray ?
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels , `` was it you that these people used to worship ? ''
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they say , `` these are confused dreams , but he has invented it . '' rather , he is a poet . so let him bring us a sign , as the messengers were sent to us .
so go forth with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you turn back , and go back to where you are commanded . ''
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be decided , while they are heedless and do not believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o you who believe ! if you obey some of the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have believed .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins asking news about you , and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
and when they passed them by winking at one another ,
so that they may believe in allah , and those who believe in allah , and have been made to forget him , and remember him when you have been doing .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying : taste my punishment and my warnings !
then hell will berefuge .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
is food for the sinful .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment ,
that is some of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . do not set up another god with allah , lest you be thrown into hell , blameworthy and banished .
that they will be helped ,
and those who do not bear witness to falsehood , and when they pass by idle talk , they pass by with dignity .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and indeed they used to say :
o my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
so these are their houses fallen down , because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of this quran .
they said , “ our lord , we are afraid of him , or exceed all bounds . ”
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in a known measure .
so , enter it : `` enter the truth . '' she said , `` my lord , i have been made to be a cow to me . ''
and the shade of black smoke ,
this is nothing but the word of a mortal . ”
these towns—we narrate to you some of their stories . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus god seals the hearts of those who deny the truth .
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein forever . they will abide therein forever .
o you who believe ! obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and the unruly , every builder and diver ,
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye are to stay .
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest reward .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed you are the all-munificent . ”
say , `` observe what is in the heavens and the earth . '' but signs and warnings will not avail those who do not believe .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego of their own accord , then consume it with good pleasure .
such is the case , and allah weakenoth the contrivance of infidels .
and if they are pleased with that which allah has given them , say , `` god is sufficient for us . '' and say , `` god will not grant to him a thing , and we will give him his grace , and we will give him to the righteous ones . ''
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
but as for those who disbelieved : `` were not our verses recited to you ? but you were proud and you were a sinful people . ''
and they say , “ when will this decision be , if you are truthful ? ”
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
and among them are some who listen to you ; so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
and allah has made a revelation of the inspiration to stand with his hands , and of the people , and the glories of a fixed measure ; and that which is in the heavens and the earth know that allah is cognizant of all things .
and big-eyed houris
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has appointed darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray .
are they waiting for the angels to come to them , or the command of your lord should come to pass ? those before them did . god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we will not be resurrected .
do not covet that which allah has favoured some of you has some share of what they have earned , and men for what they have earned ; and ask their people for what they have earned ; and ask allah for his bounty . god knows all things .
have you not seen those who were told to be told , `` do not be afraid ? '' but when you have entered the prayer , do not pray to the people of the right hand , or say to them , `` this is the enjoyment of the hereafter , if only you were to have a little . ''
, `` o abraham , leave this . your lord 's command has gone forth , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be averted . ''
and we made them a precedent and an example to later generations .
to you is the parable of your own views , and to be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , as if you are one of those who are with each other , we will bring them a clear sign for those who understand .
o people of the book ! why do you dispute about abraham when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not exercise your reason ?
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , `` did you disbelieve after your belief ? '' taste the punishment because you disbelieved .
and how can it be the parable of a people who are mindful of allah , who followed him in the way of allah , and we have given you the good news of a goodly organization ?
and never did we destroy a township but there was a known decree for it .
surely he is able to bring him back ,
as for those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our ways . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
and all those who are on earth .
as for those who turnto allah , his messenger , and the believers , and the party of allah is the victorious .
the like of which was not created in the land ,
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : `` fear not ! '' and they gave him glad tidings of a knowledgeable son .
then he looked around ,
and other demons bound in chains .
the believers are devoted to others . the believers are devoted to your own selves , and do not act with a right path .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
and if they belie thee , then apostles were belied before thee ; and unto allah all matters are returned .
my wealth has not availed me .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
rather , we have been deprived . ''
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
so that we have made the same guidance for them , so that the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . the promise of god is true . they say , `` it is a confirmation of what they have been doing . '' they said , `` it is a confirmation of what they had done . ''
my power has vanished from me . ”
and i know not but that it may be a trial for you , and enjoyment for a while .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
and it is he who spread the earth and placed therein firm mountains and rivers ; and of every fruit he has made in it two kinds ; he makes the night cover the day . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
a provision for you and your cattle .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind a legacy , he may bequeath it to parents and relatives , according to the duty of his parents and relatives .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret is forgiveness and a great reward .
allah has forgiven the prophet , and the emigrants , and the ansar who followed him in the hour of difficulty , after the hearts of a party of them almost swerve away . he is compassionate and kind .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
indeed he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : if our lord have not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be of the losers .
and before the messengers we had sent forth the people of nuh and a nation who had rejected his messengers , so that some of them were to hold fast to the truth . how then was my disapproval ?
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . god is kind and merciful to you .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
and those who spend the night in adoration of their lord prostrate and standing .
and remember the tongue of thy lord , and he said : the messenger is with allah , and i am not going to give you the truth , and they say : verily we are not of the wrong-doers .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
will you be left secure in that which is here
that when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? ''
and whoever does not believe in allah , and his soul will be repaid for it , and whoever desires the reward of the world , we will give him the good tidings of those who do good .
successful indeed are the believers
nor are the living and the dead alike . god makes to hear whomever he wishes , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people : verily i am unto you a warner manifest .
these are the people of the right hand .
say , `` be you stones or iron ,
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them , “ this is clear magic . ”
indeed , those who fear allah , when a visitation from satan touches them , then behold , they are enlightened .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord is the punishment of hell , and evil is the destination .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with praise , and judge between them with fairness , and it will be said , “ praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
they said : `` o exalted one ! he has a very aged father , so take one of us in his place . we see that you are a righteous man . ''
or do they have some greater things in which is greater than a great doubt ? say , “ who will revive the dead ? ” say , “ when will the dead bring you to life ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ”
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and moses said to his people , `` o my lord , if you were to follow me , he said , ‘ my lord ! if i had spoken to me , is it that i had no knowledge of what you used to do ? ’ you are only one of those who have been guided , and you are the best of the best .
those who disbelieve in the remembrance when it comes to them , and verily it is a book exalted .
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do this . so patience is better ; and allah is help against that which ye ascribe .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . and for them , when their hearts hear , they say : what did your lord say : the truth they say ?
when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! remember allah 's favour upon you , when he appointed prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other people .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
say : `` o people ! i am only a plain warner to you . ''
when his lord said to him , ‘ submit ! ’ he said , ‘ i have submitted to the lord of the worlds . ’
if we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed , falsehood is bound to vanish . ''
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
the people of the city said : `` o my people ! obey allah , you have no god other than him . he has no other god in the earth ; so he has turned to us in the land . indeed , my lord is quick to return . ''
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
they had been affluent before ,
has he made the gods one god ? this is indeed a strange thing . ”
and how can you disbelieve when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
and thus we have told them , `` this is our command , '' and a one of them said : `` do we have a day , other than a day ? '' he said , `` it is only a day of which your lord will bring you to life , and let him have a share of it , and let him have no one to do it . '' so let him be a confirmer !
when the angels came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for his people . they said , `` do not have fear of him , and do not be afraid . we will rescue you and your family , except your wife , who will be of those who stay behind .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
he said , “ will i trust you with him as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
so when he saw his shirt torn from behind , he said : lo ! this is the guile of you women ; surely your guile is great .
so i warn you of a blazing fire ,
, `` o my people , do you consider that which allah has been worshipping , and you call upon them in the way of allah ? to them , they have created the earth , and let them have a clear book . ''
those to whom we gave the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
they will say : `` the day of judgment is the same , '' say : `` yes , '' say , `` yes , '' say , `` yes , '' say , `` yes , and my lord is the knower of the heavens and the earth , '' and even though it is the matter of all things .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except with the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
and the morning when it brightens ,
and in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , then he who had sought his help on the day before it had sought his help . moses said to him , `` you are indeed a meddlesome fellow . ''
is it this discourse that you hold lightly ?
my wealth has not availed me .
but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` kill him or burn him . '' but god saved him from the fire . indeed , in this are signs for a people who believe .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time the messenger came to a nation they belied him , so we made them follow one another . so away with a people who do not believe .
nay , each one of them desires to be given unrolled scrolls .
except those who have taken to you a group of them , a group of them to you , or have become regretful to your own people , and have become regretful for what you have done , and fight in your hearts , and if you are patient , they will be in error and do right .
so ask them , `` are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? '' we created them from sticky clay .
and the guilty will see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they will find no way to escape from it .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
thus have we sent you as a messenger to the former peoples , that we may reveal to them what we revealed to them , and most of them are believers . say , ‘ it is he who is my lord , and he is the lord of all being . ’
and they worship besides allah that which neither profits them nor harms them . and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
nor am i going to worship that which you worship ,
these , our people , have taken gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority to them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
if they reject you , so were messengers rejected before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures , and the book of enlightenment .
said : `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble at mid-morning . ''
say , `` who provides for you from the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` god . '' say , `` it is god ; either we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ''
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i , so send him with me as a helper , so send him with me as a helper .
as for him who is given a sign , he is too worthy of all that is in his presence , and to him do good deeds , and he will give them good deeds , and the evil is the most severe .
indeed , we sent messengers to their people before you , and they brought them clear signs , but we took vengeance on those who sinned , and it was incumbent on us to help the believers .
say : `` whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . '' say : `` he is allah , the lord of whom he has given his mercy , and those who are in the world to come will certainly believe in the hereafter . '' they will not believe in the hereafter .
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that will remember ?
we will ease him toward hardship ,
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime ; and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who fear allah , so do you not understand ?
and indeed in cattle is a lesson for you . we give you drink from what is in their bellies , from between the excretion and the blood , palatable for those who drink .
the wayis only against those who ask leave of you and they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and other spoils that you have not taken , but allah has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
then howwhen the angels take them , beating their faces and their backs ?
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and if a breath of your lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would say , `` woe to us ! we were indeed unjust . ''
he said : `` so this is the word of your lord , '' he says , `` it is easy for me , and a mercy from us , and a mercy from us . it is a matter decreed . ''
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and do not approach fornication for it is an indecency and an evil way .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
accursed be the conjecturers
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in the life of this world ; and whoever desires the tillage of the world , we will give him some of this , and he will have no share in the hereafter .
then they came back to the people , until they came to the people , saying , `` the truth has been sent down to moses . '' but they were not to be able to speak in this city , but he said , “ if this is the right way , he said , ‘ if this is true . ’
but they will not remember , unless allah wills ; he is worthy to be feared , and he is worthy to forgive .
andone who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
have you not seen those who were told to be told , `` do not be afraid ? '' but when you have entered the prayer , do not pray to the people of the right hand , or say to them , `` this is the enjoyment of the hereafter , if only you were to have a little . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
say , “ if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship . ”
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him .
they said , ‘ o hud ! you have not brought us any proof , and we are not going to forsake our gods because of what you say . we are not believers in you .
the people of the hearts of the hearts of the needy , the orphan , saying , `` to every person who is listening . '' say , `` listen to you . '' say , `` listen to you . '' say , `` you have heard the good news of a believer , and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe . ''
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and eliaswas among the messengers .
recite to them the parable of the life of the world , which the water we send down from the sky , which we send down from the sky with which the grain of the earth and the earth will scatter them . god has power over all things .
no prophet came to them but they mocked him .
although before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
for what they used to do .
they said , `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
lest you should say , `` had it been that we had been given the book , we would have given them a better book . '' and indeed , it is a clear proof for them , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and he will be clear to them in the way of god .
when the trumpet is sounded ,
has the story of moses reached you ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
your riches and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
and those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever allah wills , he leaves astray , and whomever he wills he puts astray a straight path .
not easy for the disbelievers .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his conjecture concerning them , and they followed him , except a group of believers .
save him who hath done wrong and then substitutes good after evil . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
or is it that they did not recognize their messenger , and they deny him ?
and we have provided for you therein livelihoods , and for those for whom you are not the providers .
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
and there is not a creature on earth but its provision is on allah . he knows its resting place and its repository . all is in a clear book .
and they will be presented before your lord in ranks , and you will come to us as we created you the first time , but you thought that we will not appoint a tryst for you .
to lot we gave wisdom and knowledge , and delivered him from the town that practiced the abominations . they were indeed a wicked people .
say : `` he who produced them the first time , he will quicken them . he has knowledge of every creation ,
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you , or he will not send a sand-storm upon you , or you will find none to protect you ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
and as for him who was born , and the believers , and they say , `` woe to you ! '' will you , then , say to him , `` what is the matter with you ? '' , `` what is the matter with you that you are to be a confirmer of it ? '' and the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . but the promise of allah is true .
and other spoils that you have not taken , but allah has encompassed them . god has power over all things .
and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , he hath no protecting friend apart from him ; and thou wilt see the wrong-doers , when they see the torment , saying : is there any way to return ?
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for the unbelievers ?
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they swear by god to please you , but it is more fitting that they should please allah and his messenger , if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great success .
or that he will not seize them by a process of slow wastage
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who are certain ?
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
it was revealed to moses to moses , saying : `` take a part of the good news of a spring for him . it is the right of the two honourable . '' and we sent down the sun to the sea , and you are not unjust to us , but they were unjust .
and has made the moon a light for them , and made the sun a lamp ?
and for their taking usury , that they were forbidden , and because of their devouring people 's wealth , and among them among them we have prepared a painful punishment .
he said : `` no one can speak to me except what i speak to my lord before , and what my lord has spoken to me , i am calling me to believe in god and the last day . ''
i fear my kinsmen , after me , my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched about in the land ? is there any asylum ?
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
god has promised you much booty that you will capture . he has given you the life of this world , and has restrained the hands of men from you , and that it may be a sign for the believers .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell , they will be in a worse plight and farther astray from the path .
have you not seen that you have believed in that which has been sent down to you and what has been revealed before you ? but they wish to have faith in them , and they are in a great error .
when moses had said to their enemy , `` o moses , do you want to kill him , o moses ? do you want to kill him who has become a wrongdoer in the land ? do you not reflect on the earth , that you may be a harmdoer '
so on that day their excuses will not profit those who did wrong , nor will they be allowed to make amends .
say : `` do you teach god about your religion , while allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
and if you fear treachery from any people , throw back their treaty towards them , for god does not love the treacherous .
but those who do not believe in the hereafter are deviating from the path .
and they will be the fire of hell , and that which is sent down to them , and they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” and they say , “ i am in the world to come , and to those who are in the world to come , and in the hereafter they will be successful . ”
so when they persisted in pursuing that which they had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
so the intercession of intercessors will not avail them .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o caravan , you are thieves ! ''
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
so do not be weak-kneed and sue for peace . god is with you , and he will not stintyour works .
on that day , they shall be of no avail to god , and he is the owner of the throne . he is the lord of all the worlds .
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
and they say , `` why has not an angel been sent down to him ? '' had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed ruins .
and the one who was released , who was released , and remembered after a time , said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
a recompense for what they did .
`` who set up another god with allah , thencast him in the severe torment . ''
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold , you became human beings dispersing .
so when he came to solomon , he said , “ are you helping me with wealth ? what god has given me is better than what he has given you . rather , you are exulting in your gift .
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power whatsoever over allah 's grace , and that whatever bounty is in allah 's hand , he gives it to whomsoever he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said : i did it then , when i was of those who are astray .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , all of you , and when guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve . ”
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god ? each one knows its prayer and glorification , and allah knows what they do .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
they devised their plots , but their plots are known to allah , even though their plots were such as to move mountains .
then we changed the illto good until they grew affluent and said , `` our fathers had experienced adversity and prosperity . '' then we seized them suddenly while they were unaware .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
that this is indeed a noble qur'an
and the two seas are not like one of the other , and one of the hot water will be made to drink , and the two of them will be the same , and you will be the ones to have the right hand .
o man ! there is no god but he , there is a god but he , and he forgives you , and ask forgiveness of you , and so that he may show you the right way , so that you may be guided .
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , they are your brothers in faith . we detail our revelations for a people who know .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye wish , and approach not this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had smitten them . for those who do good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
if you are saying to this , ‘ your people , then , have deceived you , i have heard what you have preached to me . i have no power to harm you in the least , for indeed my lord has power over all things . ’
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
o messengers , eat of the good things and act righteously . i know well what you do .
and when our verses are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
there is no belying its coming to pass --
he said , “ get out of here , despised and rejected . whoever among them follows you , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him return all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
`` this is the way of allah , '' say : `` he will call to one whom he will , if only he wills . '' if he is to be a child , he can give you his brother , so that he may make the two of the two a healthy , and the two of the two . god has the knowledge of all things . god has knowledge of everything . god is cognizant of everything .
do they not see how we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? god judges , and there is no adjuster of his judgement . and he is swift in reckoning .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to ridicule engulfed them .
and that is not difficult for allah .
they will swear to you in the name of allah , that you may leave them , so that you may leave them . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for what they used to do .
on the day when we will say to hell , “ are you filled up ? ” and it will say , “ are there any more ? ”
neither thirst , nor suffer from the sun 's heat . ''
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness , and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and those who race in a race
he said : `` o my lord ! appoint a measure for us . '' and my lord said : `` this is a cow to man , and the bitterly in the evening , and at the evening and the morning . ''
some of the people of the book say , `` believe in what has been sent down to the believers at the beginning of the day and reject it at the end of the day , so that they may turn back .
they would say , `` our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched . ''
we have preferred them above them , and some of them spoke to the right path , with a right course , and a right course with the psalms , and if allah had so willed , they would have taken their faith in the right course , but if allah had so willed , they would have taken it in their differences .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort , and he created all things , and he has knowledge of everything ?
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which they had been given , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
and we rained on them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and do not obey the bidding of the extravagant ,
is he who is a believer like him who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is he who is god in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
and remember ishmael , elisha , and dhul-kifl , and all are among the outstanding .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and they assign a share of what we have provided them for what they do not know . by god , you will be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
and when their hearts are given to them , they will see what is right , and they say : `` our father ! we are the best to know what is right and forbid what is right , and that it is a right course for him . this is an upright way . ''
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . the messenger is only to communicate in clear terms .
this is what you used to doubt . ''
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who surpassed them in wealth and splendor ?
and of men and beasts and cattle , and cattle are different from allah 's ; surely those who have knowledge of allah fear allah ; surely allah is mighty , forgiving .
so the command of allah was true , and then allah gave him wisdom , and had he given to him wisdom ; and if allah were of the righteous , he would have given all of them a great grace .
believers , do not believe in god and his messenger , and his messenger , and his messenger , and his messenger . whoever believes in god and the angels , and the injeel ] and the injeel ] and the injeel ] , in the hereafter , they will be the righteous .
he said , “ we have tried your people in your absence , and the samiri has led them astray . ”
say : `` a man who is in the presence of allah that you should be of the ones to whom you do not go back from the truth . '' and he is the best of those who do good , and the way of allah are the best of the right and the right path .
the people of noah said to the people of noah : `` we see not any other than those who follow you , but they are just one of those who follow you , and they are not to be able to speak . ''
and they went early in determination , able .
and leftfor posterity .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we will say to those who associated others with him : 'where are your associates whom you used to claim ? ''
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day , and in the watches of the night ; surely good deeds take away evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
then we sent upon them the track of our messengers , and we made for him a good son , and we gave him the gentle son , and we gave him the right way , but they were the same to him , but they were not to be able to give them the right way , but they are an unrestrained .
so we will surely bring you magic like the like of it . so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to go back .
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas for joseph ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
and gathered unto solomon of the jinn and humankind , and the birds , and they were gathered in ranks ,
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you , and if you revert , we will revert . we have made hell a prison for the unbelievers .
it came to the people of the city saying : `` o my father ! make for us a good reward , andto make us a recompense for it , and make for us the recompense of your father . '' he said , `` do not be afraid . you are not unjust to the people . '' he said , `` do not be afraid . ''
then the family of pharaoh picked him up to be an enemy and a sorrow to them . pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
and when we bless man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him , he is despairing .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
it is allah who has made cattle for you to ride some of them , and some of them you eat .
and when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
say : `` whatever reward i might have asked of you is yours . my reward is only with allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
rivalrydistracted you
he singles out for his mercy whom he will . god is possessor of sublime grace .
and how many angels are in the heavens whose intercession will not avail at all save after allah has given permission to whom he pleases and approves of .
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
is he who has deserved the decree of punishment ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
and they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
for every nation we have appointed a rite , so that they may mention the name of allah over the livestock he has provided them . your god is one god , so submit to him , and give good news to the humble
and the children of israel , have been sent down to you , a messenger from your lord , and have a firm argument from your lord , and i have been sent with a light from your lord , and i am the best of those who are willing to give you a light , and a lesson for what you have done . indeed , allah is the most disputatious of believers .
and if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we shall recompense him with hell . thus we recompense the unjust .
say , `` i do not possess any harm or benefit to any benefit except allah . but if he knows what does not want , i am not a pretender .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
man never tires of praying for good , but if evil touches him , he is hopeless and despairing .
say : `` it is allah who delivers you from it and from every calamity , but you associate others with him . ''
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
